
<<<PAGE 1>>>



<<<PAGE 2>>>

This page intentionally left blank

<<<PAGE 3>>>

Astrophysics for Physicists
Designed for teaching astrophysics to physics students at advanced undergra-
duate or beginning graduate level, this textbook also provides an overview of
astrophysics for astrophysics graduate students, before they delve into morespecialized volumes.
Assuming background knowledge at the level of a physics major, the
textbook develops astrophysics from the basics without requiring any previousstudy in astronomy or astrophysics. Physical concepts, mathematical derivationsand observational data are combined in a balanced way to provide a uniﬁedtreatment. Topics such as general relativity and plasma physics, which are
not usually covered in physics courses but used extensively in astrophysics,
are developed from ﬁrst principles. While the emphasis is on developing thefundamentals thoroughly, recent important discoveries are highlighted at everystage.
A
RNAB RAICHOUDHURI is a Professor of Physics at the Indian Institute of
Science. One of the world’s leading scientists in the ﬁeld of solar magneto-
hydrodynamics, he is author of The Physics of Fluids and Plasmas (Cambridge
University Press, 1998).

<<<PAGE 4>>>



<<<PAGE 5>>>

Astrophysics for
Physicists
Arnab Rai Choudhuri
Indian Institute of Science


<<<PAGE 6>>>

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore,
São Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-81553-6ISBN-13    978-0-511-67742-7© A. Choudhuri 2010
2010Information on this title: www.cambrid ge.org/9780521815536
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any partmay take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
eBook (NetLibrar y)
Hardback

<<<PAGE 7>>>

Contents
Preface page xiii
A note on symbols xviii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Mass, length and time scales in astrophysics 1
1.2 The emergence of modern astrophysics 4
1.3 Celestial coordinates 6
1.4 Magnitude scale 8
1.5 Application of physics to astrophysics. Relevance of
general relativity 9
1.6 Sources of astronomical information 12
1.7 Astronomy in different bands of electromagnetic radiation 14
1.7.1 Optical astronomy 15
1.7.2 Radio astronomy 18
1.7.3 X-ray astronomy 19
1.7.4 Other new astronomies 20
1.8 Astronomical nomenclature 21
Exercises 22
2 Interaction of radiation with matter 23
2.1 Introduction 23
2.2 Theory of radiative transfer 23
2.2.1 Radiation ﬁeld 23
2.2.2 Radiative transfer equation 26
v

<<<PAGE 8>>>

vi Contents
2.2.3 Optical depth. Solution of radiative transfer equation 28
2.2.4 Kirchhoff’s law 30
2.3 Thermodynamic equilibrium revisited 31
2.3.1 Basic characteristics of thermodynamic equilibrium 32
2.3.2 Concept of local thermodynamic equilibrium 33
2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 35
2.4.1 Plane parallel atmosphere 35
2.4.2 The grey atmosphere problem 39
2.4.3 Formation of spectral lines 43
2.5 Radiative energy transport in the stellar interior 46
2.6 Calculation of opacity 48
2.6.1 Thomson scattering 50
2.6.2 Negative hydrogen ion 52
2.7 Analysis of spectral lines 53
2.8 Photon diffusion inside the Sun 55
Exercises 57
3 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data 61
3.1 Introduction 61
3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure 62
3.2.1 Hydrostatic equilibrium in stars 62
3.2.2 Virial theorem for stars 64
3.2.3 Energy transport inside stars 66
3.2.4 Convection inside stars 67
3.3 Constructing stellar models 70
3.4 Some relations amongst stellar quantities 74
3.5 A summary of stellar observational data 77
3.5.1 Determination of stellar parameters 77
3.5.2 Important features of observational data 80
3.6 Main sequence, red giants and white dwarfs 82
3.6.1 The ends of the main sequence. Eddington luminosity limit 85
3.6.2 HR diagrams of star clusters 86
Exercises 89

<<<PAGE 9>>>

Contents vii
4 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics 91
4.1 The possibility of nuclear reactions in stars 91
4.2 Calculation of nuclear reaction rates 93
4.3 Important nuclear reactions in stellar interiors 97
4.4 Detailed stellar models and experimental conﬁrmation 101
4.4.1 Helioseismology 104
4.4.2 Solar neutrino experiments 105
4.5 Stellar evolution 108
4.5.1 Evolution in binary systems 110
4.6 Mass loss from stars. Stellar winds 112
4.7 Supernovae 115
4.8 Stellar rotation and magnetic ﬁelds 119
4.9 Extrasolar planets 123
Exercises 124
5 End states of stellar collapse 127
5.1 Introduction 127
5.2 Degeneracy pressure of a Fermi gas 128
5.3 Structure of white dwarfs. Chandrasekhar mass limit 132
5.4 The neutron drip and neutron stars 137
5.5 Pulsars 139
5.5.1 The binary pulsar and testing general relativity 143
5.5.2 Statistics of millisecond and binary pulsars 144
5.6 Binary X-ray sources. Accretion disks 145
Exercises 149
6 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter 153
6.1 The shape and size of our Galaxy 153
6.1.1 Some basics of star count analysis 153
6.1.2 Shapley’s model 155
6.1.3 Interstellar extinction and reddening 157
6.1.4 Galactic coordinates 160
6.2 Galactic rotation 160
6.3 Nearly circular orbits of stars 166

<<<PAGE 10>>>

viii Contents
6.3.1 The epicycle theory 166
6.3.2 The solar motion 169
6.3.3 The Schwarzschild velocity ellipsoid 171
6.4 Stellar populations 173
6.5 In search of the interstellar gas 174
6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 177
6.6.1 H Iclouds 180
6.6.2 Warm intercloud medium 183
6.6.3 Molecular clouds 183
6.6.4 H IIregions 185
6.6.5 Hot coronal gas 187
6.7 The galactic magnetic ﬁeld and cosmic rays 187
6.8 Thermal and dynamical considerations 191
Exercises 194
7 Elements of stellar dynamics 197
7.1 Introduction 197
7.2 Virial theorem in stellar dynamics 199
7.3 Collisional relaxation 201
7.4 Incompatibility of thermodynamic equilibrium and self-gravity 204
7.5 Boltzmann equation for collisionless systems 207
7.6 Jeans equations and their applications 210
7.6.1 Oort limit 212
7.6.2 Asymmetric drift 213
7.7 Stars in the solar neighbourhood belonging to two subsystems 216
Exercises 217
8 Elements of plasma astrophysics 219
8.1 Introduction 219
8.2 Basic equations of ﬂuid mechanics 220
8.3 Jeans instability 223
8.4 Basic equations of MHD 228
8.5 Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing 230
8.6 Sunspots and magnetic buoyancy 234
8.7 A qualitative introduction to dynamo theory 237

<<<PAGE 11>>>

Contents ix
8.8 Parker instability 239
8.9 Magnetic reconnection 241
8.10 Particle acceleration in astrophysics 243
8.11 Relativistic beaming and synchrotron radiation 248
8.12 Bremsstrahlung 253
8.13 Electromagnetic oscillations in cold plasmas 254
8.13.1 Plasma oscillations 256
8.13.2 Electromagnetic waves 256
Exercises 257
9 Extragalactic astronomy 261
9.1 Introduction 261
9.2 Normal galaxies 261
9.2.1 Morphological classiﬁcation 262
9.2.2 Physical characteristics and kinematics 265
9.2.3 Open questions 270
9.3 Expansion of the Universe 271
9.4 Active galaxies 276
9.4.1 The zoo of galactic activity 276
9.4.2 Superluminal motion in quasars 280
9.4.3 Black hole as central engine 282
9.4.4 Uniﬁcation scheme 285
9.5 Clusters of galaxies 286
9.6 Large-scale distribution of galaxies 293
9.7 Gamma ray bursts 295
Exercises 296
10 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe 297
10.1 Introduction 297
10.2 What is general relativity? 298
10.3 The metric of the Universe 304
10.4 Friedmann equation for the scale factor 308
10.5 Contents of the Universe. The cosmic blackbody radiation 313
10.6 The evolution of the matter-dominated Universe 317

<<<PAGE 12>>>

x Contents
10.6.1 The closed solution ( k=+ 1) 318
10.6.2 The open solution ( k=− 1) 319
10.6.3 Approximate solution for early epochs 320
10.6.4 The age of the Universe 321
10.7 The evolution of the radiation-dominated Universe 322
Exercises 324
11 The thermal history of the Universe 325
11.1 Setting the time table 325
11.2 Thermodynamic equilibrium 327
11.3 Primordial nucleosynthesis 331
11.4 The cosmic neutrino background 334
11.5 The nature of dark matter 336
11.6 Some considerations of the very early Universe 339
11.6.1 The horizon problem and inﬂation 339
11.6.2 Baryogenesis 340
11.7 The formation of atoms and the last scattering surface 341
11.7.1 Primary anisotropies in CMBR 342
11.7.2 The Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect 343
11.8 Evidence for evolution during redshifts z∼1−6 344
11.8.1 Quasars and galaxies at high redshift 345
11.8.2 The intergalactic medium 346
11.9 Structure formation 349
Exercises 353
12 Elements of tensors and general relativity 357
12.1 Introduction 357
12.2 The world of tensors 358
12.2.1 What is a tensor? 358
12.2.2 The metric tensor 360
12.2.3 Differentiation of tensors 363
12.2.4 Curvature 367
12.2.5 Geodesics 371
12.3 Metric for weak gravitational ﬁeld 373
12.4 Formulation of general relativity 378

<<<PAGE 13>>>

Contents xi
12.4.1 The energy-momentum tensor 379
12.4.2 Einstein’s equation 381
Exercises 384
13 Some applications of general relativity 387
13.1 Time and length measurements 387
13.2 Gravitational redshift 389
13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 390
13.3.1 Particle motion in Schwarzschild geometry.
The perihelion precession 392
13.3.2 Motion of massless particles. The bending of light 399
13.3.3 Singularity and horizon 405
13.4 Linearized theory of gravity 407
13.5 Gravitational waves 411
Exercises 416
14 Relativistic cosmology 419
14.1 The basic equations 419
14.2 The cosmological constant and its signiﬁcance 421
14.3 Propagation of light in the expanding Universe 425
14.4 Important cosmological tests 428
14.4.1 Results for the case /Lambda1=0 429
14.4.2 Results for the case /Lambda1/negationslash=0 433
14.5 Cosmological parameters from observational data 435
Exercises 440
Appendix A. Values of various quantities 443
Appendix B. Astrophysics and the Nobel Prize 445
Suggestions for further reading 447
References 453
Index 463

<<<PAGE 14>>>



<<<PAGE 15>>>

Preface
Particle physics, condensed matter physics and astrophysics are arguably the
three major research frontiers of physics at the present time. It is generally
thought that a physics student’s training is not complete without an elementaryknowledge of particle physics and condensed matter physics. Most physicsdepartments around the world offer one-semester comprehensive courses on
particle physics and condensed matter physics (sometimes known by its more
traditional name ‘solid state physics’). All graduate students of physics and veryoften advanced undergraduate students also are required to take these courses.Very surprisingly, one-semester comprehensive courses on astrophysics at a
similar level are not so frequently offered by many physics departments. If a
physics department has general relativists on its faculty, often a one-semestercourse General Relativity and Cosmology would be offered, though this would
normally not be a compulsory course for all students. It has thus happened
that many students get trained for a professional career in physics without a
proper knowledge of astrophysics, one of the most active research areas ofmodern physics.
Of late, many physics departments are waking up to the fact that this is
a very undesirable situation. More and more physics departments around theworld are now introducing one-semester comprehensive courses on astrophysicsat the advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate level, similar to suchcourses covering particle physics and solid state physics. The physics depart-
ment of the Indian Institute of Science, where I have worked for more than two
decades by now, has been offering a one-semester course on basic astrophysicsfor a long time. It is a core course for our Integrated PhD Programme in PhysicalSciences as well as our Joint Astronomy and Astrophysics Programme. I must
have taught this course to more than half a dozen batches.
Over the years, several excellent textbooks suitable for use in one-semester
courses on particle physics and solid state physics have been written. Thesituation with respect to astrophysics is somewhat peculiar. There are several
outstanding elementary textbooks on astrophysics meant for students who do
xiii

<<<PAGE 16>>>

xiv Preface
not have much background of physics or mathematics beyond what is taught at
the high school level. Then there are well-known specialized textbooks dealingwith important sub-areas of astrophysics (such as stars, galaxies, interstellar
matter or cosmology). However, there have been few attempts at bridging
the gap between these two kinds of textbooks by writing books covering thewhole of astrophysics at the level of Kittel’s Solid State Physics or Perkins’s
High Energy Physics – suitable for a one-semester course meant for students
who have already studied mechanics, electromagnetic theory, thermal physics,quantum mechanics and mathematical methods at an advanced level. WheneverI had to teach the course Fundamentals of Astrophysics in our department, I
found that there was no textbook which was suitable for use in the whole course.
The present book has grown out of the material I have taught in this course.
While writing this book, I have kept in mind that most of the students using
this book will not aspire to a professional career in astrophysics. So I have tried
to stress those aspects of astrophysics which are likely to be of interest to a
physicist who is not specializing in astrophysics. Astrophysics is an observa-
tional science and an acquaintance with the basic phenomenology is absolutelyessential for an appreciation of modern astrophysics. While I have introducedthe basic phenomenology throughout the book, I believe that a physics student
can appreciate astrophysics without knowing what a T Tauri star or what a BL
Lac object is. A student who wishes to be a professional astrophysicist andhas to master the terminology of the subject (which is sometimes of the natureof historical baggage) can learn it from other books. Rather than covering the
details of too many topics, I have tried to develop the central themes of modern
astrophysics fully. The trouble with this approach is that no two astrophysicistswill completely agree as to what are central themes and what are details! I
have used my judgment to develop what I would consider a balanced account
of modern astrophysics. There is no doubt that experts in different areas ofastrophysics would feel that I have committed the cardinal sin of not coveringsomething in their area of specialization which they regard vitally important.
If I succeed in making experts in all different areas of astrophysics equally
unhappy, then I would conclude that I have written a balanced book! One other
principle I have followed is to give more stress on classical well-establishedtopics rather than topics which are still ill-understood or on which our present
views are likely to change drastically in future. To give readers a historical
perspective, I have sometimes deliberately chosen ﬁgures from original classicpapers rather than their more contemporary versions, unless the modern ﬁguressupersede the original ﬁgures in essential and important ways. I have also inten-
tionally kept away from topics which are too speculative or which do not have
close links with observational data at the present time, perhaps reﬂecting mypersonal taste.
Virtually all branches of basic physics ﬁnd applications in some topic of
astrophysics or other. I have assumed that the readers of this book would have

<<<PAGE 17>>>

Preface xv
sufﬁcient knowledge of classical mechanics, electromagnetic theory, optics,
special relativity, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, quantum mechanics,atomic physics and nuclear physics – something that is expected of an advanced
student of physics in any good university anywhere. It is a ﬁrm belief of the
present author that all physics students at this level ought to know some ﬂuidmechanics and plasma physics. However, keeping in mind that this is not thecase for physics students in the majority of universities around the world, a
background in ﬂuid mechanics or plasma physics has not been assumed and
these subjects have been developed from ﬁrst principles. General relativity isalso developed from ﬁrst principles without assuming any previous knowledgeof the subject, though a previous acquaintance with the elementary properties
of tensors will help. Some of the other basic physics topics which have been
developed in this book without assuming any previous background are thetheory of radiative transfer and the kinetic theory of gravitating particles (usingthe collisionless Boltzmann equation).
I have followed the usual traditional order of ﬁrst concentrating on stars and
then taking up galaxies to end with extragalactic astronomy and cosmology.One issue about which I had to give some thought is the placement of thebasic physics topics which I develop in the book. A possible approach would
have been to develop all the necessary basic physics topics at the beginning of
the book before delving into the world of astrophysics. I personally felt thata more satisfactory approach is to teach these physics topics ‘on the way’ aswe proceed with astrophysics. Since radiative transfer is used so extensively
in astrophysics, it comes fairly early in Chapter 2. Two other chapters dealing
primarily with basic physics topics are Chapters 7 and8devoted respectively to
stellar dynamics and plasma astrophysics. These chapters could conceivably beplaced somewhere else in the book. I felt that, after learning about our Galaxy
and interstellar matter in Chapter 6, students will be in a position to appreciate
stellar dynamics and plasma astrophysics particularly well, before they get intoextragalactic astronomy where there will be more applications of what they
learn in Chapters 7 and 8. However, putting Chapters 7 and 8where they are
has been ultimately my personal choice without very compelling logical reasons
behind it.
Now let me comment on the place of general relativity in my book. The
course Fundamentals of Astrophysics which I have taught in our department on
several occasions does not cover general relativity (we have a separate courseGeneral Relativity and Cosmology in our department). In the Fundamentals of
Astrophysics course, I basically cover the material of Chapters 1 –11,w h i c hi s
more than sufﬁcient for a one-semester course. In Chapters 10–11, I present
as much cosmology as can be done without a detailed technical knowledgeof general relativity. Initially my plan was to write up only Chapters 1 –11.
During the course of writing this book, I decided to add the last three chapters –
primarily because general relativity is playing an increasingly more important

<<<PAGE 18>>>

xvi Preface
role in many branches of astrophysics. One of the areas of astrophysics which
underwent the most explosive growth in the last decade is the study of theUniverse at redshifts z≥1. Issues involved in the study of the high-redshift
Universe cannot be appreciated without some technical knowledge of relativis-tic astrophysics. Another important development in the last decade has been theconstruction of several large detectors of gravitational radiation – a consequenceof general relativity. Because of the increased applications of general relativity
to astrophysics and also for the sake of completeness, I ﬁnally decided to write
Chapters 12–14. After developing general relativity from the ﬁrst principlesinChapters 12–13, I discuss relativistic cosmology in Chapter 14 .S ot h e
presentation of cosmology has been somewhat fractured. Topics which can be
developed without a technical knowledge of general relativity are presented
inChapters 10–11, while topics requiring general relativity are presented in
Chapter 14 . Although this arrangement may be intellectually unsatisfactory, I
believe that the advantages outweigh the disadvantages. Readers desirous of
learning the basics of cosmology without ﬁrst learning general relativity can go
through Chapters 10–11. Instructors wishing to teach a one-semester course
of astrophysics to students who do not know general relativity can use thematerial of Chapters 1 –11. On the other hand, a course on general relativity
and cosmology can be based on Chapters 10 –14– with some rearrangement of
topics and with the inclusion of additional topics like structure formation, whichis barely touched upon in this book. Finally, it should be possible to use this asa basic textbook for a two-semester course on astrophysics and relativity – with
some additional material thrown in, depending on the choice of the instructor.
This book has been and will probably remain the most ambitious project I
have ever undertaken in my life. While writing my previous book The Physics
of Fluids and Plasmas, I mostly had to deal with topics on which I had some
expertise. Now the canvas is much vaster. It is probably not possible today for anindividual to have in-depth knowledge of all branches of modern astrophysics.At least, I cannot claim such knowledge. A writer aspiring to cover the whole
of astrophysics is, therefore, compelled to write on many subjects on which
his/her own knowledge is shaky. Apart from the risk of making actual technicalmistakes, one runs the risk of not realizing where the emphasis should be put.I shall be grateful to any reader who brings any mistake to my attention, by
sending an e-mail to my address arnab@physics.iisc.ernet.in . I do hope that
readers will ﬁnd that the merits of this book outnumber its ﬂaws.
Acknowledgments
Apart from my gratitude to many authors whose books I consulted when
preparing this book (all these authors are mentioned in Suggestions for Further
Reading), I am grateful to several outstanding teachers I had as a graduate

<<<PAGE 19>>>

Preface xvii
student at the University of Chicago in the early 1980s. I was particularly
lucky to have courses on Plasma Astrophysics from Eugene Parker, Relativistic
Astrophysics from James Hartle, Cosmology from David Schramm and Stellar
Evolution from David Arnett. The inﬂuence which these teachers left on me
provided me guidance when I myself had to teach these subjects to my studentsand this inﬂuence must have eventually percolated into this book.
I asked a few colleagues to read those chapters on which I was feeling
particularly unsure. Colleagues who made valuable suggestions on some ofthese chapters are H.C. Bhatt, Sudip Bhattacharyya, K.S. Dwarakanath, BimanNath, Tarun Deep Saini and Kandaswamy Subramanian. While these colleaguescaught many errors which would have otherwise crept into the book, I am sure
that this book still has many errors and mistakes for which I am responsible.
Ramesh Babu, Shashikant Gupta and Bidya Binay Karak prepared many of
the ﬁgures in this book. I am also grateful to many organizations and individuals
who permitted me to reproduce ﬁgures under their copyright. The acknowledg-
ments are given in the captions of those ﬁgures.
I thank the staff of Cambridge University Press (especially Laura Clark,
Vince Higgs, Simon Mitton and Dawn Preston) for their cooperation during the
many years I took in preparing this book. Many students who have taken this
course from me over the years encouraged me by regularly enquiring about the
progress of the book and by giving their feedback on the course. A project ofthis magnitude would not have been possible without the strong support of mywife Mahua. Two persons who would have been the happiest to see this book
left us during the long process of writing this book: my mother and my father.
This book is dedicated to their memories.
Arnab Rai Choudhuri

<<<PAGE 20>>>

A note on symbols
In discussing astrophysical topics, one often has to combine results from
different branches of physics. Historically these branches may have evolved
independently and sometimes the same symbol is used for different things inthese different branches. In the case of a few symbols, I have added a subscriptto make them unambiguous. For example, I use σ
Tfor the Thomson cross-
section (since σdenotes the Stefan–Boltzmann constant), κBfor the Boltzmann
constant (since kdenotes the wavenumber in several derivations) and aBfor the
blackbody radiation constant (since adenotes the scale factor of the Universe).
A look at equation (3.48) of Kolb and Turner (1990) will show the kinds of
problems you run into if you use the same symbol to denote different things ina derivation. While I have avoided using the same symbol for different thingswithin one derivation, I sometimes had to use the same symbol for differentthings in different portions of the book. For example, it has been the custom for
many years to use Mto denote both mass (of stars or galaxies) and absolute
magnitude. Rather than inventing unorthodox symbolism, I have trusted the
common sense of readers who should be able to ﬁgure out the meaning of thesymbol from the context and hopefully will not get confused. I now mention a
potential source of confusion. I have used f(E)in§4.2 to denote the probability
that particles have energy Eand have used f(p)in§5.2 to denote the number
density of particles with momentum p(throughout Chapter 7 ,Iu s e fto
denote number density and not probability). While these notations may not beconsistent with each other, they happen to be the most convenient notations for
the derivations presented in §4.2 and§5.2 (and also the notations used by many
previous authors).
xviii

<<<PAGE 21>>>

1
Introduction
1.1 Mass, length and time scales in astrophysics
Astrophysics is the science dealing with stars, galaxies and the entire Universe.
The aim of this book is to present astrophysics as a serious science based onquantitative measurements and rigorous theoretical reasoning.
The standard units of mass, length and time that we use (cgs or SI units)
are appropriate for our everyday life. For expressing results of astrophysicalmeasurements, however, they are not the most convenient units. Let us begin
with a discussion of the basic units we use in astrophysics and the scales of
various astrophysical objects we encounter.
Unit of mass
The mass of the Sun is denoted by the symbol M⊙and is often used as the unit
of mass in astrophysics. Its value is
M⊙=1.99×1030kg. (1.1)
Although intrinsic brightnesses and sizes of stars vary over several orders ofmagnitude, the masses of most stars lie within a relatively narrow range from0.1M
⊙to 20 M⊙. The reason behind this will be discussed in §3.6.1. Hence
the solar mass happens to be a very convenient unit in stellar astrophysics.
Sometimes, however, we have to deal with objects much more massive than
stars. The mass of a typical galaxy can be 1011M⊙. Globular clusters, which
are dense clusters of stars having nearly spherical shapes, typically have massesaround 10
5M⊙.
Unit of length
The average distance of the Earth from the Sun is called the Astronomical Unit
(abbrev. AU). Its value is
AU=1.50×1011m. (1.2)
1

<<<PAGE 22>>>

2 Introduction
Fig. 1.1 Deﬁnition of parsec.
It is a very useful unit for measuring distances within the solar system. But it is
too small a unit to express the distances to stars and galaxies.
As the Earth goes around the Sun, the nearby stars seem to change their
positions very slightly with respect to the faraway stars. This phenomenon is
known as parallax. Let us consider a star on the polar axis of the Earth’s orbit
at a distance daway, as shown in Figure 1.1 . The angle θis half of the angle
by which this star appears to shift with the annual motion of the Earth and isdeﬁned to be the parallax. It is obviously given by
θ=1A U
d. (1.3)
Theparsec (abbrev. pc) is the distance where the star has to be so that its parallax
turns out to be 1/prime/prime. Keeping in mind that 1/prime/primeis equal to π/(180×60×60)
radians, it is easily found from (1.3) that
pc=3.09×1016m. (1.4)
It may be noted that 1 pc is equal to 3.26 light years – a unit very popularwith popular science writers, but rarely used in serious technical literature. For
even larger distances, the standard units are kiloparsec (10
3pc, abbrev. kpc),
megaparsec (106pc, abbrev. Mpc) and gigaparsec (109pc, abbrev. Gpc).
The star nearest to us, Proxima Centauri, is at about a distance of 1.31 pc.
Our Galaxy and many other galaxies like ours are shaped like disks with thick-ness of order 100 pc and radius of order 10 kpc. The geometric mean between
these two distances, which is 1 kpc, may be taken as a measure of the galacticsize. The Andromeda Galaxy, one of the nearby bright galaxies, is at a distanceof about 0.74 Mpc. The distances to very faraway galaxies are of order Gpc. It
should be kept in mind that light from very distant galaxies started when the
Universe was much younger and the concept of distance to such galaxies is nota very straightforward concept, as we shall see in §14.4.1. It is useful to keep

<<<PAGE 23>>>

1.1 Mass, length and time scales in astrophysics 3
Table 1.1 Approximate conversion
factors to be memorized.
M⊙ ≈ 2×1030kg
pc ≈ 3×1016m
yr ≈ 3×107s
the following rule of thumb in mind: pc is a measure of interstellar distances,
kpc is a measure of galactic sizes, Mpc is a measure of intergalactic distancesand Gpc is a measure of the visible Universe.
Unit of time
Astrophysicists have to deal with very different time scales. On the one hand,the age of the Universe is of the order of a few billion years. On the other hand,there are pulsars which emit pulses periodically after intervals of fractions of asecond. There is no special unit of time. Astrophysicists use years for large time
scales and seconds for small time scales, the conversion factor being
yr=3.16×10
7s. (1.5)
The stars typically live for millions to billions of years. Occasionally, one uses
the unit gigayear (109yr, abbrev. Gyr). The age of the Sun is believed to be
about 4.5 Gyr.
The importance of order of magnitude estimates
We can often have good guesses of the values of various quantities around useven without making accurate measurements. By looking at a table, I may makea rough estimate that its side is about 1 m long. By lifting a sack of potatoes,I may make a rough estimate that it weighs about 5 kg. Careful measurements
usually show that such guesses are not very much off the mark. We never have
the suspicion that a measurement of the length of a table would yield valueslike either 10
−2cm or 100 km. For astrophysical quantities, we usually do not
have any such direct feeling. If somebody tells us that the mass of the Sun is
either 1020kg or 1040kg, there would be nothing in our everyday experiences
on the basis of which we could say that these values are unreasonable. Hence, in
astrophysics, it is often very useful ﬁrst to make order of magnitude estimates ofvarious quantities before embarking on a more detailed calculation. Throughout
this book, we shall be making various order of magnitude estimates. For such
purposes, it is useful to remember the conversion factors given in Table 1.1 .T h e
accurate values of these conversion factors are given in (1.1), (1.4) and(1.5).

<<<PAGE 24>>>

4 Introduction
Although the emphasis in this book will be on understanding things and not
memorizing things, we would urge the readers to commit the conversion factorsofTable 1.1 to memory. They are used too often in making various order of
magnitude estimates!
1.2 The emergence of modern astrophysics
From the dawn of civilization, human beings have wondered about the starrysky. Astronomy is one of the most ancient sciences. Perhaps mathematics andmedicine are the only other sciences which can claim as ancient a traditionas astronomy. But modern astrophysics, which arose out of a union between
astronomy and physics, is a fairly recent science; it can be said to have been
born in the middle of the nineteenth century.
Let us say a few words about ancient astronomy. Early humans noticed that
most stars did not seem to change their positions with respect to each other.
The seven stars of the Great Bear occupy the same relative positions night after
night. But a handful of starlike objects – the planets – kept on changing theirpositions with respect to the background stars. It was noticed that there wasa certain regularity in the movements of the planets. Building a model of the
planetary motions was the outstanding problem of ancient astronomy, which
reached its culmination in the geocentric theory of Hipparchus (second centuryBC) and Ptolemy (second century AD). Ptolemy’s Almagest , which luckily
survived the ravages of time, has come down to us as one of the greatest classics
of science and provides the deﬁnitive account of the geocentric model. The
scientiﬁc Renaissance of Europe began with Copernicus (1543) showing that
a heliocentric model provided a simpler explanation of the planetary motionsthan the geocentric model. The new physics developed by Galileo and Newton
ﬁnally provided a dynamical theory which could be used to calculate the orbits
of planets around the Sun.
Only very rarely a branch of science reaches a phase when the practitioners
of that science feel that all the problems which that branch of science had set
out to solve had been adequately solved. With the development of Newtonian
mechanics, planetary astronomy reached a kind of ﬁnality. Even the compli-cated techniques of calculating perturbations to planetary orbits due to the largerplanets got perfected by the nineteenth century. Astronomers then turned their
attention beyond the solar system. Telescopes also became sufﬁciently large by
the middle of the nineteenth century to reveal some of the secrets of the stellarworld to us. It may be mentioned that, with the heralding of the Space Age inthe middle of the twentieth century, research in planetary science has blossomed
again. However, modern planetary science has become a scientiﬁc discipline
quite distinct from astrophysics and we shall not discuss about planets inthis book.

<<<PAGE 25>>>

1.2 The emergence of modern astrophysics 5
If stars are distributed in a three-dimensional space and the Earth is going
round the Sun, then nearby stars should appear to change their positions with
the movement of the Earth, i.e. they should display parallax. Now we know that
even the nearest stars have too little parallax to be detected by the naked eye.
Certainly no parallax observations were available at the time of Copernicus.While proposing that the Earth moves around the Sun, Copernicus (1543)h i m -
self was bothered by the question why stars showed no parallax and correctly
guessed that the stars may just be too far away. Ever since the invention of the
telescope, astronomers have been on the lookout for parallax. Finally, in thefateful year 1838, three astronomers working in three different countries almostsimultaneously reported the ﬁrst parallax measurements (Bessel in Germany,
Struve in Russia and Henderson in South Africa). This forever demolished the
Aristotelian belief that stars are studded on the two-dimensional inner surfaceof a crystal sphere. Suddenly the sky ceased to be a two-dimensional globe andopened into an apparently limitless three-dimensional space! The stars are not
static objects in space. The component of velocity perpendicular to the line of
sight would lead to the change of position of a star in the sky. Such motionsin the globe of the sky are called proper motions . Even Barnard’s star, which
has the largest proper motion of about 10
/prime/primeper yr, would take 360 yr to move
through 1◦in the sky. Most stars have much smaller proper motions and it is no
wonder the appearance of the sky has not changed that much in the last 2000 yr.Some of the ﬁrst measurements of proper motions were also made in the middleof the nineteenth century and it became clear that stars are luminous objects
wandering around in the vast, dark three-dimensional space.
Another momentous event took place in the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury. Bunsen and Kirchhoff (1861) provided the ﬁrst correct explanation of the
dark lines observed by Fraunhofer (1817) in the solar spectrum and realized
that the presence of various chemical elements in the Sun can be inferred from
those dark lines. As soon as astronomers started looking carefully at the stellarspectra, it became clear that the Sun and the stars are made up of the same
chemical elements which are found on the Earth. This discovery provided a
death blow to the other Aristotelian doctrine that heavenly bodies are made upof the element ether which is different from terrestrial elements and obeyeddifferent laws of physics. Newton had shown that planets obeyed the same laws
of physics as falling objects at the Earth’s surface. It now became clear that stars
are made up of the same stuff as the Earth and the laws of physics discovered inthe terrestrial laboratories should hold for them.
With the realization that the laws of physics can be applied to understand
the behaviour of stars, the modern science of astrophysics was born. Nowadaysthe words ‘astronomy’ and ‘astrophysics’ are used almost interchangeably.Although modern astrophysicists study problems completely different from theproblems studied by ancient astronomers, two very useful concepts introduced
by ancient astronomers are still universally used. One is the concept of celestial

<<<PAGE 26>>>

6 Introduction
coordinates, and the other is the magnitude scale for describing the brightness
of a celestial object. We now turn to these two topics.
1.3 Celestial coordinates
The sky appears as a spherical surface above our heads. We call it the celestial
sphere. Just as the position of a place on the Earth’s surface can be spec-
iﬁed with the latitude and longitude, the position of an astronomical object
on the celestial sphere can be speciﬁed with two similar coordinates. Thesecoordinates are deﬁned in such a way that faraway stars which appear immov-able with respect to each other have ﬁxed coordinates. Objects like planets
which move with respect to them will have their coordinates changing with
time.
The coordinate corresponding to latitude is called the declination .T h e
points where the Earth’s rotation axis would pierce the celestial sphere are
called celestial poles. The north celestial pole is at present close to the pole
star. The great circle on the celestial sphere vertically above the Earth’s equator
is called the celestial equator . The declination is essentially the latitude on
the celestial sphere deﬁned with respect to the celestial poles and equator.
Something lying on the celestial equator has declination zero, whereas the north
pole has declination +π/ 2.
The coordinate corresponding to longitude is called the right ascension
(R.A. in brief). Just as the zero of longitude is ﬁxed by taking the longitude
of Greenwich as zero, we need to ﬁx the zero of R.A. for deﬁning it. This is
done with the help of a great circle called the ecliptic . Since the Earth goes
around the Sun in a year, the Sun’s position with respect to the distant stars, asseen by us, keeps changing and traces out a great circle in the sky. The ecliptic
is this great circle. Twelve famous constellations (known as the signs of the
zodiac) appear on the ecliptic. It was noted from almost prehistoric times that
the Sun happens to be in different constellations in different times of the year.We cannot, of course, directly see a constellation when the Sun lies in it. But, by
looking at the stars just after sunset and just before sunrise, ancient astronomers
could infer the position of the Sun in the celestial sphere. The celestial equatorand the ecliptic are inclined at an angle of about 23
1
2◦and intersect at two points,
as shown in Figure 1.2 . One of these points, lying in the constellation Aries, is
taken as the zero of R.A. When the Sun is at this point, we have the vernalequinox. It is a standard convention to express the R.A. in hours rather than indegrees. The celestial sphere rotates around the polar axis by 15
◦in one hour.
Hence one hour of R.A. corresponds to 15◦.
The declination and R.A. are basically deﬁned with respect to the rotation
axis of the Earth, which ﬁxes the celestial poles and equator. One problematicaspect of introducing coordinates in this way is that the Earth’s rotation axis

<<<PAGE 27>>>

1.3 Celestial coordinates 7
Fig. 1.2 The celestial sphere with the equator and the ecliptic indicated on it. The
celestial pole is denoted by P, whereas Kis the pole of the ecliptic.
is not ﬁxed, but precesses around an axis perpendicular to the plane of the
Earth’s orbit around the Sun. This means that the point PinFigure 1.2 traces
out an approximate circle in the celestial sphere slowly in about 25,800 years,around the pole Kof the ecliptic. This phenomenon is called precession and was
discovered by Hipparchus (second century BC) by comparing his observationswith the observations made by earlier astronomers about 150 years previously.
The precession is caused by the gravitational torque due to the Sun acting
on the Earth and can be explained from the dynamics of rigid bodies (see,for example, Goldstein ,1980, §5–8). Due to precession, the positions of the
celestial poles and the celestial equator keep changing slowly with respect to
ﬁxed stars. Hence, if the declination and the R.A. of an astronomical object
at a time are deﬁned with respect to the poles and the equator at that time,then certainly the values of these coordinates will keep changing with time. Thecurrent convention is to use the coordinates deﬁned with respect to the positions
of the poles and the equator in the year 2000.
Many ground-based optical telescopes have been traditionally designed to
have equatorial mounting, which means that the main axis of the telescope is
parallel to the rotation axis of the Earth. The telescope is designed such that itcan have two kinds of motion. Firstly, it can be rotated towards or away from the
axis of mounting (which is the Earth’s rotation axis). Secondly, the telescope canbe moved to generate a conical surface with this axis as the central axis. Supposewe want to turn the telescope towards an object of which the declination and
R.A. are known. The ﬁrst kind of motion enables us to set the telescope at the
correct declination. The second kind of motion allows us to turn it to variousvalues of R.A. at that declination.
The main advantage of using the declination and R.A. is that an equatorially
mounted telescope can easily be turned to an object of which we know the dec-lination and R.A. However, there is another coordinate system, called galactic
coordinates, widely used in galactic studies. In this system, the plane of our

<<<PAGE 28>>>

8 Introduction
Galaxy is taken as the equator and the direction of the galactic centre as seen by
us (in the constellation Sagittarius) is used to deﬁne the zero of longitude.
1.4 Magnitude scale
Suppose we have two series of lamps – the ﬁrst series with lamps havingintensities I
0,2I0,3I0,4I0..., w h e r e a s t h e l a m p s i n t h e second series have
intensities I0,2I0,4I0,8I0....W h e nw el o o ka tt h et w os e r i e so fl a m p s ,i ti st h e
second series which will appear to have lamps of steadily increasing intensity.In other words, the human eye is more sensitive to a geometric progressionof intensity rather than an arithmetic progression. The magnitude scale fordescribing apparent brightnesses of celestial objects is based on this fact.
On the basis of naked eye observations, the Greek astronomer Hipparchus
(second century BC) classiﬁed all the stars into six classes according to theirapparent brightnesses. We can now of course easily measure the apparentbrightness quantitatively. It appears that stars in any two successive classes,
on the average, differ in apparent brightness by the same common factor. A
quantitative basis of the magnitude scale was given by Pogson (1856) by noting
that the faintest stars visible to the naked eye are about 100 times faintercompared to the brightest stars. Since the brightest and faintest stars differ by
ﬁve magnitude classes, stars in two successive classes should differ in apparent
brightness by a factor (100)
1/5. Suppose two stars have apparent brightnesses
l1andl2, whereas their magnitude classes are m1andm2. It is clear that
l2
l1=(100)1
5(m1−m 2). (1.6)
Note that the magnitude scale is deﬁned in such a fashion that a fainter objecthas a higher value of magnitude. On taking the logarithm of (1.6),w eﬁ n d
m
1−m2=2.5l o g10l2
l1. (1.7)
This can be taken as the deﬁnition of apparent magnitude denoted by m,w h i c h
is a measure of the apparent brightness of an object in the sky.
Since a star emits electromagnetic radiation in different wavelengths, one
important question is: what is the wavelength range over which we consider
the electromagnetic radiation emitted by a star to measure its apparent bright-
ness quantitatively? If we use apparent brightnesses based on the radiationin all wavelengths, then the magnitude deﬁned from it is called the bolo-
metric magnitude . Since any device for measuring intensity of light does not
respond to all wavelengths in the same way, ﬁnding the bolometric magnitudefrom measurements with a particular device is not straightforward. A muchmore convenient system, called the Ultraviolet–Blue–Visual system or the UBV

<<<PAGE 29>>>

1.5 Application of physics to astrophysics 9
system, was introduced by Johnson and Morgan (1953) and is now universally
used by astronomers. In this system, the light from a star is made to pass
through ﬁlters which allow only light in narrow wavelength bands around the
three wavelengths: 3650 ˚A, 4400 ˚A and 5500 ˚A. From the measurements of the
intensity of light that has passed through these ﬁlters, we get magnitudes in
ultraviolet, blue and visual, usually denoted by U,BandV. Typical examples of
Vmagnitudes are: the Sun, V=− 26.74; Sirius, the brightest star, V=− 1.45;
faintest stars measured, V≈27.
Suppose we consider a reddish star. It will have less brightness in Bband
compared to Vband. Hence its Bmagnitude should have a larger numerical
value than its Vmagnitude. So we can use (B−V)as an indication of a star’s
colour. The more reddish a star, the larger will be the value of (B−V).
Theabsolute magnitude of a celestial object is deﬁned as the magnitude it
would have if it were placed at a distance of 10 pc. The relation between relativemagnitude mand absolute magnitude Mcan easily be found from (1.7).I ft h e
object is at a distance dpc, then (10/d)
2is the ratio of its apparent brightness
and the brightness it would have if it were at a distance of 10 pc. Hence
m−M=2.5l o g10d2
102,
from which
m−M=5l o g10d
10. (1.8)
The absolute magnitude in the Vband, denoted by MV, is often used as a
convenient quantity to indicate the intrinsic brightness of an object.
1.5 Application of physics to astrophysics.
Relevance of general relativity
Astrophysics is a supreme example of applied physics. To be a competentastrophysicist, ﬁrst and foremost one has to be a competent physicist. Virtu-
ally all branches of physics are needed in the study of astrophysics. Classical
mechanics, electromagnetic theory, optics, thermodynamics, statistical mechan-ics, ﬂuid dynamics, plasma physics, quantum mechanics, atomic physics,nuclear physics, particle physics, special and general relativity – there is no
branch of physics which does not ﬁnd application in some astrophysical prob-
lem or other. We shall use results from all these branches of physics in thisbook. In the astrophysical setting, however, the laws of physics are often appliedto extremes of various physical conditions like density, pressure, temperature,
velocity, angular velocity, gravitational ﬁeld, magnetic ﬁeld, etc. – well beyond
the limits for which the laws have been tested in the laboratory. For example,the vacuousness of the intergalactic space is much more than the best vacuums

<<<PAGE 30>>>

10 Introduction
we can create at the present time, whereas the interiors of neutron stars may
have the almost inconceivable density of 1017kg m−3. Only in one case, human
beings may have been able to surpass Nature. There are good reasons to suspect
that temperatures lower than 2.73 K never existed anywhere in the Universe
until scientists succeeded in creating such temperatures about a century ago.
At the ﬁrst sight, it may seem that the astrophysicists are concerned with the
macro-world of very large systems like stars and galaxies, which is far removed
from the micro-world of atoms, nuclei and elementary particles. However, it
turns out very often that we need the physics of the micro-world to make senseof the macro-world of astrophysics. One example is the famous Chandrasekharmass limit of white dwarf stars, which will be derived in §5.3. It was found by
Chandrasekhar (1931) that the maximum mass which white dwarfs (which are
compact dead stars in which no more energy generation takes place) can haveis given by
M
Ch=2.018√
6
8π/parenleftbigghc
G/parenrightbigg3/21
m2
Hμ2e, (1.9)
where his Planck’s constant, mHis the mass of hydrogen atom and μeis some-
thing called the mean molecular weight of electrons (to be introduced in §5.2)
having a value close to 2. On putting numerical values of various quantities,
MChturns out to be about 1.4 M⊙. Thus the constants of the atomic world like
handmHdetermine the mass limit of a vast object like a white dwarf star.
It is this interplay between the physics of the micro-world and the physics of
the macro-world which makes modern astrophysics such a fascinating scientiﬁc
discipline. Very often major breakthroughs in micro-physics have a big impact
in astrophysics, and occasionally discoveries in astrophysics have providednew insights in micro-physics.
We shall assume the readers of this book to have a working knowledge
of mechanics, electromagnetic theory, thermal physics and quantum physicsat an advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate level. General relativityhappens to be a branch of physics which is often not included in a regularphysics curriculum, but which is applied in some areas of astrophysics. Till
Chapter 11 , we proceed without assuming any background of general relativity.
Then, only in the last three chapters of this book, we give an introduction
to general relativity and consider its applications to astrophysical problems.Readers unwilling to learn general relativity can still get a reasonably rounded
background of modern astrophysics from this book by studying till Chapter 11 .
We now make a few comments on the circumstances in which general relativity
is expected to be important and what a reader misses if he or she is ignorant ofgeneral relativity.
Even readers without any technical knowledge of general relativity would
have heard of black holes, which are objects with gravitational ﬁelds so strongthat even light cannot escape. Let us try to ﬁnd out when this happens.

<<<PAGE 31>>>

1.5 Application of physics to astrophysics 11
Newtonian theory does not tell us how to calculate the effect of gravity of
light. So let us ﬁgure out when a particle moving with speed cwill get trapped,
according to Newtonian theory. Suppose we have a spherical mass Mof radius
rand a particle of mass mis ejected from its surface with speed c.T h e
gravitational potential energy of the particle is
−GMm
r.
If we use the non-relativistic expression for kinetic energy for a crude estimate(we should actually use special relativity for a particle moving with c!), then the
total energy of the particle is
E=1
2mc2−GMm
r.
Newtonian theory tells us that the particle will escape from the gravitationalﬁeld if E>0 and will get trapped if E<0. In other words, the condition of
trapping is
2GM
c2r>1. (1.10)
It turns out that more accurate calculations using general relativity gives exactlythe same condition (1.10) for light trapping, which was ﬁrst obtained by Laplace
(1795) by the arguments which we have given. General relativity is neededwhen this factor
f=2GM
c2r(1.11)
is of order unity. On the other hand, Newtonian theory is quite adequate if thisfactor is much smaller than 1. For the Sun with mass 1.99 ×10
30kg and radius
6.96×108m, this factor fturns out to be only 4 .24×10−6. Hence Newtonian
theory is almost adequate for all phenomena in the solar system. Only if we wantto calculate very accurate orbits of planets close to the Sun (such as Mercury),
we have to bother about general relativity.
Are there situations in astrophysics where general relativity is essential?
We can use (1.11) to calculate the radius to which the solar mass has to be
shrunk such that light emitted at its surface gets trapped. This radius turns outto be 2.95 km. As we shall discuss in more detail in Chapters 4 –5, when the
energy source of a star is exhausted, the star can collapse to very compact
conﬁgurations like neutron stars or black holes. General relativity is neededto study such objects. If matter is distributed uniformly with density ρinside
radius r, then we can write
M=4
3πr3ρ
and(1.11) becomes

<<<PAGE 32>>>

12 Introduction
f=8π
3Gr2ρ
c2. (1.12)
We note that fis large when either ρis large or ris large (for given ρ). The
density ρis very high inside objects like neutron stars. Can there be situations
where general relativity is important due to large r? We know of one object
with very large size – our Universe itself. The distance to the farthest galaxies
is of order 1 Gpc. It is difﬁcult to estimate the average density of the universe
accurately. Probably it is of order 10−26kg m−3, as we shall discuss in §10.5.
Substituting these values in (1.12),w eg e t
f≈0.06.
This tells us that we should use general relativity to study the dynamics of
the whole Universe, which comes under cosmology. Thus, in astrophysics, wehave two clear situations in which general relativity is important – the study of
collapsed stars and the study of the whole Universe (or cosmology). In most
other circumstances, we can get good results by applying Newtonian theoryof gravity.
Even though general relativity is needed to study the structure of a col-
lapsed star, we do not require general relativity to study some of the physicalphenomena in the surrounding space or to ﬁgure out the conditions under whichthe collapse takes place. Again, we shall see in Chapter 10 that Newtonian
mechanics allows us a formulation of the dynamics of the Universe, which is
conceptually incomplete, but the crucial equation surprisingly turns out to be
identical with the equation derived from general relativity (see §10.4). We are
thus able to do quite a bit of astrophysics without general relativity. However,general relativity becomes essential when we want to make a conceptually
satisfactory investigation of the properties of the Universe as revealed by very
faraway galaxies. This subject will be taken up in Chapter 14 for those readers
who are willing to learn general relativity in Chapters 12–13.
1.6 Sources of astronomical information
In most branches of science, controlled experiments play a very importantrole. Astrophysics is a peculiar science in which astronomical observationstake the place of controlled experiments. An astronomer can only observe an
astronomical object with the help of the signals reaching us from the object. We
list below four kinds of possible sources of astronomical information.
1. Electromagnetic radiation
To this day, the electromagnetic radiation reaching us from celestial objectsgives us the most extensive information about these objects. Until the time of

<<<PAGE 33>>>

1.6 Sources of astronomical information 13
World War II, all astronomical observations were primarily based on visible
light. However, in the last few decades, virtually all the bands of electromagneticradiation have become available for the astronomer. Instruments and methods
for detection of electromagnetic radiation (or photons) are discussed in §1.7.
2. Neutrinos
Nuclear reactions inside stars produce neutrinos, as we shall discuss in detail inChapter 4. Since neutrinos take part in weak interactions alone (and not in strongor electromagnetic interactions), the cross-section of any neutrino process is
very small. Hence most of the neutrinos created at the centre of a star can come
out without interacting with the stellar matter. Unlike photons which come fromthe outer layers of a star and cannot tell us anything directly about the stellarcore, neutrinos come out of the core unmodiﬁed. However, the very small cross-
section of interaction between matter and neutrinos also makes it difﬁcult to
detect neutrinos. Only when a neutrino has interacted with the detector, can webe sure of its presence. Because of this difﬁculty of detecting neutrinos, weexpect to detect neutrinos only either from very nearby sources or from sources
which emit exceptionally large ﬂuxes of neutrinos (like a supernova explosion)
if the source is not too nearby.
For detecting neutrinos, we need a huge amount of some substance with
atoms having nuclei with which neutrinos interact. In the 1960s Davis started
a famous experiment to detect neutrinos from the Sun by using a huge under-
ground tank of cleaning liquid C
2Cl4as the detector. Initially Davis detected
fewer neutrinos than what is expected theoretically. The puzzling solar neutrinoproblem and its subsequent resolution is described in §4.4.2. In the late 1980s
and the early 1990s, other neutrino detection experiments started, one of themost important being Kamiokande in Japan. Apart from the Sun, the only otherastronomical source from which it has so far been possible to detect neutrinosis the Supernova 1987A, as discussed in §4.7. Only about 20 neutrinos detected
in two terrestrial experiments could be ascribed to this supernova! Neutrinoastronomy is, therefore, very much in its infancy.
3. Gravitational radiation
According to general relativity, a disturbance in a gravitational ﬁeld can propa-gate in the form of a wave with speed c(to be shown in §13.4). Indirect evidence
for the existence of gravitational radiation has come from the binary pulsardiscovered by Hulse and Taylor (1975), as discussed in §5.5.1. The binary
pulsar is a system in which two neutron stars are orbiting around each other withan orbital period of about 8 hours. This system continuously emits gravitation
radiation and keeps on losing energy, thereby causing the two neutron stars to
come closer together. This results in a decrease in the orbital period, whichhas been measured and is found to be in good agreement with the theoreticalprediction from general relativity. This is, however, an indirect conﬁrmation of

<<<PAGE 34>>>

14 Introduction
the theory of gravitational radiation. One would like to directly measure the
gravitational radiation reaching the Earth from astronomical sources.
As we shall see in §13.5, gravitational radiation impinging on an object
causes a deformation of the object. Even a supernova explosion in our Galaxyis expected to produce a size deformation which may be at most of order only10
−18part of the size of the object. Even if the detector has a size of the order
of a km, the deformation will be of the order of 10−15m only. One needs
very sensitive interferometric techniques to measure such tiny deformations.As discussed in §13.5, several gravitational radiation detectors are now being
constructed around the world, but there is yet no unambiguous detection ofgravitational radiation from any astronomical source. In contrast to neutrino
astronomy which is in its infancy, gravitational wave astronomy is still waiting
to be born.
4. Cosmic rays
These are highly energetic charged particles (electrons, protons and heaviernuclei) continuously bombarding the Earth from all directions. As we shall dis-
cuss in §8.10, we believe that these charged particles are accelerated primarily in
the shock waves produced in supernova explosions. Afterwards, however, they
spiral around the magnetic ﬁeld of the Galaxy and, by the time they reach us,they appear to be coming from directions totally different from the direction of
their original source. In the case of electromagnetic radiation reaching us from
outer space, usually the astronomical source can be identiﬁed without too muchambiguity. In contrast, we cannot identify the astronomical source from which acosmic ray particle has come. Cosmic rays, therefore, have limited applications
as a source of astronomical information.
1.7 Astronomy in different bands of electromagnetic radiation
We now consider astronomy with electromagnetic radiation, which is so far
our main source of astronomical information. The Earth’s atmosphere is anannoying inconvenience for the astronomer. The atmosphere is transparent to
only small bands of electromagnetic radiation. Even though visible light passes
through the atmosphere, the light rays are affected by the disturbances in theatmosphere, leading to a degradation of the astronomical image. Figure 1.3
indicates the heights above the sea level which we have to climb before we
can receive radiation of a particular wavelength from the outer space. Apart
from visible light, radio waves in a certain wavelength band can reach theEarth’s surface. However, radio waves with wavelengths larger than about 10 mcannot reach us from astronomical sources, since this wavelength corresponds
to the plasma frequency of the ionosphere such that the ionosphere reﬂects radio
waves with wavelengths larger than about 10 m (see §8.13.2). In fact, this is
the reason why faraway regions on the Earth’s surface can communicate with

<<<PAGE 35>>>

1.7 Astronomy in different bands 15
Fig. 1.3 The penetrating ability of electromagnetic wave through the Earth’s atmo-
sphere. The altitudes against different wavelengths indicate the heights above the sea
level we have to climb to receive radiation of that wavelength from astronomicalsources. Adapted from Shu (1982, p. 17).
long-wavelength radio waves in spite of the curvature of the surface. We,
therefore, need to use shorter wavelengths for doing radio astronomy and longer
wavelengths for communicating with distant regions on the Earth’s surface.
Near infrared radiation is absorbed mainly by water vapour, which remainsconﬁned in the lower layers of the atmosphere. Hence it is possible to doastronomy in the near infrared by going to the top of a mountain in a dry region.
However, we need to go above the Earth’s atmosphere to do ultraviolet or X-
ray astronomy, since radiation in these wavelengths is absorbed by the upperatmosphere. We now say a few words about the instruments for doing astronomyin different wavelength bands.
1.7.1 Optical astronomy
This is astronomy in visible light. Although human beings have been observingthe starry sky from prehistoric times, modern optical astronomy can be said

<<<PAGE 36>>>

16 Introduction
to have been born when Galileo turned his telescope to the night sky in 1609.
While Galileo’s telescope was of the refracting type, Newton developed thereﬂecting telescope around 1668. The crucial optical component in a refracting
telescope is a lens and in a reﬂecting telescope is a parabolic mirror. Most of the
large telescopes constructed in the last one century are of the reﬂecting type. Itis not difﬁcult to understand the reasons. Firstly, a mirror is free from chromaticaberration, which affects a lens. Secondly, making a large lens of high quality
is much more difﬁcult than making a large mirror, since a mirror requires only
a defect-free surface, whereas a lens involves a volume of glass that has to beperfectly uniform and defect-free. Finally, a mirror can be supported from thewhole of its back-side, unlike a lens which is principally supported only along
its outer circumference. For a large optical component which can bend under its
own weight, a proper mechanical support is crucial.
The size of a telescope is indicated by the diameter of its main optical
component (the lens or the mirror). The great refractor of Yerkes Observatory
near Chicago, which was built in 1897 and has a diameter of 1 m, still remains
the world’s largest refracting telescope. From the beginning of the twentiethcentury, reﬂecting telescopes started becoming large enough for accurate extra-galactic studies. The 2.5 m reﬂector at Mount Wilson Observatory in California,
commissioned in 1917, was probably one of the most important telescopes in the
history of astronomy. It was used by astronomers like Hubble to make severalpath-breaking discoveries. The 5 m reﬂector of the nearby Mount PalomarObservatory, completed in 1948, remained the world’s largest telescope for
several years. Only in the last few years, it has been possible to build much
larger telescopes by using new technology. The largest telescope at present isthe Keck Telescope in Hawaii, which started operating from 1993. Instead of a
single mirror, it has 36 hexagonal adjustable segments which together make up
a large parabolic mirror of 10 m diameter.
Why do we try to build bigger and bigger telescopes? There are basically
two reasons – to achieve higher resolution and to collect more light. Let us look
at these two issues.
The resolving power of a mirror or a lens of diameter Dis given by
θ=1.22λ
D, (1.13)
where λis the wavelength of the light used (see, for example, Born and Wolf,
1980, §8.6.2). For a 1 m telescope, the resolving power at a wavelength of
5000 ˚A should be of order 0.12/prime/prime. Telescopes which are of this size and larger,
however, produce images much less sharp than what is theoretically expected.This is because the air through which the light rays pass before reaching the
telescope is always in turbulent motion. As a result, the paths of light rays
become slightly deﬂected, giving rise to blurred images. Astronomers usethe term seeing to indicate the quality of image under a given atmospheric

<<<PAGE 37>>>

1.7 Astronomy in different bands 17
Fig. 1.4 A view of the Keck Telescope in Hawaii showing its mirror made up of 36
segments. Courtesy: W. M. Keck Observatory.
condition. Seeing is rarely good enough to allow images which are sharp enough
to resolve more than 0 .5/prime/prime. Only if we can place a telescope above the Earth’s
atmosphere, is it possible to achieve the theoretical resolution given by (1.13).
That is why the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), which was placed into orbit in1990 and had an initial problem of image formation rectiﬁed in 1993, producedmuch sharper and crisper images than any ground-based telescope, even though
its mirror has a diameter of only 2.4 m.
It may be mentioned that during the last couple of decades astronomers have
come up with ingenious techniques for producing images even with ground-
based telescopes that are sharper than what they would be if we were limited
by seeing. In speckle imaging, which is possible only for fairly bright sources,
very short exposure images are ﬁrst produced. Since air above the telescope
would not move much during the short exposure, the image would be sharp butdim. Combining many such images, a proper sharp image is constructed. The
other technique is adaptive optics, which involves putting a deformable mirror
in the light path within the telescope. A computer which gets information from
a sensor about the deﬂection of light paths caused by turbulence keeps adjustingthe mirror to correct for the effect of seeing.
It is clear that a bigger ground-based telescope cannot achieve higher
resolutions beyond a certain limit. However, the light-gathering ability of atelescope – which obviously increases with the area of the mirror and therefore

<<<PAGE 38>>>

18 Introduction
goes as D2– turns out to be crucial when we want to produce images of
very faint objects like faraway galaxies. Anybody who has been fascinated by
beautiful photographs of galaxies in books usually becomes very disappointed
when he or she looks at a galaxy through a telescope for the ﬁrst time in life.
Beautiful galaxy pictures are usually produced only after long exposures. Oneneeds a large telescope to produce photographs or spectra of very faint galaxies.
1.7.2 Radio astronomy
Radio astronomy – the ﬁrst of the new astronomies – began when Jansky
(1933) discovered radio signals coming from the direction of the constellationSagittarius, where the galactic centre is located. Reber (1940) later built a
primitive radio telescope in his backyard and found that radio signals werecoming from the Sun and also from some other directions in the sky. Thedevelopment of radar technology during World War II provided a major boostfor the blossoming of radio astronomy after the war.
The main component of a radio telescope is an antenna in the form of a
dish, which focuses the radio waves at a focal point, where receiving instru-ments can be kept. The early radio telescopes consisted of single dishes. Thefamous radio telescope of Jodrell Bank near Manchester, constructed in 1957,
has a fully steerable single dish of 76 m diameter. Since radio waves are not
affected by the atmospheric turbulence (though radio waves at wavelengthslonger than 20 cm are affected by the plasma irregularities in the ionosphereand the solar wind), the resolving power of a radio telescope is not limited by
atmospheric seeing and can achieve the theoretical value given by (1.13). With
the development of interferometric techniques by Ryle and others, it became
possible to combine signals received by different dishes and to produce imagesof which the resolution was determined by the maximum separation amongst
the dishes. At a wavelength of 10 cm, antennas spread over an area of 1 km give
a resolution of order 2.4
/prime/prime. Perhaps the world’s most important radio telescope in
the last few years has been the Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico, whichbecame operational around 1980 and consists of 27 radio antennas in a Y-shaped
conﬁguration spread over a few km. To achieve even higher resolution, one
can combine signals from different radio telescopes around the Earth operatingtogether in a mode called the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). Thenessentially the diameter of the Earth becomes the Dthat you put in (1.13).
VLBI can achieve much higher resolution than what is possible in opticalastronomy.
Let us say a few words about the kinds of astronomical sources from
which one expects radio waves. Surfaces of stars have temperatures of order
a few thousand degrees and emit primarily in visible wavelengths. The visible
radiation received by optical telescopes from hot bodies (like stars) is emitted bythem because of their temperature – the type of radiation usually called thermal

<<<PAGE 39>>>

1.7 Astronomy in different bands 19
Fig. 1.5 The Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope in New Mexico, made up of
several dish antennas. Courtesy: NRAO/AUI/NSF.
radiation in astronomy. There are, however, many non-thermal processes due
to which an object may emit radiation. Some of the most intriguing objects
discovered by radio telescopes – pulsars (§5.5) and quasars (§9.4) – emit not
because they have temperatures appropriate for the emission of radio waves, but
because of non-thermal processes. One very important example of non-thermal
radiation in astronomy is synchrotron radiation, which is emitted by relativisticelectrons spiralling around magnetic ﬁeld lines (§8.11) . All signals received
by radio telescopes, however, are not non-thermal. One of the most famous
discoveries in the history of radio astronomy is that of the thermal radiation
with 2.73 K temperature ﬁlling the whole Universe (§10.5) .
1.7.3 X-ray astronomy
Since X-rays are absorbed by the Earth’s ionosphere, it is necessary to send anX-ray telescope completely above the Earth’s atmosphere in order to receiveX-rays from astronomical objects. The ﬁrst extraterrestrial X-ray signals werereceived by Geiger counters ﬂown in a rocket ( Giacconi et al., 1962). X-ray
astronomy really came of age when the satellite Uhuru, completely devotedto X-ray astronomy, was launched in 1970. The Chandra X-ray Observatory(named after S. Chandrasekhar), which was lifted into orbit in 1999, is cap-able of producing much sharper X-ray images than any of the previous X-ray
telescopes.
X-rays are reﬂected from metal surfaces only when they are incident at
grazing angles (otherwise, they pass through metals). Hence X-ray telescopes

<<<PAGE 40>>>

20 Introduction
Incident
ray
Focal
plane
Fig. 1.6 A schematic representation of the optics of an X-ray telescope, in which
X-rays are focused by two successive reﬂections at grazing incidence.
are designed very differently from optical telescopes. Figure 1.6 shows a
sketch of an X-ray telescope in which X-rays are brought to a focus after two
reﬂections at grazing angles. Also, mirrors in X-ray telescopes have to be muchsmoother than mirrors in optical telescopes because of the small wavelength
of X-rays. Hence building powerful X-ray telescopes has been a formidable
technological challenge.
X-rays are mainly emitted by very hot gases in astronomical systems. As
we shall see in §5.6, one of the most important sources of astronomical X-rays
is the type of binary star system in which one is a compact star gravitationallypulling off gas from its inﬂated binary companion.
1.7.4 Other new astronomies
After this brief discussion of the three bands of electromagnetic radiationwhich have yielded the maximum amount of astronomical information (optical,radio and X-ray), let us make a few remarks about the other bands. By now,
virtually all wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation have been explored by
astronomers.
Since star-forming regions are much less hot than the surfaces of stars, they
are expected to emit infrared radiation. Therefore infrared astronomy is very
important in understanding the star formation process, amongst other things.
As we already mentioned, near infrared astronomy can be done from telescopeslocated at sufﬁciently high altitudes. One difﬁculty with infrared astronomy isthat all objects around in the observatory emit infrared radiation and one has
to pick up the signals from astronomical sources out of all these. It is like
doing optical astronomy with lights around. There is no doubt that space is abetter place for infrared astronomy. The Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS)was launched in 1983. It has been followed by the Space Infrared Telescope
Facility (SIRTF) launched in 2003.
Other important satellite missions devoted to studying other bands of elec-
tromagnetic radiation are the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), launched

<<<PAGE 41>>>

1.8 Astronomical nomenclature 21
in 1978 to explore the Universe in the ultraviolet, and the Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory, launched in 1991 to detect gamma rays from outer space.
1.8 Astronomical nomenclature
Somebody embarking on a ﬁrst study of astronomy may get confused by thenames of various astronomical objects. Only a few of the brightest stars weregiven names in various ancient civilizations. Some of these names are still in
use. For stars which do not have names and for all other astronomical objects,
astronomers had to invent schemes by which an astronomical object can beidentiﬁed unambiguously. There are several famous catalogues of astronomicalobjects. Very often an astronomical object is identiﬁed by the entry number in a
well-known catalogue.
Stars down to about ninth magnitude were listed in the famous Henry
Draper Catalogue , published during 1918–1924. It gives the celestial coor-
dinates and spectroscopic classiﬁcation (to be discussed in §3.5.1) of about
225,000 stars. A star listed in this catalogue is indicated by ‘HD’ followed by
its listing number. For example, Sirius, the brightest star in the sky, can also bereferred to as HD 48915, since it is listed as the object number 48915 in theHenry Draper Catalogue.
As will be clear from this book, modern astrophysicists are very much
interested in objects other than stars visible in the sky. During 1774–1781 theFrench astronomer Charles Messier compiled a famous list of more than 100non-stellar objects visible through a small telescope. This list includes some of
the most widely studied galaxies, star clusters, supernova remnants and nebulae
of various types. These objects are indicated by ‘M’ followed by the numberin the Messier catalogue. The Andromeda Galaxy is M31, whereas the CrabNebula, the remnant of a supernova seen from the Earth in 1054, is M1. A
much bigger catalogue for non-stellar objects with nearly 8000 entries was
compiled by Dreyer (1888) based primarily on observations of Hershel. This
is known as the New General Catalogue , abbreviated as NGC. Galaxies not
listed by Messier but listed in NGC are usually indicated by ‘NGC’ followed by
the number in this catalogue.
After the development of radio and X-ray astronomies, astronomers had
to devise schemes for identifying objects discovered in the radio and X-ray
wavelengths. Initially when only a few objects emitting radio or X-rays were
known, they were often named after the constellation in which they were found.
The strongest radio source and the strongest X-ray source in the constellationCygnus, for example, are known respectively as Cygnus A and Cygnus X-1.A very useful catalogue of radio sources is the Third Cambridge Catalogue of
Radio Sources, known as 3C (Edge et al., 1959). Radio sources listed in this
catalogue are often indicated by ‘3C’ followed by the number in the catalogue.The object 3C 273 is the brightest quasar (to be discussed in §9.4).

<<<PAGE 42>>>

22 Introduction
Lastly, some astronomical objects are named by their celestial coordinates.
For example, PSR 1913 +16 is the name of the pulsar (to be discussed in §5.5)
having the right ascension (R.A.) 19 hours 13 minutes and the declination +16◦.
Exercises
1.1 The Sun is at a distance of about 8 kpc from the galactic centre and
moves around the galactic centre in a circular path with a velocity of about
220 km s−1. Make a rough estimate of the mass of the Galaxy.
1.2 A star at a distance of 4 pc has an apparent magnitude 2. What is its
absolute magnitude? Given the fact that the Sun has a luminosity 3.9 ×1026W
and has an absolute magnitude of about 5, ﬁnd the luminosity of the star.
1.3 The Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT) near Pune has several
antennas spread over a region of size about 10 km. Make an estimate of the
resolution (in arcseconds) which this telescope is expected to have. How largewill an optical telescope have to be to achieve similar resolution in visiblelight?

<<<PAGE 43>>>

2
Interaction of radiation
with matter
2.1 Introduction
As we pointed out in §1.6, most of our knowledge about the astrophysical
Universe is based on the electromagnetic radiation that reaches us from the sky.
By analysing this radiation, we infer various characteristics of the astrophysicalsystems from which the radiation was emitted or through which the radiation
passed. Hence an understanding of how radiation interacts with matter is very
vital in the study of astrophysics. Such an interaction between matter andradiation can be studied at two levels: macroscopic and microscopic. At themacroscopic level, we introduce suitably deﬁned emission and absorption coef-
ﬁcients, and then try to solve our basic equations assuming these coefﬁcients to
be given. This subject is known as radiative transfer. At the microscopic level,
on the other hand, we try to calculate the emission and absorption coefﬁcientsfrom the fundamental physics of the atom. Much of this chapter is devoted
to the macroscopic theory of radiative transfer. Only in §2.6, do we discuss how
the absorption coefﬁcient of matter can be calculated from microscopic physics.
The emission coefﬁcient directly follows from the absorption coefﬁcient if thematter is in thermodynamic equilibrium, as we shall see in §2.2.4.
2.2 Theory of radiative transfer
2.2.1 Radiation ﬁeld
Let us ﬁrst consider how we can provide the mathematical description of
radiation at a given point in space. It is particularly easy to give a mathematical
description of blackbody radiation, which is homogeneous and isotropic insidea container. We shall assume the reader to be familiar with the basic physics of
23

<<<PAGE 44>>>

24 Interaction of radiation with matter
Fig. 2.1 Illustration of speciﬁc intensity.
blackbody radiation, which is discussed in many excellent textbooks on thermal
physics (see, for example, Saha and Srivastava ,1965,C h .X V ; Reif, 1965,
pp. 373–388). One of the most famous results in the theory of blackbodyradiation is Planck’s law ( Planck, 1900), which speciﬁes the energy density U
ν
in the frequency range ν,ν+dν:
Uνdν=8πh
c3ν3dν
exp/parenleftBig
hν
κBT/parenrightBig
−1. (2.1)
This law more or less provides us with complete information about blackbody
radiation at a given temperature T. Since blackbody radiation is isotropic,
we do not have to provide any directional information. In general, however,
the radiation in an arbitrary situation is not isotropic. When we have sunlightstreaming into a room, we obviously have a non-isotropic situation involving
the ﬂow of radiation from a preferred direction. We require a more complicated
prescription to describe such radiation mathematically.
We consider a small area dAat a point in space as shown in Figure 2.1 .
Let us consider the amount of radiation dE
νdνpassing through this area in time
dtfrom the solid angle d/Omega1and lying in the frequency range ν,ν+dν.I ti s
obvious that dEνdνshould be proportional to the projected area dAcosθ,a s
well as proportional to dt,d/Omega1anddν. Hence we can write
dEνdν=Iν(r,t,ˆn)cosθdA dt d /Omega1dν, (2.2)
where ˆnis the unit vector indicating the direction from which the radiation is
coming. The quantity Iν(r,t,ˆn), which can be a function of position r, time t
and direction ˆn, is called the speciﬁc intensity .I fIν(r,t,ˆn)is speciﬁed for all
directions at every point of a region at a time, then we have a complete prescrip-tion of the radiation ﬁeld in that region at that time. In this elementary treatment,
we shall restrict ourselves only to radiation ﬁelds which are independent of time.
It is possible to calculate various quantities like ﬂux, energy density and
pressure of radiation if we know the radiation ﬁeld at a point in space. Forexample, radiation ﬂux is simply the total energy of radiation coming fromall directions at a point per unit area per unit time. Hence we simply have to

<<<PAGE 45>>>

2.2 Theory of radiative transfer 25
divide (2.2) bydA dt and integrate over all solid angles. It is easy to see that the
radiation ﬂux associated with frequency νis
Fν=/integraldisplay
Iνcosθd/Omega1, (2.3)
whereas the total radiation ﬂux is
F=/integraldisplay
Fνdν. (2.4)
Energy density of radiation
Let us consider energy dEνof radiation associated with frequency νas given by
(2.2). This energy passes through area dAin time dtin the direction ˆn. Since the
radiation traverses a distance cd t in time dt, we expect this radiation dEνto ﬁll
up a cylinder with base dAand axis of length cd tin the direction ˆn.T h ev o l u m e
of such a cylinder being cos θdA c dt , the energy density of this radiation
dEν
cosθdA c dt=Iν
cd/Omega1
follows from (2.2). To get the total energy density of radiation at a point
associated with frequency ν, we have to integrate over radiation coming from
different directions so that
Uν=/integraldisplayIν
cd/Omega1. (2.5)
We now apply (2.5) to blackbody radiation to ﬁnd its speciﬁc intensity.
Since blackbody radiation is isotropic, the speciﬁc intensity of blackbody radi-
ation, usually denoted by Bν(T), should be independent of direction. Hence, on
applying (2.5) to blackbody radiation, we get
Uν=4π
cBν(T),
where 4π comes from the integration over /Omega1. Making use of the expression
(2.1), we now conclude that the speciﬁc intensity of blackbody radiation is
given by
Bν(T)=2hν3
c21
exp/parenleftBig
hν
κBT/parenrightBig
−1. (2.6)
Pressure due to radiation
The pressure of the radiation ﬁeld over a surface is given by the ﬂux of momen-
tum perpendicular to that surface. The momentum associated with energy dEν

<<<PAGE 46>>>

26 Interaction of radiation with matter
isdEν/cand its component normal to the surface dAisdEνcosθ/c. By dividing
this by dA dt , we get the momentum ﬂux associated with dEν,w h i c hi s
dEνcosθ
c1
dA dt=Iν
ccos2θd/Omega1
on making use of (2.2). The pressure Pνis obtained by integrating this over all
directions, i.e.
Pν=1
c/integraldisplay
Iνcos2θd/Omega1. (2.7)
If the radiation ﬁeld is isotropic, then we get
Pν=Iν
c/integraldisplay
cos2θd/Omega1=4π
3Iν
c. (2.8)
It follows from (2.5) that
Uν=4πIν
c
for isotropic radiation. Combining this with (2.8),w eh a v e
Pν=1
3Uν (2.9)
for isotropic radiation.
2.2.2 Radiative transfer equation
If matter is present, then in general the speciﬁc intensity keeps changing as we
move along a ray path. Before we consider the effect of matter, ﬁrst let us ﬁndout what happens to the speciﬁc intensity in empty space as we move along a
ray path.
LetdA
1anddA2be two area elements separated by a distance Rand placed
perpendicularly to a ray path, as shown in Figure 2.2 .L e t Iν1andIν2be the
speciﬁc intensity of radiation in the direction of the ray path at dA1anddA2.
We want to ﬁnd out the amount of radiation passing through both dA1anddA2
in time dtin the frequency range ν,ν+dν.I fd/Omega12is the solid angle subtended
Fig. 2.2 Two area elements
perpendicular to a ray path.

<<<PAGE 47>>>

2.2 Theory of radiative transfer 27
bydA1atdA2, then according to (2.2) the radiation falling on dA2in time dt
after passing through dA1is
Iν2dA2dt d/Omega12dν.
From considerations of symmetry, this should also be equal to
Iν1dA1dt d/Omega11dν,
where d/Omega11is the solid angle subtended by dA2atdA1. Equating these two
expressions and noting that
d/Omega11=dA2
R2,d/Omega12=dA1
R2,
we get
Iν1=Iν2. (2.10)
In other words, in empty space the speciﬁc intensity along a ray path does not
change as we move along the ray path. If sis the distance measured along the
ray path, then we can write
dIν
ds=0 (2.11)
in empty space.
At ﬁrst sight, this may appear like a surprising result. We know that the
intensity falls off as we move further and further away from a source of radi-
ation. Can the speciﬁc intensity remain constant? The mystery is cleared up
when we keep in mind that the speciﬁc intensity due to a source is essentially
its intensity divided by the solid angle it subtends, which means that speciﬁcintensity is a measure of the surface brightness. As we move further away from asource of radiation, both its intensity and angular size fall as (distance)
2. Hence
the surface brightness, which is the ratio of these two, does not change. Supposeyou are standing on a street in a dark night and are looking at the street lights.The lights further away would appear smaller in size, but their surfaces wouldappear as bright as the surfaces of nearby lights. This result has an important
astronomical implication. If we neglect intergalactic extinction, then the surface
brightness of a galaxy which is resolved by a telescope is independent ofdistance. Whether the galaxy is nearby or far away, its surface would appearequally bright to us. We may expect a similar consideration to hold for stars also.
Then why do distant stars look dimmer? Since the theory of radiative transfer
is based on the concept of ray path, we are tacitly assuming geometrical opticsin all our derivations. So our results hold as long as geometrical optics is valid.If the star is very far away, then its disk is not resolved and geometrical optics
no longer holds. The angular size of the star may be caused by the diffraction
of light or the seeing (§1.7.1). As the star is moved further away, its intensity
diminishes, but the angular size due to diffraction does not change much. Hence

<<<PAGE 48>>>

28 Interaction of radiation with matter
a decreasing amount of radiation gets spread over an image of the same angular
size, making the star appear dimmer. It may be noted that very faraway galaxiesalso look dimmer due to general relativistic effects to be discussed in §14.4.1.
Let us now consider what happens if matter is present along the ray path.
If the matter emits, we expect that it will add to the speciﬁc intensity. This canbe taken care of by adding an emission coefﬁcient j
νon the right-hand side of
(2.11). On the other hand, absorption by matter would lead to a diminution of
speciﬁc intensity and the diminution rate must be proportional to the speciﬁc
intensity itself. In other words, the stronger the beam, the more energy thereis for absorption. Hence the absorption term on the right-hand side of (2.11)
should be negative and proportional to I
ν. Thus, in the presence of matter, (2.11)
gets modiﬁed to the following form
dIν
ds=jν−ανIν, (2.12)
where ανis the absorption coefﬁcient. This is the celebrated radiative transfer
equation and provides the basis for our understanding of interaction betweenradiation and matter.
In the early years of spectral research, many astronomers held the view that
the Sun was surrounded by a cool layer of gas which only absorbed radiation
at certain frequencies to produce the dark lines. Schuster (1905) recognized the
importance of treating emission and absorption simultaneously by the same layer
of gas. A primitive version of radiative transfer theory was formulated by Schuster
(1905) by considering only two beams of radiation – one moving upward and
one moving downward. Schwarzschild (1914) was the ﬁrst to formulate a proper
radiative transfer theory by considering the speciﬁc intensity of radiation.
It is fairly trivial to solve the radiative transfer equation (2.12) if either the
emission coefﬁcient or the absorption coefﬁcient is zero. Let us consider thecase of j
ν=0, i.e. matter is assumed to absorb only but not to emit. Then (2.12)
becomes
dIν
ds=−ανIν. (2.13)
On integrating this equation over the ray path from s0tos,w eg e t
Iν(s)=Iν(s0)exp/bracketleftbigg
−/integraldisplays
s0αν(s/prime)ds/prime/bracketrightbigg
. (2.14)
More general solutions of the radiative transfer equation will be discussed now.
2.2.3 Optical depth. Solution of radiative transfer equation
We deﬁne optical depth τνthrough the relation
dτν=ανds (2.15)

<<<PAGE 49>>>

2.2 Theory of radiative transfer 29
such that the optical depth along the ray path between s0andsbecomes
τν=/integraldisplays
s0αν(s/prime)ds/prime. (2.16)
From (2.14) and(2.16), it follows that the speciﬁc intensity along the ray path
falls as
Iν(τν)=Iν(0)e−τν (2.17)
if matter does not emit.
If the optical depth τν/greatermuch1 along a ray path through an object, then the
object is known as optically thick . On the other hand, an object is known as
optically thin ifτν/lessmuch1 for a ray path through it. It follows from (2.17) that
an optically thick object extinguishes the light of a source behind it, whereas an
optically thin object does not decrease the light much. Hence the terms optically
thick and optically thin roughly mean opaque and transparent at the frequency
of electromagnetic radiation we are considering.
We now deﬁne the source function
Sν=jν
αν. (2.18)
Dividing the radiative transfer equation (2.12) byαν,w eg e t
dIν
dτν=− Iν+Sν (2.19)
on making use of (2.15) and(2.18). Multiplying this equation by eτν, we obtain
d
dτν(Iνeτν)=Sνeτν.
Integrating this equation from optical path 0 to τν(i.e. from s0tosalong the
ray path), we get
Iν(τν)=Iν(0)e−τν+/integraldisplayτν
0e−(τν−τ/prime
ν)Sν(τ/prime
ν)dτ/prime
ν. (2.20)
This is the general solution of the radiative transfer equation.
If matter through which the radiation is passing has constant properties,
then we can take Sνconstant and work out the integral in (2.20).T h i sg i v e s
Iν(τν)=Iν(0)e−τν+Sν(1−e−τν).
We are now interested in studying the emission and absorption properties of anobject itself without a source behind it. Then we take I
ν(0)=0 and write
Iν(τν)=Sν(1−e−τν). (2.21)

<<<PAGE 50>>>

30 Interaction of radiation with matter
Let us consider the cases of optically thin and thick objects. If the object is
optically thin (i.e. τν/lessmuch1), then we write 1 −τνfore−τνsuch that
Iν(τν)=Sντν.
For matter with constant properties, we take τν=ανL,w h e r e Lis the total
length of the ray path. Making use of (2.18),w eg e t
Optically thin: Iν=jνL. (2.22)
On the other hand, if the object is optically thick, then we neglect e−τνcompared
to 1 in (2.21).T h e n
Optically thick: Iν=Sν. (2.23)
We have derived two tremendously important results (2.22) and (2.23).T o
understand their physical signiﬁcance, we have to look at some thermodynamicconsiderations.
2.2.4 Kirchhoff’s law
Suppose we have a box kept in thermodynamic equilibrium. If we make a smallhole on its side, we know that the radiation coming out of the hole will beblackbody radiation. Hence the speciﬁc intensity of radiation coming out of the
hole is simply
I
ν=Bν(T), (2.24)
where Bν(T)is given by (2.6). We now keep an optically thick object behind
the hole as shown in Figure 2.3 . If this object is in thermodynamic equilibrium
with the surroundings, then it will not disturb the environment and the radiation
coming out of the hole will still be blackbody radiation, with speciﬁc intensitygiven by (2.24). On the other hand, we have seen in (2.23) that the radiation
coming out of an optically thick object has the speciﬁc intensity equal to thesource function. From (2.23) and(2.24), we conclude
S
ν=Bν(T) (2.25)
Fig. 2.3 Blackbody radiation coming out of a hole in a box with an optically thick
obstacle placed behind the hole.

<<<PAGE 51>>>

2.3 Thermodynamic equilibrium revisited 31
when matter is in thermodynamic equilibrium. On using (2.18), we ﬁnally have
jν=ανBν(T). (2.26)
This famous result is known as Kirchhoff’s law Kirchhoff (1860). The relevance
of this law in the radiative transfer theory was recognized by the pioneers
Schuster (1905)a n dSchwarzschild (1914).
Let us now stop and try to understand what we have derived. Very often
matter tends to emit and absorb more at speciﬁc frequencies corresponding tospectral lines. Hence both j
νandανare expected to have peaks at spectral
lines. But, according to (2.26), the ratio of these coefﬁcients should be the
smooth blackbody function Bν(T). We now look at the results (2.22) and(2.23).
The radiation coming out of an optically thin source is essentially determinedby its emission coefﬁcient. Since the emission coefﬁcient is expected to havepeaks at spectral lines, we ﬁnd the emission from an optically thin systemlike a hot transparent gas to be mainly in spectral lines. On the other hand,
the speciﬁc intensity of radiation coming out of an optically thick source is its
source function, which has been shown to be equal to the blackbody function
B
ν(T). Hence we expect an optically thick object like a hot piece of iron to
emit roughly like a blackbody. The theory of radiative transfer is important not
only in astrophysics. If we want to understand rigorously and quantitatively
many everyday phenomena such as why hot transparent gases emit in spectrallines whereas hot pieces of iron emit like blackbodies, then we need to invokethe theory of radiative transfer. The nature of radiation from an astrophysical
source crucially depends on whether the source is optically thin or optically
thick. Emission from a tenuous nebula is usually in spectral lines. On the otherhand, a star emits very much like a blackbody. Why is the radiation from astar not exactly blackbody radiation? Why do we see absorption lines? We
derived (2.23) by assuming the source to have constant properties. This is
certainly not true for a star. As we go down from the star’s surface, temperature
keeps increasing. Hence (2.23) should be only approximately true. It is the
temperature gradient near the star’s surface which gives rise to the absorption
lines. This will be shown in §2.4.3.
2.3 Thermodynamic equilibrium revisited
By assuming thermodynamic equilibrium, we have derived the tremendously
important result (2.25) that the source function should be equal to the
blackbody function Bν(T). In a realistic situation, we rarely have strict
thermodynamic equilibrium. The temperature inside a star is not constant, but
varies with its radius. In such a situation, will (2.25) hold? Before answer-
ing this question, let us look at some basic characteristics of thermodynamic
equilibrium.

<<<PAGE 52>>>

32 Interaction of radiation with matter
2.3.1 Basic characteristics of thermodynamic equilibrium
If a system is in thermodynamic equilibrium, then certain important principles
of physics can be applied to that system. Let us recapitulate some of these
important principles. We assume the reader to be familiar with them and donot present derivations or detailed discussion.
Maxwellian velocity distribution
Different particles in a gas move around with different velocities. If the gas is in
thermodynamic equilibrium with temperature T, then the number of particles
having speeds between vandv+dvis given by
dnv=4πn/parenleftbiggm
2πκ BT/parenrightbigg3/2
v2exp/parenleftbigg
−mv2
2κBT/parenrightbigg
dv, (2.27)
where nis the number of particles per unit volume and mis the mass of
each particle. This is the celebrated law of the Maxwellian velocity distribution(Maxwell ,1860).
Boltzmann and Saha equations
We know that a hydrogen atom has several different energy levels. It is also
possible to break the hydrogen atom into a proton and an electron. This process
of removing an electron from the atom is called ionization. If a gas of hydrogen
atoms is kept in thermodynamic equilibrium, then we shall ﬁnd that a certainfraction of the atoms will occupy a particular energy state and also a certainfraction will be ionized. The same considerations hold for other gases besides
hydrogen.
Ifn
0is the number density of atoms in the ground state, then the number
density neof atoms in an excited state with energy Eabove the ground state is
given by
ne
n0=exp/parenleftbigg
−E
κBT/parenrightbigg
. (2.28)
This is the Boltzmann distribution law.
Saha (1920) derived the equation which tells us what fraction of a gas will
be ionized at a certain temperature Tand pressure P. Derivation of this equation
can be found in books such as Mihalas (1978, §5-1) or Rybicki and Lightman
(1979, §9.5). If χis the ionization potential (i.e. the amount of energy to be
supplied to an atom to ionize it), then the fraction xof atoms which are ionized
is given by
x2
1−x=(2πme)3/2
h3(κBT)5/2
Pexp/parenleftbigg
−χ
κBT/parenrightbigg
, (2.29)
where his Planck’s constant and meis the mass of electron.

<<<PAGE 53>>>

2.3 Thermodynamic equilibrium revisited 33
Planck’s law of blackbody spectrum
When radiation is in thermodynamic equilibrium with matter, it is called black-
body radiation. The spectral distribution of energy in blackbody radiation is
given by the famous law derived by Planck (1900). We have already written
down the law in (2.1).
2.3.2 Concept of local thermodynamic equilibrium
Now we come to the all-important question: when can we expect a system tobe in thermodynamic equilibrium and when can we expect the above principles(Maxwellian velocity distribution, Boltzmann equation, Saha equation, Planck’s
law) to hold? If a box ﬁlled with gas and radiation is kept isolated from the
surroundings, then we know that thermodynamic equilibrium will get estab-lished inside, and all the above principles will hold. However, a realistic systemis always more complicated. Inside a star, the temperature keeps decreasing
as we go from the central region to the outside. Can the above principles be
applied in such a situation? To answer that question, let us try to understandhow thermodynamic equilibrium gets established.
We again consider a box ﬁlled with gas and radiations. Even if the gas
particles initially do not obey the Maxwellian distribution, they will relax toit after undergoing a few collisions. In other words, collisions – or ratherinteractions amongst the constituents of the system – are vital in establishingthermodynamic equilibrium. We assume the reader to be familiar with the
concept of mean free path. When collisions are frequent, the mean free path
turns out to be small. Hence, the smallness of mean free path is a measure ofhow important collisions are. If the mean free path is small, then particles in agas will interact with each other more effectively and we expect that principles
like the Maxwellian velocity distribution, the Boltzmann equation or the Saha
equation will hold. But how small will the mean free path have to be? Supposethe temperature is varying inside a gas and we consider a point Xwith the left
side hotter and right side colder. Then gas particles coming to Xfrom the left
side will be more energetic than the gas particles coming from the right side.This will make the velocity distribution at Xdifferent from the Maxwellian,
provided particles are able to come directly to Xfrom regions where tempera-
tures are signiﬁcantly different from the temperature at X. However, if the mean
free path is small and the temperature does not vary much over that distance,then these considerations will be unimportant and we shall have the Maxwellianvelocity distribution. Hence the condition of validity of the Maxwellian velocitydistribution (as well as the Boltzmann equation and the Saha equation) is that
the mean free path has to be small enough such that the temperature does not
vary much over the mean free path. For Planck’s law to be established forradiation, the radiation has to be in equilibrium with matter. This is possible only

<<<PAGE 54>>>

34 Interaction of radiation with matter
when radiation interacts efﬁciently with matter. The absorption coefﬁcient αν
in the radiative transfer equation (2.12) is a measure of the interaction between
radiation and matter. We note from (2.12) thatανhas the dimension of inverse
length. Its inverse α−1
νgives the distance over which a signiﬁcant part of a beam
of radiation would get absorbed by matter. Often this distance α−1
νis referred
to as the mean free path of photons, since this is the typical distance a photon
is expected to traverse freely before interacting with an atom. The smaller the
value of α−1
ν, the more efﬁcient is the interaction between matter and radiation.
Ifα−1
νis sufﬁciently small such that the temperature can be taken as constant
over such distances, then we expect Planck’s law of blackbody radiation to hold.
Let us consider a simple example from everyday life – sunlight streaming
into a room through a window. Is this a system in thermodynamic equilibrium?
The mean free path of air molecules is only of the order of 10−7m. Hence we
expect the Maxwellian velocity distribution and the Boltzmann equation to holdfor air molecules. The ionization level in air at room temperature is negligible,
which is completely consistent with the Saha equation. However, if the system
were in complete thermodynamic equilibrium, then radiation in the room shouldobey Planck’s law at the room temperature. This is deﬁnitely not the case. Sinceair is virtually transparent to visible light, the photons do not interact with air
molecules at all. The photons in the beam of sunlight have come directly from
the surface of the Sun and have not interacted with matter at all after they left thesolar surface. If we analyse the spectrum of sunlight, then we ﬁnd that it is notlike a blackbody spectrum at room temperature, but the shape of the spectrum
is rather like a blackbody spectrum at a temperature of 6000 K (the surface tem-
perature of the Sun), although the energy density in sunlight is obviously muchless than the energy density in blackbody radiation at 6000 K. Although ther-
modynamic equilibrium is a very useful concept, this example would make one
realize that we usually do not have full thermodynamic equilibrium around us.
If the temperature is varying within a system, then it is not in full ther-
modynamic equilibrium. However, we can have a situation where both α
−1
ν
and the mean free path of particles are small compared to the length overwhich the temperature varies appreciably. In a such situation, all the importantlaws of thermodynamic equilibrium are expected to hold within a local region,provided we use the local temperature Tin the expressions (2.1), (2.27), (2.28)
and (2.29). Such a situation is known as local thermodynamic equilibrium,
abbreviated as LTE. Sunlight streaming into the room is obviously not a caseof LTE because the air is almost transparent to radiation and hence α
−1
νmust
be very large. Inside a star, however, we expect LTE to be a very good approx-
imation and we can assume (2.25) to hold when we solve the radiative transfer
equation inside the star. In the outermost atmosphere of a star, LTE may fail
and it often becomes necessary to consider departures from LTE when studyingthe transfer of radiation there. In our elementary treatment, we shall consider
radiative transfer only in situations of LTE.

<<<PAGE 55>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 35
2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres
Several treatises have been written on radiative transfer theory, one of the most
famous being by Chandrasekhar (1950). Now, we have written down the general
solution of the radiative transfer equation in (2.20). If it is so easy to write
down the general solution, then what is the necessity of writing treatises on this
subject? Well, we get a complete solution of the problem from (2.20) only if
we know in advance the source function Sνeverywhere. This is almost never
the case! Even in LTE when (2.25) holds, we need to know the temperatures
at different points to ﬁnd out the source functions there. We usually have theproblem of ﬁnding out the radiation ﬁeld and the temperature simultaneously.
If the radiation ﬁeld is strong in a region, then we expect the temperature to behigh there. Hence the radiation ﬁeld determines the temperature. On the otherhand, the temperature determines the source function and thereby the radiation
ﬁeld through (2.20). It is the simultaneous solution of temperature and radiation
ﬁeld which is a tremendously challenging problem. To give an idea how this
problem can be solved, we discuss the application of radiative transfer theory tostellar atmospheres.
Traditionally, the study of stellar astronomy has been divided into two
branches: stellar interior andstellar atmosphere . One may wonder, at what
depth inside a star does the stellar atmosphere end and the stellar interior begin.As it happens, the terms stellar interior and stellar atmosphere do not correspond
to physically distinct regions of a star, but to two different scientiﬁc subjects
which address two different sets of questions. We shall see in the next chapterthat there exist certain relationships amongst such quantities as the total massof a star and its luminosity (more massive stars tend to be more luminous).
Since we need to look at the physical processes in the interior of the star to
understand such global relationships, studying and understanding such globalcharacteristics of a star constitutes the subject of stellar interior. On the otherhand, to explain and analyse the spectrum of a star, we need to consider the
passage of radiation through the outer layers of a star. This is the subject of
stellar atmospheres. We now give a very brief introduction to this subject.
2.4.1 Plane parallel atmosphere
When we focus our attention on the local region of a stellar atmosphere, we canneglect the curvature and assume the various thermodynamic quantities like thetemperature Tto be constant over horizontal planes. Let us take the zaxis in
the vertical direction, with zincreasing above. Any thermodynamic variable of
the atmosphere can be a function of zalone. Let us consider an element of a
ray path dsas shown in Figure 2.4 .I fdz is the change in zcorresponding to ds,
then we have

<<<PAGE 56>>>

36 Interaction of radiation with matter
Fig. 2.4 A ray path through a plane parallel atmosphere.
ds=dz
cosθ=dz
μ, (2.30)
where
θ=cos−1μ
is the angle subtended by the ray path with the vertical direction.
We have seen in §2.2.1 that the speciﬁc intensity Iν(r,t,ˆn)can in general
be a function of position, time and direction. We are considering a static situ-
ation. In the plane parallel stellar atmosphere, nothing varies in the horizontal
directions and all direction vectors lying on a cone around the vertical axis are
symmetrical. Hence we expect the speciﬁc intensity Iν(z,μ ) to be a function
ofzandμ=cosθonly. On using (2.30), the radiative transfer equation (2.12)
gives us the equation
μ∂Iν(z,μ )
∂z=jν−ανIν (2.31)
for the plane parallel atmosphere problem.
We now deﬁne the optical depth of a plane parallel atmosphere slightly
differently from the way it was deﬁned in (2.15).W ed e ﬁ n e
dτν=−ανdz. (2.32)
In other words, the optical depth is now deﬁned as a function of the verticaldistance zrather than the distance along ray path s. The negative sign in
(2.32) implies that the optical depth increases as we go deeper down, which
corresponds to the usual notion of depth. The normal convention is to takeτ
ν=0 at the top of the stellar atmosphere.

<<<PAGE 57>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 37
On dividing (2.31) byανand using the deﬁnition (2.18) of the source
function, we get
μ∂Iν(τν,μ )
∂τν=Iν−Sν. (2.33)
Multiplying (2.33) bye−(τν/μ)and rewriting it slightly, we have
μd
dτν/parenleftBig
Iνe−τν
μ/parenrightBig
=− Sνe−τν
μ.
Integrating this equation from some reference optical depth τν,0, we obtain
Iνe−tν
μ|τντν,0=−/integraldisplayτν
τν,0Sν
μe−tν
μdtν. (2.34)
We now consider two cases separately: (I) 0 ≤μ≤1, which corresponds to
a ray path proceeding in the outward direction in the stellar atmosphere; and
(II)−1≤μ≤0, which corresponds to a ray path going inward in the stellar
atmosphere. In case (I) the ray path can be assumed to begin from a great
depth inside the star and we can take τν,0=∞ . On the other hand, the ray path
in case (II) starts receiving contributions beginning with the top of the stellar
atmosphere and we can take τν,0=0. In these two cases, (2.34) reduces to
0≤μ≤1:Iν(τν,μ )=/integraldisplay∞
τνSνe−(tν−τν)/μdtν
μ, (2.35)
−1≤μ≤0:Iν(τν,μ )=/integraldisplayτν
0Sνe−(τν−tν)/(−μ) dtν
(−μ). (2.36)
It may be noted that (2.36) was obtained by using the boundary condition
Iν(0,μ ) =0 for negative μ, which implies that the speciﬁc intensity for a
downward ray path is zero at the top of the stellar atmosphere.
So far we have not used any thermodynamics. To proceed further, we have
to use some suitable expression for the source function Sνin(2.35) and(2.36).
Let us assume LTE throughout the stellar atmosphere so that the source functioneverywhere is equal to the Planck function there, in accordance with Kirchhoff’s
law(2.25). Suppose we want to ﬁnd out the radiation ﬁeld at some optical depth
τ
ν. The source function there is given by Bν(T(τν)), which we write as Bν(τν)
for simpliﬁcation. The source function at a nearby optical depth tνcan be written
in the form of a Taylor expansion around the optical depth τν,i . e .
Sν(tν)=Bν(τν)+(tν−τν)dBν
dτν+... (2.37)
Truncating (2.37) after the linear term and substituting it in both (2.35) and
(2.36), we get for both positive and negative μthe very important equation
Iν(τν,μ )=Bν(τν)+μdBν
dτν, (2.38)

<<<PAGE 58>>>

38 Interaction of radiation with matter
provided the point considered is sufﬁciently inside the atmosphere such that
τν/greatermuch1 and we can take e−τνto be zero. It is the second term on the right-hand
side of (2.38) which depends on μand makes the radiation ﬁeld anisotropic.
If there was no variation of temperature within the stellar atmosphere, thendB
ν/dτνwould vanish and the radiation ﬁeld would become an isotropic black-
body radiation. It is the presence of a temperature gradient in the atmospherewhich makes the radiation ﬁeld depart from the Planckian distribution, making
it anisotropic. An estimate of the anisotropy will be given below.
We have seen in (2.3), (2.5) and (2.7) that the radiation ﬂux, the energy
density and the pressure of a radiation ﬁeld can be calculated from the speciﬁc
intensity. In the case of a plane parallel atmosphere, the integration over the
solid angle becomes simpliﬁed due to symmetry. If A(cosθ)is any function of
angle in a plane parallel atmosphere, then
/integraldisplay
A(cosθ)d/Omega1=/integraldisplay
π
θ=0/integraldisplay2π
φ=0A(cosθ)sinθdθdφ
=2π/integraldisplay−1
+1A(μ)d(−μ)=2π/integraldisplay+1
−1A(μ)dμ.
On making use of this, (2.3), (2.5) and(2.7) give
Uν=2π
c/integraldisplay1
−1Iνdμ, (2.39)
Fν=2π/integraldisplay1
−1Iνμdμ, (2.40)
Pν=2π
c/integraldisplay1
−1Iνμ2dμ. (2.41)
If we substitute (2.38) in the above three equations, then we get
Uν=4π
cBν(τν), (2.42)
Fν=4π
3dBν
dτν, (2.43)
Pν=4π
3cBν(τν). (2.44)
It is clear from (2.38) that the ratio of the anisotropic part in the radiation ﬁeld
to the isotropic part is of order
dBν/dτν
Bν≈3Fν
cUν
on making use of (2.42) and(2.43). Approximating Fν/UνbyF/U(where F
andUare respectively the total ﬂux and the total energy density integrated over

<<<PAGE 59>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 39
all wavelengths), we have
Anisotropic term
Isotropic term≈3F
cU. (2.45)
We now use the standard results from thermal physics that the total energy
density of blackbody radiation is given by
U=aBT4, (2.46)
whereas the total ﬂux is the ﬂux which eventually emerges out of the surfaceand is given by the Stefan–Boltzmann law ( Stefan ,1879; Boltzmann, 1884):
F=σT
4
eff, (2.47)
where Teffis the effective temperature of the surface and
σ=caB
4(2.48)
(see, for example, Saha and Srivastava ,1965, §15.21; also Exercise 2.1). On
making use of (2.46), (2.47) and(2.48), it follows from (2.45) that
Anisotropic term
Isotropic term≈3
4/parenleftbiggTeff
T/parenrightbigg4
. (2.49)
As we go deeper in a stellar atmosphere, Tbecomes much larger than Teff,
making the anisotropic term negligible compared to the isotropic term. In otherwords, the radiation ﬁeld is nearly isotropic in sufﬁciently deep layers of astellar atmosphere where the temperature is considerably higher than the surfacetemperature.
The expression (2.38) would give us the radiation ﬁeld inside a stellar
atmosphere, if we knew how temperature varied with depth and could calculatethe Planck function B
ν(τν)at different depths. As we already pointed out,
this is not known a priori in general and the real challenge of studying stellar
atmospheres is to solve the radiation ﬁeld and the temperature structure of the
stellar atmosphere simultaneously. We now show how this can be done in asimpliﬁed idealized model known as the grey atmosphere.
2.4.2 The grey atmosphere problem
If the absorption coefﬁcient ανis constant for all frequencies, then the atmo-
sphere is called a grey atmosphere. There is no real stellar atmosphere which hasthis property. The grey atmosphere is an idealized mathematical model which ismuch simpler to treat than a more realistic stellar atmosphere and gives us some
insight into the nature of the problem, as we shall see below.
Ifα
νis independent of frequency, then it follows from (2.32) that the value
of optical depth at some physical depth will be the same for all frequencies. In

<<<PAGE 60>>>

40 Interaction of radiation with matter
such a situation, denoting the optical depth by τ,(2.33) can be integrated over
νto give
μ∂I(τ, μ)
∂τ=I−S, (2.50)
where
I=/integraldisplay
Iνdν (2.51)
and
S=/integraldisplay
Sνdν (2.52)
are the total speciﬁc intensity and total source function integrated over all
frequencies. Just similar to (2.39), (2.40) and (2.41), we write down the total
energy density, total radiation ﬂux and total radiation pressure integrated over
all frequencies:
U=2π
c/integraldisplay1
−1Idμ, (2.53)
F=2π/integraldisplay1
−1Iμdμ, (2.54)
P=2π
c/integraldisplay1
−1Iμ2dμ. (2.55)
We also deﬁne the average speciﬁc intensity Javeraged over all angles
J=1
2/integraldisplay1
−1Idμ. (2.56)
It follows from (2.53) and(2.56) that
J=c
4πU. (2.57)
We now obtain two important moment equations of (2.50). Multiplying
(2.50) by 1/2 and integrating over μ,w eg e t
1
4πdF
dτ=J−S (2.58)
on making use of (2.54) and(2.56). On the other hand, multiplying (2.50) by
2πμ/ cand integrating over μ,w eg e t
dP
dτ=F
c. (2.59)
Although Iis a function of both τandμ, it may be noted that FandPare
functions of τalone. Hence we have used ordinary derivatives in (2.58) and
(2.59) instead of partial derivatives as in (2.50). Very often, within a stellar

<<<PAGE 61>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 41
atmosphere, we do not have a source or sink of energy. The energy generated in
the stellar interior passes out in the form of a constant energy ﬂux through theouter layers of the stellar atmosphere. In other words, Fhas to be independent
of depth. It follows from (2.58) that this is possible only if
J=S, (2.60)
i.e. the average speciﬁc intensity has to be equal to the source function. This iscalled the condition of radiative equilibrium.U s i n g (2.56) and(2.60), we write
(2.50) in the form
μ∂I(τ, μ)
∂τ=I−1
2/integraldisplay1
−1Idμ (2.61)
valid under radiative equilibrium. This is an integro-differential equation for
I(τ, μ). There are techniques for solving (2.61) exactly and obtaining Ifor all
τandμ. Readers are referred to Chandrasekhar (1950, Ch. III) and Mihalas
(1978, pp. 64–74) for a discussion of the exact solution of the grey atmosphereproblem. Since the method of exact solution is somewhat complicated and
beyond the scope of this elementary treatment, we now discuss an approximate
method of solving the grey atmosphere problem.
Since Fis constant under the condition of radiative equilibrium, we can
easily integrate (2.59) to obtain
P=F
c(τ+q), (2.62)
where qis the constant of integration. It follows from (2.9) that the total pressure
and total energy density of an isotropic radiation ﬁeld are related by
P=1
3U. (2.63)
We note from (2.49) that the radiation ﬁeld becomes nearly isotropic as we go
somewhat below the surface and (2.63) holds. Just underneath the surface, how-
ever, we do not expect (2.63) to hold. If we assume (2.63) to hold everywhere,
then ﬁnding a full solution to our problem becomes straightforward. This isknown as the Eddington approximation (Eddington, 1926, §226). Under this
approximation, we can combine (2.57), (2.60), (2.62) and(2.63) to obtain
S=3F
4π(τ+q). (2.64)
We have seen from equations like (2.35) and(2.36) that the speciﬁc intensity can
easily be written down if the source function is given. The main challenge is toobtain the solution for the source function (which depends on the temperature)
at different depths along with the speciﬁc intensity. If we can evaluate the
constant of integration q,t h e n (2.64) will ﬁnally provide us with the solution for
the source function for the grey atmosphere problem (albeit under the Eddington

<<<PAGE 62>>>

42 Interaction of radiation with matter
approximation). We now show below that qcan be evaluated by calculating the
ﬂux from (2.64) and setting it equal to F.
Just as (2.33) can be solved to obtain (2.35) for the speciﬁc intensity in the
upward direction, we can similarly write down the solution of (2.50):
I(τ, μ≥0)=/integraldisplay∞
τSe−(t−τ)/μ dt
μ. (2.65)
The speciﬁc intensity of radiation coming out of the stellar surface is obtained
by setting τ=0 in this equation, i.e.
I(0,μ ) =/integraldisplay∞
0Se−t/μdt
μ.
Substituting from (2.64),w eg e t
I(0,μ ) =3F
4π/integraldisplay∞
0(t+q)e−t/μdt
μ=3F
4π(μ+q). (2.66)
From (2.54), the ﬂux coming out of the upper surface of the stellar atmosphere is
F=2π/integraldisplay1
0Iμdμ.
On substituting for Ifrom (2.66),w eg e t
F=3F
2/parenleftbigg1
3+q
2/parenrightbigg
,
which gives the value of the constant of integration to be
q=2
3. (2.67)
On putting this value of qin(2.64), the source function as a function of depth
inside the stellar atmosphere is ﬁnally given by
S=3F
4π/parenleftbigg
τ+2
3/parenrightbigg
. (2.68)
On making use of (2.57) and(2.60), we have from (2.68)
cU=3F/parenleftbigg
τ+2
3/parenrightbigg
.
Using (2.46), (2.47) and(2.48),w eg e t
T4=3
4T4
eff/parenleftbigg
τ+2
3/parenrightbigg
. (2.69)
This equation tells us how temperature varies inside a grey atmosphere.

<<<PAGE 63>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 43
Fig. 2.5 A ray coming to an observer from the
solar disk.
Finally we derive an important result for radiation coming out from the
stellar surface. Substituting from (2.67) into (2.66),w eh a v e
I(0,μ ) =3F
4π/parenleftbigg
μ+2
3/parenrightbigg
,
which implies
I(0,μ )
I(0,1)=3
5/parenleftbigg
μ+2
3/parenrightbigg
. (2.70)
This equation has a very important physical signiﬁcance. Suppose we consider
the intensity of radiation coming from different points on the disk of the Sun as
seen by us. The ray coming from the central point of the solar disk emerges out
of the solar surface in the vertical direction and the speciﬁc intensity for this raywill be I(0,1). On the other hand, the ray coming from an off-centre point must
emerge from the solar surface at an angle θ=cos
−1μwith the vertical, as seen
inFigure 2.5 , and the corresponding speciﬁc intensity will be I(0,μ ) .
Hence (2.70) gives the variation of intensity on the solar disk as we move
from the centre to the edge. In astronomical jargon, the region near the edgeof the solar disk is referred to as the limb of the Sun. Therefore, a law
giving the variation of intensity over the solar disk is called the limb-darkening
law. The theoretical limb-darkening law predicts that the intensity at the edge
of the solar disk will be about 40% of the intensity at the centre. In Figure 2.6 ,
we show the observationally determined limb-darkening along with the plot of(2.70) obtained by the Eddington approximation as well as the theoretical limb-
darkening law derived by an exact solution of the grey atmosphere problem (i.e.derived by solving the integro-differential equation (2.61) exactly). Although
theory matches the observational data reasonably well, the discrepancy betweenthe two is due to the fact that the solar atmosphere is not grey.
2.4.3 Formation of spectral lines
The grey atmosphere problem provides us with an example of how the radiativetransfer equation can be solved consistently to give the source function alongwith the radiation ﬁeld. As we have pointed out, one of the key problems of

<<<PAGE 64>>>

44 Interaction of radiation with matter
Fig. 2.6 The observed limb-darkening of the solar disk (indicated by dots) along with
theoretical limb-darkening laws obtained by the Eddington approximation (dashed line)
and by exact solution of the grey atmosphere problem (solid line). The observational
data (indicated by dots) are for wavelength λ=5485 ˚A as given by Pierce et al. (1950).
stellar atmospheres is a quantitative understanding of spectral line formation.
The grey atmosphere problem does not throw any light directly on the problemof line formation. It is the constancy of the total radiation ﬂux Fwhich allowed
us to integrate equations like (2.59), thus paving the way for a complete solution
of the grey atmosphere problem. In the case of the general non-grey stellar atmo-sphere, we have frequency-dependent equations exactly analogous to (2.58) and
(2.59). Those equations, however, cannot be solved in the same way as theequations of the grey atmosphere problem, since the ﬂux F
νassociated with
frequency νis not in general a constant, even when the total ﬂux Fis a constant.
If there is no source or sink in the stellar atmosphere, then a constant energypasses through the layers of stellar atmosphere, but the energy continuously getsredistributed amongst different frequencies. For example, in the interior of the
Sun where the temperature is of order 10
7K, the radiation ﬁeld is mainly made
up of X-ray photons. By the time the energy ﬂux reaches the solar surface, it
mainly consists of visible light. In a rigorous treatment of stellar atmospheres,it is also necessary to split the absorption coefﬁcient α
νinto two parts: scat-
tering and true absorption. In radiative equilibrium, true absorption is followedby complete re-emission of the absorbed radiation. One important differencebetween scattering and true absorption is that in scattering the frequency ofradiation does not change, whereas in true absorption followed by re-emission
the frequency changes. Also, Kirchhoff’s law is applicable only in the case of
true absorption. We refer the reader to Mihalas (1978) for a treatment of the
radiative transfer problem by treating scattering and true absorption separately.

<<<PAGE 65>>>

2.4 Radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres 45
Although a proper treatment of the non-grey atmosphere is beyond the
scope of our elementary presentation, we give some idea about the line for-
mation problem. It follows from (2.38) that
Iν(0,1)=Bν(τν=0)+dBν
dτν.
If we expand Bν(τν=1)in a Taylor series around τν=0 and keep only the
linear term, then it becomes equal to the right-hand side of the above equation.
Hence
Iν(0,1)≈Bν(τν=1). (2.71)
This very important equation tells us that the speciﬁc intensity of radiation at
a frequency νcoming out of a stellar atmosphere is approximately equal to the
Planck function at a depth of the atmosphere where the optical depth for thatfrequency νequals unity. We now show how (2.71) can be used to explain the
formation of spectral lines.
Let us consider an idealized situation that the absorption coefﬁcient in the
outer layers of a stellar atmosphere is equal to α
Cat all frequencies except
a narrow frequency range around νLwhere it has a larger value αL.T h i si s
sketched in Figure 2.7 (a). We now use (2.71) to ﬁnd the spectrum of the
radiation emerging out of this atmosphere. For frequencies in the continuumoutside the spectral line, the optical depth becomes unity at a depth α
−1
C.I ft h e
temperature there is TC, then the spectrum in the continuum region will be like
the blackbody spectrum Bν(TC). For frequencies within the spectral line, the
optical depth becomes unity at a shallower depth α−1
L, where the temperature
must have a lower value TL.Figure 2.7 (b) shows both the functions Bν(TC)and
Bν(TL). Since the speciﬁc intensity in the continuum is given by Bν(TC)and
the speciﬁc intensity in the spectral line by Bν(TL), the full spectrum looks as
indicated by the dark line in Figure 2.7 (b). We saw in §2.2.4 that the spectrum
of radiation coming out of an object with strictly uniform temperature insideis pure blackbody radiation. Since any object radiating from the surface isexpected to have a temperature gradient in the layers underneath the surface,
we conclude that the existence of spectral lines should be a very common
occurrence.
One of the aims of stellar atmosphere studies is to estimate the abundances
of various elements in an atmosphere from a spectroscopic analysis. Suppose
an element has a spectral line at frequency ν
L. Then, the larger the number
of atoms of that element per unit volume, the higher will be the value of the
absorption coefﬁcient αLat that frequency and consequently the spectral line
will be stronger. Thus, from the strengths of spectral lines, it is possible to
calculate the abundances of elements. Although it is beyond the scope of this
book to discuss the quantitative details of this subject, we shall give some basicideas of spectral line analysis in §2.7.

<<<PAGE 66>>>

46 Interaction of radiation with matter
Fig. 2.7 For an absorption coefﬁcient indicated in (a), the emergent spectrum is indi-
cated in (b) by the dark line. The two blackbody spectra shown in (b) correspond to the
temperatures TC(upper curve) and TL(lower curve) explained in the text.
2.5 Radiative energy transport in the stellar interior
In§2.4, we have discussed radiative transfer in the outer layers of a star. Astro-
physicists studying stellar interiors have to consider radiative transfer in the
stellar interior as well. In a typical star, energy is usually produced by nuclearreactions in the innermost core of the star. This energy in the form of radiation isthen transported outward. We shall see later in §3.2.4 that sometimes convection
can transport energy in a stellar interior. For the time being, let us considera stellar interior in which energy is transported outward by radiative transfer.In the study of stellar atmospheres, one has to bother about the distribution ofenergy in different wavelengths, since the ultimate goal is to understand the
spectrum of radiation coming out of the stellar atmosphere. While studying
stellar interiors, however, one is primarily interested in ﬁnding out how anenergy ﬂux is driven outward by the gradient of the radiation ﬁeld. Whilediscussing the grey atmosphere problem, we had derived (2.59) relating the ﬂux
of radiation to the gradient of radiation pressure. Can this equation be applied tostellar interiors even in situations when α
νvaries with νand the grey atmosphere
assumption does not hold?

<<<PAGE 67>>>

2.5 Radiative energy transport 47
We now want to show that (2.59) holds even for a non-grey atmosphere if
an average of ανoverνis taken in a suitable way. In a non-grey situation, we
shall have the frequency-dependent version of (2.59):
dPν
dτν=Fν
c, (2.72)
which can be obtained from (2.33) in exactly the same way (2.59) was obtained
from (2.50).F r o m (2.72), it follows that
Fν=−c
ανdPν
dz
on making use of (2.32). Integrating over all frequencies, the total radiation
ﬂux is
F=/integraldisplay
Fνdν=−c/integraldisplay1
ανdPν
dzdν. (2.73)
We now want Fto satisfy an equation of the form (2.59),i . e .
F=−c1
αRdP
dz, (2.74)
where αRis a suitable average of αν. To ﬁgure out how this averaging has to be
done, we need to equate (2.73) and(2.74), which gives
1
αR=/integraltext1
ανdPν
dzdν
/integraltextdPν
dzdν. (2.75)
Now Pνis proportional to the Planck function Bνas seen from (2.44).S ow e
can write
dPν
dz=4π
3c∂Bν
∂TdT
dz.
We substitute this both in the numerator and denominator of (2.75), and cancel
outdT/dz. This ﬁnally gives
1
αR=/integraltext1
αν∂Bν
∂Tdν
/integraltext∂Bν
∂Tdν. (2.76)
The mean absorption coefﬁcient αRdeﬁned in this way is known as the Rosse-
land mean (Rosseland, 1924). When αRis deﬁned in this way, the ﬂux of radiant
energy is given by (2.74). We often write
αR=ρχ, (2.77)
where χis known as the opacity of the stellar matter. On using (2.46), (2.63)
and(2.77), we can put (2.74) in the form
F=−c
χρd
dz/parenleftBigaB
3T4/parenrightBig
. (2.78)

<<<PAGE 68>>>

48 Interaction of radiation with matter
As we shall see in the next chapter, (2.78) is one of the fundamental equations
for studying stellar interiors, which was ﬁrst derived by Eddington (1916).
2.6 Calculation of opacity
To build a model of the stellar interior, it is necessary to solve a slightly modiﬁed
version of (2.78) as discussed in the §3.2.3. To solve this equation, we need
to know the value of opacity χ. The gas in the interior of a star exists under
such conditions of temperature and pressure which cannot be easily reproduced
in the laboratory. Hence we cannot experimentally ﬁnd out χfor conditions
appropriate for the stellar interior. The opacity χ, therefore, has to be calculated
theoretically. This is a fairly complicated calculation. With improvements instellar models, more and more accurate computations of opacity are demanded.This has become a highly specialized and technical subject, with very few
groups in the world who have the right expertise for calculating opacity accu-
rately. Other scientists who need values of opacity for their research almostnever try to calculate the opacity themselves, but use the values computedby the groups who specialize in these computations. For several decades, the
so-called Los Alamos opacity tables ( Cox and Stewart, 1970) remained the
last word on this subject. There is no point in discussing details of opacity
calculation methods here. We summarize below only some of the main ideas.For a clear discussion of the quantum mechanical principles involved in opacity
calculations, the readers are referred to Clayton (1983, §3–3).
Suppose we have a gas of a certain composition kept at a given density and
temperature. We want to calculate its opacity theoretically. We can apply the
Boltzmann law (2.28) and the Saha equation (2.29) to ﬁnd out the numbers of
atoms and electrons in various energy levels and in various stages of ionization.When electromagnetic radiation of frequency νimpinges on the system, atoms
can absorb this radiation if electrons associated with the atoms are pushed tolevels which have energies higher by an amount hνcompared to previous levels.
We know from quantum mechanics that atomic energy levels can be eitherbound (discrete levels) or free (continuum). Hence the absorption of radiation byan atom can be due to three kinds of upward electronic transitions: (i) bound-bound, (ii) bound-free and (iii) free-free. One can apply Fermi’s golden rule
of quantum mechanics with a semiclassical treatment of radiation to calculate
the absorption cross-sections for these processes (see, for example, Mihalas,
1978, §4–2; Clayton, 1983, §3–3). Finally one adds up the cross-sections for allatoms and electrons at different excitation and ionization levels present in a unit
volume. After including the effect of stimulated emission (which is discussed in
§6.6), one gets the absorption coefﬁcient α
ν, from which the opacity is obtained
by applying (2.76) and(2.77).

<<<PAGE 69>>>

2.6 Calculation of opacity 49
If certain approximations are made, then it can be shown that both bound-free
and free-free transitions (which are the dominant processes for the opacity) lead
to an opacity which varies with density ρand temperature Tin the following way:
χ∝ρ
T3.5. (2.79)
This is called Kramers’s law, after Kramers (1923) who arrived at this law while
studying the absorption of X-rays by matter. This approximate law certainlycould not be true for all temperatures. For example, when the temperature issufﬁciently low, most of the atoms will be in their lowest energy levels. In sucha situation, it will be possible for radiation to be absorbed only if there are
sufﬁciently energetic photons to knock off electrons from these lowest energy
levels. Since the radiation falling on the system is very close to blackbodyradiation and since blackbody radiation at a low temperature will not have manyenergetic photons to knock off the atomic electrons from the lowest levels, we
conclude that not much radiation will be absorbed. Hence opacity is expected
to drop at low temperatures and to depart from Kramers’s law.
Figure 2.8 gives the opacity of material of solar composition, based on
detailed calculations. Each curve is for a deﬁnite density and shows how the
Fig. 2.8 Opacity of material of solar composition as a function of temperature. Dif-
ferent curves correspond to different densities, with the values of log ρ(ρin kg m−3)
indicated next to the curves. The dashed line indicates the slope that would result if
opacity varied as T−3.5for a ﬁxed density. Adapted from Tayler (1994, p. 101).

<<<PAGE 70>>>

50 Interaction of radiation with matter
opacity varies with temperature for that density. As we expect, the opacity is
negligible at low temperatures. When the temperature is about a few thousanddegrees, the opacity is maximum. The curves for higher densities lie higher,
as expected from Kramers’s law (2.79). On the right side of the peak, we
ﬁnd that the opacity falls sharply with temperature and a T
−3.5dependence
in accordance with Kramers’s law (indicated by the dashed line) is not a bad
ﬁt for this. However, Kramers’s law would suggest that opacity should keep on
going down with temperature and should be very small at high temperatures.
But that does not seem to be happening. At high temperature, the opacity seemsto become independent of density and reaches an asymptotic value. We nowturn to an explanation for this.
2.6.1 Thomson scattering
At sufﬁciently high temperatures, many atoms in a gas become ionized andthere is a supply of free electrons. It is well known that a free electron can scatterradiation by a process called Thomson scattering (Thomson, 1906), which turns
out to be extremely important in many astrophysical processes. Since manyadvanced textbooks on electrodynamics present a derivation of the Thomsonscattering cross-section (see, for example, Panofsky and Phillips ,1962,
§22-2–22-4; Rybicki and Lightman, §3.4–3.6), we merely quote the result
without reproducing the derivation here.
Suppose an electromagnetic wave of frequency ωfalls on an electron bound
to an atom by spring constant m
eω2
0,w h e r e meis the mass of the electron. The
equation of motion of the electron subject to an electric ﬁeld Eis
me/parenleftbiggd2x
dt2+γdx
dt+ω2
0x/parenrightbigg
=−eE,
where γis the damping constant. The electric ﬁeld of the electromagnetic
wave will force the electron to undergo an oscillatory motion. We know that
a charge in an oscillatory motion emits electromagnetic waves. The energy of
this emitted wave must come from the energy of the incident electromagneticwave. In other words, some energy of the incident wave gets scattered in otherdirections. A completely classical treatment shows that the scattering cross-
section is given by
σ=8π
3/parenleftbigge2
4π/epsilon1 0mec2/parenrightbigg2ω4
(ω2−ω2
0)2+γ2ω2. (2.80)
When the frequency of the incident electromagnetic wave is very high ( ω/greatermuch
ω0,γ), the electron is forced to move like a free electron and the cross-section

<<<PAGE 71>>>

2.6 Calculation of opacity 51
reduces to the Thomson cross-section for free electrons, which is
σT=8π
3/parenleftbigge2
4π/epsilon1 0mec2/parenrightbigg2
. (2.81)
Before discussing the contribution of Thomson scattering to the opacity, let us
brieﬂy consider the other limit of the electron being tightly bound to the atom
(ω0/greatermuchω,γ ). In that limit, (2.80) reduces to
σR=σT/parenleftbiggω
ω0/parenrightbigg4
. (2.82)
This is the celebrated Rayleigh scattering , in which the cross-section goes as
ω4or asλ−4,w h e r e λis the wavelength of the incident electromagnetic wave.
Rayleigh scattering provides explanations for many natural as well as astro-
nomical phenomena. In the visible spectrum, blue light is scattered more thanred light because the wavelength of blue light is shorter. This explains why thesetting Sun looks reddish. The rays of the setting Sun have to traverse through
a larger distance of the atmosphere, where blue light is selectively scattered
away, leaving more red light in the beam compared to the blue light. On theother hand, the daytime sky looks blue because the dust particles in the skyscatter more blue colour from the sunlight into our eyes. When starlight passes
through interstellar dust, it also becomes redder due to the selective scattering
of blue light by the dust particles. However, as we shall discuss in §6.1.3,t h e
interstellar extinction of starlight seems to go as λ
−1rather than λ−4.
On substituting the values of different fundamental quantities in (2.81),t h e
numerical value of the Thomson cross-section is found to be
σT=6.65×10−29m2. (2.83)
If there are nefree electrons per unit volume, then the ‘absorption coefﬁcient’
due to Thomson scattering is neσT(remember that scattering is not true absorp-
tion as we brieﬂy point out in §2.4.3 and there is no corresponding emission
coefﬁcient satisfying (2.26)). Hence, by (2.77), the opacity χTdue to Thomson
scattering is given by
χT=ne
ρσT. (2.84)
At sufﬁciently high temperatures when a gas is fully ionized, neis proportional
to the density and ne/ρdepends on the composition alone. For example, for
fully ionized hydrogen, ne/ρis equal to 1 /mH(where mHis the mass of
hydrogen atom) so that from (2.83) and (2.84) we conclude that the opacity
for fully ionized hydrogen is
χT=3.98×10−2m2kg−1(2.85)

<<<PAGE 72>>>

52 Interaction of radiation with matter
if the temperature is sufﬁciently high to make other sources of opacity
unimportant.
While computating opacity, the contribution due to Thomson scattering is
added to the contributions from bound-free and free-free transitions (keepingin mind that there is no stimulated emission associated with Thomson scatter-ing). However, when Thomson scattering is present in an atmosphere, somespecial care has to be taken while solving the radiative transfer equation, since
Kirchhoff’s law (2.26) will not hold for Thomson scattering. It should be clear
from Figure 2.8 that at the typical temperatures of stellar surfaces Thomson
scattering should contribute very little to the opacity. Hence, while studying
radiative transfer through stellar atmospheres, one can usually neglect Thomson
scattering and take (2.26) to be fully valid.
Readers are urged to work out Exercise 2.7 to get a feeling about the role
of Thomson scattering in making a gas opaque. The air around us is transparent
only because all the electrons are locked inside atoms. If all the atomic electrons
were to come out of atoms, then air would be opaque in a few metres. Apart from
stellar interiors, Thomson scattering plays a very important role in the earlyUniverse. When all matter in the early Universe was ionized (due to the hightemperature), matter was sufﬁciently opaque to keep the matter and radiation
coupled together. Once the temperature fell with the expansion of the Universe
and atoms formed, locking up the free electrons inside them, the Universe sud-denly became transparent. We shall discuss the consequences of this in §11.7.
2.6.2 Negative hydrogen ion
The temperature of the solar surface is about 6000 K. It appears that the solarsurface is sufﬁciently opaque and we cannot see anything underneath it. Oneimportant question is what makes the solar gases so opaque at a temperature of
6000 K? At that temperature, hydrogen and helium atoms (which are the most
abundant atoms) are not ionized and mostly occupy the lowest energy levels. Toforce transitions to higher energy levels, one needs photons having energy of theorder of a few eV . Blackbody radiation at 6000 K does not have enough photons
with such energy. So, at ﬁrst sight, it seems that matter at 6000 K should not be
able to absorb radiation and should be transparent. It mystiﬁed astrophysicistsfor some time as to what causes the opacity of the solar surface, until a cleveridea was suggested by Wildt (1939) and later conﬁrmed by Chandrasekhar
and Breen (1946) through detailed calculations. The electron inside a hydrogen
atom is not able to screen the electrostatic force of the nucleus completely. Soit is possible for the hydrogen atom to attract an additional electron and forma loosely bound negative ion H
−. The binding energy of the negative hydrogen
ion is only about 0.75 eV – much smaller than the ionization energy of 13.6 eV .So blackbody radiation at 6000 K has enough photons to knock off this looselybound electron and can get absorbed in this process. It is estimated that there are

<<<PAGE 73>>>

2.7 Analysis of spectral lines 53
enough negative hydrogen ions at the solar surface and that they are providing
the opacity there.
2.7 Analysis of spectral lines
In§2.4.3 we have given a qualitative idea of how spectral lines form.
Astronomers, however, require a quantitative theory of spectral lines in order to
analyse them to determine the composition of the source. A quantitative theory
of spectral lines in a stellar atmosphere involves certain difﬁculties because weneed to consider both absorption and emission at spectral lines in the outerlayers of the star. A simpler problem is to consider the passage of radiation
through a medium which absorbs only at a spectral line and does not emit. We
shall now present an analysis of this simpler problem to give an idea of thissubject. Even this simpler problem is often of considerable practical relevance.For example, we may consider the passage of visible light from a star through
the interstellar medium. Since parts of the interstellar medium are made up of
gas having fairly low temperatures like 100 K (see §6.6), there is negligible
emission of visible light from this gas which may absorb starlight at particularfrequencies. Since this gas is cold, it produces spectral lines which are much
narrower than typical spectral lines produced in the stellar atmosphere. The
extreme narrowness of a line in a stellar spectrum is indicative that it is producedduring the passage of light through the interstellar medium rather than in thestellar atmosphere.
Letnbe the number density of atoms of a certain kind in the absorbing
medium having energy levels differing by hν
0. We expect these atoms to absorb
at the frequency ν0and produce a spectral line. It is customary to write the
absorption cross-section of the atom as
σ=e2
4/epsilon10mecf, (2.86)
where fis called the oscillator strength . Each spectral line will be characterized
by an oscillator strength f. The larger the value of f, the stronger the spectral
line is expected to be. We also expect the absorption coefﬁcient to have a
normalized proﬁle φ(/Delta1ν) where /Delta1νis the departure of the frequency from
the line centre at ν0and/integraltext
φ(/Delta1ν) dν=1. Then the absorption coefﬁcient is
given by
αν=nσφ(/Delta1ν) =e2
4/epsilon10mecnfφ(/Delta1ν)
so that the optical depth through the absorbing medium, as given by (2.16),i s
τν=e2
4/epsilon10mecNfφ(/Delta1ν), (2.87)

<<<PAGE 74>>>

54 Interaction of radiation with matter
where N=/integraltext
nd s is the column density of the atoms along the line of sight
through the absorbing medium. As we shall see in §6.6, one has to subtract the
effect of induced emission in a full calculation of the absorption coefﬁcient. For
visible light passing through a gas at temperature of order 100 K, the inducedemission is negligible (because of the very low population of the upper level)
and we do not consider it here. If we assume that there is no emission in the
medium, then the intensity is given by (2.17). The intensity I
cof the continuum
just outside the spectral line will be equal to Iν(0)appearing in (2.17). Hence
we can write (2.17) as
Iν=Ice−τν (2.88)
withτνgiven by (2.87).
It is clear that (Ic−Iν)/Icis the fractional dip in intensity at some fre-
quency νinside the spectral line. We can get an estimate of the strength of
the spectral line by integrating this fractional dip over the spectral line. This iscalled the equivalent width of the spectral line, deﬁned as
W
λ=/integraldisplayIc−Iν
Icdλ. (2.89)
On using (2.88) and changing the integration variable from λtoν,w eg e t
Wλ=λ2
c/integraldisplay
[1−e−τν]dν, (2.90)
where λis the wavelength of the spectral line which is taken outside the integral
because it does not vary much over the spectral line.
Certain simpliﬁcations are possible if the spectral line is weak, when we
can take e−τν≈1−τνso that (2.90) becomes
Wλ=λ2
c/integraldisplay
τνdν.
Substituting from (2.87) and remembering that φ(/Delta1ν)is normalized, we get
Wλ
λ=e2
4/epsilon10mec2Nfλ. (2.91)
For a weak spectral line of which we know the oscillator strength f, we can use
(2.91) to determine the column density Nof the atoms producing the spectral
line when we have a measurement of the equivalent width Wλ.
Suppose the absorbing medium has certain atoms producing several spectral
lines with different oscillator strengths f. It follows from (2.91) thatWλ/λwill
be proportional to Nfλfor weak spectral lines. Even if the spectral lines are
not weak, we can plot Wλ/λas a function of Nfλfor all the spectral lines.
Such a plot is shown in Figure 2.9 . The curve passing through the data points is
called the curve of growth. The left side of the curve of growth shows a linearly
increasing regime corresponding to weak spectral lines for which we have the

<<<PAGE 75>>>

2.8 Photon diffusion inside the Sun 55
Fig. 2.9 Equivalent widths of various spectral lines produced in the spectrum of the
starζOphiuchi by absorption in the interstellar medium, plotted against Nfλ.T h e
curves of growth for hydrogen atoms and hydrogen molecules are shown. From Spitzer
and Jenkins (1975). ( c/circlecopyrtAnnual Reviews Inc. Reproduced with permission from Annual
Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics .)
proportionality to Nfλ. For stronger spectral lines, the curve of growth saturates
to a horizontal plateau. The reason behind this saturation is that the fractional
dip(Ic−Iν)/Icappearing in (2.89) can never be more than 1, no matter how
strong the spectral line is. Eventually, for very strong spectral lines, the curve of
growth again shows a tendency of rising because very strong spectral lines have
some absorption in the wings (i.e. two sides of the core of a spectral line) whichare not saturated.
2.8 Photon diffusion inside the Sun
We close our discussion on the interaction of radiation with matter by workingout a curious example. Suppose the energy generation rate at the centre of the
Sun were to increase or decrease suddenly due to some reason. We expect
that eventually the surface of the Sun will become brighter or dimmer as aconsequence of this. How much time will it take before the effect of this suddenchange at the centre becomes visible at the surface?
The photons created at the centre of the Sun interact with the neighbour-
ing atoms. Atoms which have absorbed photons will de-excite by giving outphotons. In this process, photons diffuse from the centre of the Sun towards

<<<PAGE 76>>>

56 Interaction of radiation with matter
the surface. The absorption and re-emission of photons by atoms can be far
from simple. The atom may spend some time in the excited state and whenit de-excites, it may not come back to exactly the same state in which it was
originally in. As a result, the emitted photon may have a frequency different
from what was the frequency of the absorbed photon. This is necessary becausethe initial photons at the centre at temperature of order 10
7would typically be
X-ray photons, whereas the photons which reach the outer surface are more
likely to be photons of visible light. We now make a rough estimate of the
diffusion time by making a simplifying assumption that photons merely do arandom walk through stellar matter where an encounter with an atom simplychanges the direction of ﬂight of the photon.
Let us ﬁrst make an estimate of the mean free path of photons between
encounters with atoms. As pointed out in §2.3.2, the inverse of the absorption
coefﬁcient gives this mean free path. So we can take α
−1
R=(ρχ)−1to be the
mean free path. While this mean free path would be a function of radius, we
simplify our life further by using an approximate average value. It is seen from
Figure 2.8 that 10−1m2kg−1would be an appropriate value for χto use in the
solar interior. Taking an average density of order 103kg m−3, we get a mean
free path of about 1 cm.
Suppose an average photon has to take Nsteps to diffuse from the centre to
the surface. If l1,l2,...,l Nare the displacements in these steps, then the total
displacement is
L=l1+l2+···+ lN.
On squaring and averaging both sides, we would have
/angbracketleftL2/angbracketright=/angbracketleft l2
1/angbracketright+/angbracketleft l2
2/angbracketright+···+/angbracketleft l2
N/angbracketright, (2.92)
since it is obvious that the cross-terms will give zero on averaging over differentphotons. As we are making the simplifying assumption that all the steps are
equal, (2.92) becomes
/angbracketleftL
2/angbracketright=N/angbracketleftl2/angbracketright.
Taking l=1c m a n d Lto be equal to the solar radius, Nturns out to be of
order 1022. With a step size of 1 cm, an average photon would travel over a
distance 1020m in order to escape from the centre to the surface. Dividing this
by the speed of light, we get a diffusion time of order 104years. A more careful
calculation shows that the photon diffusion time inside the Sun is actually a few
times larger than this.
If the energy generation rate at the centre of the Sun were to change
suddenly, that information will take tens of thousands years to reach the surface.
The sunlight that we receive today was created by nuclear reactions at the centre
of the Sun at a time when our ancestors were ﬁghting woolly mammoths andsabre-toothed tigers.

<<<PAGE 77>>>

Exercises 57
Exercises
2.1 Assuming that the spectrum of blackbody radiation is given by Planck’s
law(2.1), prove the following.
(a) Show that the total energy density of blackbody at temperature Tis
given by
U=aBT4,
where
aB=8πκ4
B
c3h3/integraldisplay∞
0x3dx
ex−1.
(Note: this integral can be evaluated exactly and can be shown to be equal
toπ4/15.)
(b) Show that the total energy radiated in unit time from unit area on the
surface of a blackbody is given by σT4, where
σ=caB
4.
(c) Show that the frequency νmaxat which the energy density Uνis maximum
is given by
νmax
T=5.88×1010Hz K−1.
2.2 Consider a ‘pinhole camera’ having a small circular hole of diameter din
its front and having a ‘ﬁlm plane’ at a distance Lbehind it (see Figure 2.10 ).
Show that the ﬂux Fνat the ﬁlm plane is related to the incident intensity
Iν(θ,φ) in the following way
Fig. 2.10 SeeExercise 2.2 .

<<<PAGE 78>>>

58 Interaction of radiation with matter
Fν=πcos4θ
4f2Iν(θ,φ),
where f=L/dis the ‘focal ratio’.
2.3 Consider hydrogen gas having the same density as the density of air under
normal temperature and pressure ( ρ=1.29 kg m−3). Given the fact that the
ionization potential χof hydrogen is 13.6 eV , use the Saha equation (2.29) to
calculate the fraction of ionization xat different temperatures Tand make a
plot of xversus T.
2.4 Find out the speciﬁc intensity I(τ,μ > 0)at an arbitrary optical depth τ
inside a plane-parallel grey atmosphere obeying the Eddington approximation.
You may assume a constant energy ﬂux Fpassing through the atmosphere.
2.5 Consider a spherical cloud of gas with a radius Rand a constant inside
temperature Tfar away from the observer. (a) Assuming the cloud to be
optically thin, ﬁnd out how the brightness seen by the observer would vary
as a function of distance bfrom the cloud centre. (b) What is the overall
effective temperature of the cloud surface? (c) How will the answers to (a)–(b) be modiﬁed if the cloud were optically thick?
2.6 How will you calculate the spectrum of radiation emerging from a
grey atmosphere assuming Eddington approximation? Those of you who are
comfortable with numerical computations may like to write a small computer
program to compute I
ν(0,1)as a function of νand plot it.
Suppose Gshows the spectrum from a grey atmosphere and Rthe spec-
trum from a real atmosphere (see Figure 2.11 ). What can you say about the
variation of ανwith frequency?
Fig. 2.11 SeeExercise 2.6 .

<<<PAGE 79>>>

Exercises 59
2.7 Consider an atmosphere of completely ionized hydrogen having the same
density as the density of the Earth’s atmosphere. Using the fact that a beam
of light passing through this atmosphere will be attenuated due to Thomsonscattering by free electrons, calculate the path length which this beam has
to traverse before its intensity is reduced to half its original strength. (This
problem should give you an idea of why the matter-radiation decoupling to bediscussed in §11.7 took place after the number of free electrons was reduced
due to the formation of atoms.)

<<<PAGE 80>>>



<<<PAGE 81>>>

3
Stellar astrophysics I: Basic
theoretical ideas and
observational data
3.1 Introduction
At the beginning of §2.4, we pointed out the scope of the subject stellar
interior. It appears from observational data (to be discussed in detail later) that
various quantities pertaining to stars have some relations amongst each other.For example, a more massive star usually has a higher luminosity and also ahigher surface temperature. To explain such observed relations theoretically, we
have to ﬁgure out the equations which should hold inside a star and then solve
them to construct models of stellar structure.
The years ≈1920–1940 constituted the golden period of research in this
ﬁeld, when theoretical developments led to elegant explanations of a vast mass
of observational data pertaining to stars. Ever since that time, the subject of
stellar interior or stellar structure has remained a cornerstone of modern astro-physics and improved computational powers have led to more detailed models.This is a subject in which theory and observations are intimately combined
together to build up an imposing ediﬁce. While presenting a subject like this,
the ﬁrst question that a teacher or a writer has to face is this: from a purelypedagogical point of view, is it better to start with a discussion of observationaldata or with a discussion of basic theoretical ideas?
It follows from simple theoretical considerations that there must be objects
like stars, provided energy can be generated by some mechanism in the centralregions. We need not know the details of the energy generation mechanism tomake this prediction. Eddington, who played the leading role in establishing the
theoretical discipline of stellar structure, has imagined a physicist on a cloud-
bound planet, who has never seen stars but makes theoretical predictions of stars
61

<<<PAGE 82>>>

62 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
on the basis of his calculations (Eddington, 1926, p. 16). Then one day the veil
of cloud is removed and the physicist is able to look at the stars he has predicted.
Although important trends in observational data were discovered before their
theoretical explanation and, in fact, provided a motivation for developing the
theory, here we shall proceed somewhat like Eddington’s physicist on a cloud-bound planet. First we shall discuss some of the basic theoretical ideas. Thenwe shall present the observations and discuss whether our theoretical results
are conﬁrmed by observations. Although some of the patterns in the observa-
tional data can be explained by very simple theoretical considerations, we shallsee that it is necessary to delve deeper into theory to have a more completepicture. After familiarizing ourselves with observational data in the later parts
of this chapter, we shall return to some of the deeper theoretical issues in the
next chapter.
3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure
We now establish the basic equations of stellar structure by assuming the star tobe spherically symmetric. If the star is rotating sufﬁciently rapidly, then there
will be some ﬂattening in the direction of the rotation axis. Again, if the star has
strong magnetic ﬁelds, that can be another cause of departure from sphericalsymmetry. Such complications are neglected in the ﬁrst treatment of stellarstructure. When we look at our own Sun, we ﬁnd spherical symmetry to be
a fairly good approximation. The rotational ﬂattening of the Sun is negligible.
Although the solar corona is highly non-spherical due to the presence of mag-netic ﬁelds, the magnetic ﬁelds are not strong enough to cause departures fromspherical symmetry below the surface of the Sun.
3.2.1 Hydrostatic equilibrium in stars
LetMrbe the mass inside the radius rof a star. Then the mass inside radius
r+drshould be Mr+dMr, which means that dMris the mass of the spherical
shell between radii randr+dr.I fρis the density at radius r, then the mass of
this shell is ρ×4πr2dr,i . e .
dMr=4πr2ρdr,
from which
dMr
dr=4πr2ρ. (3.1)
This is the ﬁrst of our stellar structure equations.
Let us now consider a small portion of the shell between randr+dr.I fdA
is the transverse area of this small element, the forces exerted by pressure acting

<<<PAGE 83>>>

3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure 63
on its inward and outward surfaces are Pd A and−(P+dP)dA,w h e r e Pand
P+dPare respectively the pressures at radii randr+dr. So the net force
arising out of pressure is −dP dA , which should be balanced by gravity under
equilibrium conditions. The gravitational ﬁeld at ris caused by the mass Mr
inside rand is equal to −GM r/r2. Since the mass of the small element under
consideration is ρdr dA , the force balance condition for it is
−dP dA −GM r
r2ρdr dA =0,
from which
dP
dr=−GM r
r2ρ. (3.2)
This is the second of the stellar structure equations.
A look at (3.1) and(3.2) will show that they involve three variable functions
of the radial coordinate r:Mr,ρandP. Certainly two equations are not enough
to solve for three variable functions. We shall see in Chapter 5 that there are
special kinds of dense stars like white dwarfs and neutron stars inside which
pressure becomes a function of density alone. In such cases, the number of inde-
pendent variables becomes two rather than three, and the above equations (3.1)
and(3.2) can be solved to ﬁnd the stellar structure. In normal stars, however, the
stellar material behaves very much like a perfect gas, and pressure is a function
of both density and temperature, having the form P∝ρT. In such a situation,
we need additional equations for temperature and energy generation to solve the
stellar structure. These additional equations will be derived in §3.2.3.
Central pressure and temperature of the Sun
Although the hydrostatic equilibrium equation (3.2) does not tell us the whole
story about the stellar interior, we now show that it can nevertheless provide uswith valuable clues about the interior conditions of stars. In the astrophysicalUniverse, we often have to deal with quantities for whose magnitudes we have
no a priori feeling. For example, what are the temperature T
cand pressure Pc
at the centre of the Sun? Nothing from our everyday life gives even a clue
for the values of these quantities. So even an order of magnitude estimatecorrect within a factor of 10 is an important ﬁrst step. We now show that (3.2)
allows us to make an approximate estimate of P
candTc. Throughout this book,
we shall again and again make such order of magnitude estimates of variousastrophysical quantities without solving the equations exactly. For various orderof magnitude estimates involving stars, we shall use the following approximate
values of solar luminosity L
⊙and solar radius R⊙:
L⊙≈4×1026W, (3.3)
R⊙≈7×108m. (3.4)

<<<PAGE 84>>>

64 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
Their accurate values are given in Appendix A. Some of the other quantities
needed in order of magnitude estimates are listed in Table 1.1 .
For the purpose of an order of magnitude estimate, the derivative dP/drcan
be replaced by −Pc/R⊙. The various quantities on the right-hand side of (3.2)
have to be replaced by their appropriate averages. Taking M⊙/2a n d R⊙/2t o
be the averages of Mrandr,(3.2) reduces to the approximate equation
Pc
R⊙≈G(M⊙/2)
(R⊙/2)2/parenleftBigg
M⊙
4
3πR3
⊙/parenrightBigg
.
On substituting the values of M⊙andR⊙,w eﬁ n d
Pc≈6×1014Nm−2. (3.5)
Since the gas inside the Sun behaves very much like a perfect gas, we can use
P=nκBT,w h e r e nis the number density of gas particles. Assuming the gas
to contain hydrogen predominantly, the number of atoms per unit volume is
ρ/mH. Since hydrogen is completely ionized in the deep solar interior and each
hydrogen atom contributes two particles (a proton and an electron), we haven=2ρ/m
Hso that
P=2κB
mHρT.
If we take the central density to be about twice the mean density, then at thecentre of the Sun
P
c=4κB
mH/parenleftBigg
M⊙
4
3πR3
⊙/parenrightBigg
Tc.
On taking the value of Pcfrom (3.5) and substituting the values of other
quantities, we obtain
Tc≈107K. (3.6)
Thus we have estimated the values of central pressure and temperature of
the Sun in a relatively painless way. These values compare quite favourably withthe values which one obtains from a detailed solution of all stellar structureequations. This example should illustrate the power of an order of magnitudeestimate, which is such a favourite tool of the working astrophysicist!
3.2.2 Virial theorem for stars
In ordinary stars like the Sun, the inward gravitational pull is balanced by the
excess pressure of the hot interior. In other words, it is the thermal energy of
the interior which balances gravity. We, therefore, expect that the total thermalenergy should be of the same order as the total gravitational energy. This can

<<<PAGE 85>>>

3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure 65
be rigorously established from the hydrostatic equilibrium equation (3.2) .W e
multiply both sides of (3.2) by 4π r3and then integrate from the centre of the
star to its outer radius R.T h i sg i v e s
/integraldisplayR
0dP
dr4πr3dr=/integraldisplayR
0/parenleftbigg
−GM r
r2ρ/parenrightbigg
4πr3dr.
The left-hand side can be easily integrated by parts, leading to
−/integraldisplayR
03P×4πr2dr=/integraldisplayR
0/parenleftbigg
−GM r
r/parenrightbigg
4πr2ρdr. (3.7)
The right-hand side is clearly the total gravitational energy EGof the star, i.e.
EG=/integraldisplayR
0/parenleftbigg
−GM r
r/parenrightbigg
4πρr2dr. (3.8)
Since (3/2)κ BTis the mean energy of thermal motion per particle in a region
of temperature Tand hence (3/2)n κBTis the thermal energy per unit volume,
the total thermal energy of the star is given by
ET=/integraldisplayR
03
2nκBT×4πr2dr=/integraldisplayR
03
2P×4πr2dr. (3.9)
Using (3.8) and(3.9), we can write (3.7) in the form
2ET+EG=0. (3.10)
This elegant and famous result is known as the virial theorem.
From (3.10),w eg e t
ET=−1
2EG=1
2|EG|, (3.11)
since the total gravitational energy EG,a sg i v e nb y (3.8), is clearly a negative
quantity. The sum of thermal and gravitational energies
E=EG+ET=1
2EG=−1
2|EG| (3.12)
is also negative. It is not difﬁcult to understand why Eshould be negative.
Suppose that a star formed by slow gravitational contraction of material which
was initially spread over a much larger volume. As the star contracts, it mustbecome hotter and radiates away some energy so that the energy of the star has
to become negative.
We now know that a normal star radiates energy which is produced by
nuclear reactions in the interior (to be discussed in the next chapter). So, apart
from thermal and gravitational energies, a star has another store of energy, i.e.
nuclear energy. In the early years of stellar research, however, this additional
source of energy was not known and Eas given by (3.12) was regarded as
the total energy. When Helmholtz (1854)a n d Kelvin (1861) ﬁrst addressed

<<<PAGE 86>>>

66 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
the question of the source of stellar energy, it was believed that the thermal
and gravitational energies were all that one needed to consider. In such ascenario, a star could gradually contract and a part of the gravitational potential
energy released in the process could radiate away. We expect the star to be
in approximate hydrostatic equilibrium as it collapses slowly and hence thevirial theorem (3.10) should always hold approximately. As the star contracts,
it becomes more gravitationally bound making |E
G|larger and it follows from
(3.11) thatETalso becomes larger, implying that the star becomes hotter. Now,
the gravitational potential energy lost during the contraction of the star has to betransformed into other forms of energy. It is clear from (3.11) that exactly half of
the gravitational energy released is transformed into thermal energy. The other
half must leave the system so that the total energy Ecan be given by (3.12).W e
thus arrive at a very beautiful result. If there was no such thing as nuclear energy,
then all stars had to contract slowly. Half of the gravitational potential energyreleased in the process has to be converted to thermal energy, whereas the other
half should leave the system, presumably in the form of radiation. Helmholtz
(1854)a n dKelvin (1861) suggested that this is how stars shine.
If we estimate the lifetime of a star on the basis of this theory, then we
can at once see that this theory could not possibly be correct. According tothis theory, the Sun has so far radiated away an amount of energy equal to
(1/2)| E
G|. Assuming that the Sun always radiated energy at the present rate
L⊙, we conclude that the age of the Sun should be
τKH≈1
2|EG|
L⊙. (3.13)
An approximate value of |EG|can be easily calculated from (3.8). Replacing
Mrandrby their average values, we have
|EG|≈G(M⊙/2)
(R⊙/2)×M⊙≈4×1041J. (3.14)
Putting this in (3.13), we ﬁnd the Kelvin–Helmholtz time scale to be
τKH≈107yr.
Even in the days of Kelvin and Helmholtz, there was enough geological evi-dence that the Earth was much older than this. So the age of the Sun deﬁnitely
could not be so short!
3.2.3 Energy transport inside stars
The energy generated by nuclear reactions in the central region of a star istransported outward. We now have to derive equations which describe this
process. Let L
rbe the total amount of energy ﬂux per unit time which ﬂows
outward across a spherical surface of radius rinside the star (the spherical

<<<PAGE 87>>>

3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure 67
surface being centred at the centre of the star). We expect Lrto be equal to
the luminosity Lof the star at the outer radius r=Rof the star. If Lr+dLris
the outward energy ﬂux at radius r+dr,t h e n dLris obviously the additional
input to the energy ﬂux made by the spherical shell between randr+dr.I f
εis the rate of energy generation per unit mass per unit time (presumably by
nuclear reactions), then we should have
dLr=4πr2dr×ρε ,
from which
dLr
dr=4πr2ρε . (3.15)
After (3.1) and(3.2), this is the third of the important stellar structure equations.
The energy ﬂux is driven by the temperature gradient inside the star. We
need an equation for that as well. We know that there are three important modes
of heat transfer in nature: conduction, convection and radiation. Although con-duction is important in compact stars like white dwarfs, it turns out to be totallyunimportant in the interiors of normal stars. In the next subsection, we shall
discuss the possibility of convection. Right now, let us consider a region in the
interior of a star where heat is transported outward only by radiative transfer. Wehave already derived an expression for the energy ﬂux per unit area by radiativetransfer in (2.78). Replacing zbyr, the energy ﬂux L
racross the spherical
surface of radius ris given by
Lr=4πr2F=− 4πr2c
χρd
dr/parenleftBigaB
3T4/parenrightBig
,
from which
dT
dr=−3
4aBcχρ
T3Lr
4πr2. (3.16)
This is the fourth equation of stellar structure if the heat ﬂux is carried outwardby radiative transfer. We need to replace (3.16) by a different equation if the
heat ﬂux is carried by convection. We shall derive this alternative equation in
the next subsection.
It may be noted that the ﬁrst three equations of stellar structure – (3.1), (3.2)
and (3.15) – follow from fairly straightforward considerations. Only (3.16),
which was obtained by Eddington (1916), is somewhat non-trivial. It may be
useful for the reader to look at an instructive alternative derivation of (3.16)
given by Eddington (1926, §71).
3.2.4 Convection inside stars
In radiative transfer, energy is transported without any material motion. Convec-
tion, on the other hand, involves up and down motions of the gas. Hot blobs of

<<<PAGE 88>>>

68 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
Fig. 3.1 Vertical displacement of a blob of gas in a stratiﬁed atmosphere.
gas move upward and cold blobs of gas move downward, thereby transporting
heat. Let us now ﬁnd out under what circumstances this is likely to happen.
Suppose we have a perfect gas in hydrostatic equilibrium inside a star. We
now consider a blob of gas which has been displaced vertically upward as shown
inFigure 3.1 . Initially the blob of gas had the same density ρand the same
pressure Pas the surroundings. The external gas density and pressure at the new
position of the blob are ρ/primeandP/prime. We know that pressure imbalances in a gas are
rather quickly removed by acoustic waves, but heat exchange between differentparts of the gas takes more time. Hence it is not unreasonable to consider the
blob to have been displaced adiabatically and to have the same pressure P
/primeas
the surroundings in its new position. Let ρ∗be its density in the new position.
Ifρ∗<ρ/prime, then the displaced blob will be buoyant and will continue to move
upward further away from its initial position, making the system unstable andgiving rise to convection. On the other hand, if ρ
∗>ρ/prime, then the blob will try
to return to its original position so that the system will be stable and there will
be no convection. So convection is of the nature of an instability in the system.
To ﬁnd the condition for convective instability, we have to determine whether
ρ∗is greater than or less than the surrounding density ρ/prime.
From the assumption that the blob has been displaced adiabatically, it
follows that
ρ∗=ρ/parenleftbiggP/prime
P/parenrightbigg1/γ
. (3.17)
IfdP/dris the pressure gradient in the atmosphere, we can substitute
P/prime=P+dP
dr/Delta1r

<<<PAGE 89>>>

3.2 Basic equations of stellar structure 69
and make a binomial expansion keeping terms to the linear order in /Delta1r.T h i s
gives
ρ∗=ρ+ρ
γPdP
dr/Delta1r. (3.18)
On the other hand,
ρ/prime=ρ+dρ
dr/Delta1r.
Using ρ=P/RT,w eg e t
ρ/prime=ρ+ρ
PdP
dr/Delta1r−ρ
TdT
dr/Delta1r. (3.19)
Here dρ/dranddT/dr are the density and temperature gradients in the atmo-
sphere. From (3.18) and(3.19),
ρ∗−ρ/prime=/bracketleftbigg
−/parenleftbigg
1−1
γ/parenrightbiggρ
PdP
dr+ρ
TdT
dr/bracketrightbigg
/Delta1r. (3.20)
Keeping in mind that dT/dr anddP/dr are both negative, the atmosphere is
stable if
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledT
dr/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle</parenleftbigg
1−1
γ/parenrightbiggT
P/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledP
dr/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (3.21)
This is the famous Schwarzschild stability condition (Schwarzschild, 1906). If
the temperature gradient of the atmosphere is steeper than the critical value
(1−1/γ)( T/P)|dP/dr|, then the atmosphere is unstable to convection.
Convection is an extremely efﬁcient mechanism for transporting energy.
The temperature gradient has to be only slightly steeper than the critical gradientto drive the typical stellar energy ﬂux. We would not be very far off the mark ifwe take
dT
dr=/parenleftbigg
1−1
γ/parenrightbiggT
PdP
dr(3.22)
inside the convection zone. In order to make more accurate calculations, onehas to take the help of mixing length theory, which was developed by Biermann
(1948)a n d Vitense (1953). It is described in any standard textbook on stellar
structure (see, for example, Kippenhahn and Weigert ,1990, Chapter 7). This
theory assumes that upward-moving hot blobs or downward-moving cold blobstypically traverse a vertical distance called the mixing length, after which theylose their identity and mix their heat contents with their surroundings. Byassuming a reasonable value of the mixing length, it is possible to calculate
the small difference between the actual temperature gradient and the critical
gradient, which is responsible for transporting the necessary heat ﬂux. We shallnot discuss mixing length theory in this elementary textbook.

<<<PAGE 90>>>

70 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
While constructing a model of a star, one has to proceed in the following
way. First one assumes that there is no convection and heat transport is entirely
due to radiative transport described by (3.16). After calculating the temperature
distribution on the basis of this assumption, the next step is to check if thetemperature gradient obtained in this way satisﬁes the Schwarzschild stabilitycondition (3.21). If it is satisﬁed, then it can be taken as established that the
heat ﬂux is really carried by radiative transport and the temperature gradient
is given by (3.16). On the other hand, if the stability condition (3.21) is not
satisﬁed in some regions, then the heat ﬂux is primarily carried by convec-
tion in those regions and one has to repeat the calculation by using (3.22)
instead of (3.16).
3.3 Constructing stellar models
We have already derived all the necessary equations for constructing stellar
models. Let us now see how it can be done.
First of all, one has to specify the chemical composition of a star, since
opacity and the nuclear energy generation rate depend on the chemical compo-
sition. The chemical composition can be given by specifying the mass fraction
Xiof various elements present in the stellar material. The next step is to ﬁgure
out the equation of state P(ρ,T,Xi), the opacity χ(ρ, T,Xi)and the nuclear
energy generation rate ε(ρ, T,Xi)as functions of density, temperature and
chemical composition. In §2.6, we have already discussed the opacity calcu-
lation. In the next chapter, we shall discuss how the nuclear energy generationrate is calculated. Before discussing the stellar structure models, we make a fewcomments about the equation of state.
The density at the centre of the Sun is more than 100 times the density
of water. However, still the material there behaves like a perfect gas, becausethe temperature is so high that the interatomic potential energies are negligiblecompared to the typical kinetic energies of the particles and atoms do not geta chance to bind together to form a solid or a liquid. If we can assume the
gas to be completely ionized, then the equation of state becomes particularly
simple. Let Xbe the mass fraction of hydrogen, Ythe mass fraction of helium
andZthe mass fraction of other heavier elements (often referred to as ‘metals’
by astronomers!). The number of hydrogen atoms per unit volume is Xρ/m
H.
Since each hydrogen atom contributes two particles (one electron and onenucleus which is a proton), there will be 2 Xρ/m
Hparticles per unit volume from
fully ionized hydrogen. The number density of helium atoms will be Yρ/4mH
and they will contribute 3 Yρ/4mHparticles. Since a heavy atom of atomic mass
Aapproximately contributes A/2 particles, it is easy to see that the contribution
to the number density from heavier elements is Zρ/2mH. Hence the number of
particles per unit volume is

<<<PAGE 91>>>

3.3 Constructing stellar models 71
n=/parenleftbigg
2X+3
4Y+1
2Z/parenrightbiggρ
mH
so that the gas pressure is given by
P=κB
μmHρT, (3.23)
where
μ=/parenleftbigg
2X+3
4Y+1
2Z/parenrightbigg−1
(3.24)
is known as the mean molecular weight. We shall see that (3.23) will be quite
adequate for the purpose of qualitatively understanding various properties of
stars. For accurate stellar models, however, one needs to take account of the
partial ionization, especially in the outer layers of the star, and should alsoinclude the radiation pressure, which becomes important for more massive stars.Finally, when the density is very high, the electron gas becomes degenerate ,
i.e. it obeys the Fermi–Dirac distribution rather than the classical Maxwelliandistribution. This gives rise to what is called the degeneracy pressure , which will
be discussed in detail in §5.2. This pressure can play a crucial role in balancing
gravity when the nuclear fuel is exhausted in a star. A more complete discussion
of the equation of state is postponed to §5.2.
Let us now write down all the equations for stellar structure in one place.
They are
dM
r
dr=4πr2ρ, (3.25)
dP
dr=−GM r
r2ρ, (3.26)
dLr
dr=4πr2ρε, (3.27)
dT
dr=−3
4aBcχρ
T3Lr
4πr2
dT
dr=/parenleftbigg
1−1
γ/parenrightbiggT
PdP
dr⎫
⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎭. (3.28)
We discussed at the end of the previous section how one determines which form
of(3.28) is to be used. In a typical star, the convection may take place in a
certain range of radius, whereas heat is transported by radiative transfer in other
regions. So, for the same stellar model, it may be necessary to use one form of(3.28) in some regions and the other form elsewhere. Once the equation of state
P(ρ,T,X
i), the opacity χ(ρ, T,Xi)and the nuclear energy generation rate
ε(ρ, T,Xi)are given, the above equations involve four independent functions
ofr:ρ,T,MrandLr. The number of independent equations is also four. It is

<<<PAGE 92>>>

72 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
straightforward to ﬁgure out the boundary conditions. We have the following
two boundary conditions at the centre of the star
Mr=0a tr=0, (3.29)
Lr=0a tr=0. (3.30)
The radius r=Rof the star is the point where both ρandTbecome very small
compared to their values in the interior. Hence the simplest boundary conditionsfor them are
ρ=0a tr=R, (3.31)
T=0a tr=R. (3.32)
Since there are four equations involving four variables, with one boundarycondition for each variable, this is clearly a mathematically well-posed problem.Unfortunately, not much progress can be made analytically unless one makesdrastically simplifying assumptions. However, it is not difﬁcult to solve the
equations of stellar structure numerically.
Although it is not our aim to give a detailed discussion of the numerical
methods, let us try to give an idea how one proceeds. Suppose we want to
construct a model of a star with a given central density ρ
c. Taking the central
temperature to have a value Tcand using the boundary conditions (3.29)–(3.30),
we can start integrating (3.25)–(3.28) from r=0. In general, ρandTwill not
become zero at the same value of rso that it will not be possible to satisfy
(3.31)–(3.32) simultaneously. We then have to try out the procedure again
and again by varying the value of the central temperature Tc, until we ﬁnd a
combination ρcandTcfor which the solution would be such that ρandTwill
become simultaneously zero for some particular r. We would regard that rto be
the radius Rof the star, and boundary conditions (3.31)–(3.32) will be satisﬁed.
The values of MrandLratr=Rwould give us the mass and the luminosity
of the star. We thus see that in principle the structure of a star with a centraldensity ρ
ccan be found this way, and such a star would have a deﬁnite mass
and deﬁnite luminosity. Although the procedure outlined above gives an idea
of how a stellar structure can be found, this simple procedure unfortunately
does not work properly. The equation of radiative energy transfer in (3.28) has a
factor T3in the denominator and this factor becomes very large near the surface
where Tis very small. This leads to a numerical instability. One can think of the
alternative of starting the numerical integration from the stellar surface r=R.
This leads to a numerical instability at the centre due to the factor r2in the
denominator of (3.26). One possible way of getting around these difﬁculties
is to start the numerical integrations both from r=0a n d r=R,a n dt h e n
match them smoothly at an intermediate point. Although this method works,it is not a particularly efﬁcient method. A more efﬁcient numerical algorithmwas developed by Henyey, Vardya and Bodenheimer (1965) and is known as

<<<PAGE 93>>>

3.3 Constructing stellar models 73
theHenyey method. This is a standard method widely used in solving stellar
structures and is described in standard textbooks (see, for example, Kippenhahn
and Weigert, 1990, §11.2).
Uniqueness of solutions?
For the sake of simplicity, let us consider stars of given uniform composition.
Then the equation of state, the opacity and the nuclear energy generation rate
all become functions of density and pressure alone. From the discussion of the
previous section, it would seem that it will be possible to construct a uniquestellar structure solution starting from a given central density ρ
c. Such a solution
would correspond to a star of given mass M. Hence, at ﬁrst sight, it appears that
there should be a unique stellar structure solution for a star of a given mass. Infact, in the early years of stellar research, astronomers believed that the structureof a star of given mass and given chemical composition should be unique. Thisresult was known as the Vogt–Russell theorem (V ogt, 1926; Russell, Dugan and
Stewart, 1927). Even the otherwise careful Chandrasekhar gave a ‘proof’ of this
theorem in his book ( Chandrasekhar, 1939, pp. 252–253).
Further research showed that solving the stellar structure equations is a
complicated problem and often solutions were not unique. In other words, the
V ogt–Russell theorem could not be a mathematically correct result! Let us give
one counter-example. Consider a star of mass M
⊙. Such a star can have a
structure like the Sun. We shall see in Chapter 5 that it is possible for such a
star to have a different conﬁguration – the white dwarf conﬁguration. At ﬁrst
sight, it may seem that this may be due to the change in chemical composition,
since the Sun is expected to become a white dwarf when its nuclear fuel isexhausted, leading to a change in its chemical composition. However, we shallsee in Chapter 5 that the white dwarf conﬁguration arises when stellar matter is
in a degenerate state. It should in principle be hypothetically possible to puteven the solar material into a degenerate state and a white dwarf star withthe solar composition is a theoretical possibility. It is thus clear that a star ofmass M
⊙can have at least two distinct conﬁgurations and both of these should
follow from the stellar structure equations. The V ogt–Russell theorem cannotbe correct.
Although the V ogt–Russell theorem is not correct from a strictly mathe-
matical point of view, for practical purposes a normal star of a given mass M
and standard composition may be taken to have a reasonably unique structure.Such a structure would correspond to a luminosity Land radius R.I no t h e r
words, by solving the stellar structure equations, it should be possible to ﬁndthe luminosity Land radius Rof a star of mass M. If it were possible to solve
the stellar structure equations (3.25) –(3.28) analytically, we could have found
out how LandRare related to M. Unfortunately it is not possible to solve the
stellar structure equations analytically. Only if we are allowed to make drastic

<<<PAGE 94>>>

74 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
assumptions and simpliﬁcations, is it possible to proceed analytically and obtain
a few approximate relations amongst various quantities pertaining to a star.
3.4 Some relations amongst stellar quantities
We shall now do a few drastic things with the stellar structure equations (3.25) –
(3.28) to extract some relations amongst various quantities pertaining to a star.
Since some of our steps will be highly questionable in nature, we shall have totake the derived results with a degree of caution. A comparison with detailedstellar models, however, will show that we are not very much off the track.Our aim will be to ﬁnd how various quantities scale with each other. We
shall, therefore, ignore the constant factors in our equations. A slightly more
sophisticated approach than ours is to construct what are called homologous
stellar models, in which it is assumed that various quantities vary inside different
stars in similar ways. Several standard textbooks discuss homologous stellar
models, a particularly excellent account being given by Tayler (1994, pp. 110–
117; see also Kippenhahn and Weigert, 1990, Chapter 20).
Let us replace the left-hand side of the hydrostatic equation (3.26) by
−P/R,w h e r e Pcan be taken as the typical pressure inside the star. Replacing
M
r/r2on the right-hand side by M/R2, we are led to
P
R∝M
R2ρ,
from which
P∝M2
R4(3.33)
on taking ρ∝M/R3. The equation of state P∝ρTwould imply
P∝M
R3T. (3.34)
For(3.33) and(3.34) to hold simultaneously, we must have
T∝M
R. (3.35)
In other words, inside temperatures of different stars should be proportionaltoM/R.
After subjecting (3.26) to this drastic treatment, we do a similar thing with
the radiative energy transfer equation (3.28). If we assume that the radiative
transfer equation holds throughout the star and further the variation of χinside
the star is not very appreciable, then we can write

<<<PAGE 95>>>

3.4 Some relations amongst stellar quantities 75
T
R∝M
R3T3L
R2,
from which it follows that
L∝(TR)4
M. (3.36)
It is seen from (3.35) thatTRshould be proportional to M. Substituting this in
(3.36), we come to the conclusion
L∝M3. (3.37)
This is called the mass–luminosity relation , which implies that a more massive
star should be more luminous. Since we derived this relation by making some
drastic assumptions, one may express doubts about the correctness of thisrelation. Figure 3.2 shows a plot of log Lversus log Mas obtained from detailed
numerical solutions of stellar structure equations. On this ﬁgure, we superposea dashed line with a slope corresponding to the relation (3.37). This line is not
too far off from what we get from detailed stellar models. We shall present acomparison with observational data in the next section.
We saw in the previous chapter that the surface of a star behaves approxi-
mately like a blackbody. Hence, if T
effis the effective surface temperature, then
we must have
Fig. 3.2 Luminosity as a function of mass computed by detailed stellar models. The
dashed line indicates the slope that would result if Lvaried as M3. Adapted from
Hansen and Kawaler (1994, p. 43) who use the results of Iben (1965) and Brunish and
Truran (1982).

<<<PAGE 96>>>

76 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
L=4πR2σT4
eff, (3.38)
where σis the Stefan–Boltzmann constant. If we assume that Teffis a measure
of the typical interior temperature of the star (i.e. if hotter stars have hotter
surface temperatures), then we can write from the above
L∝R2T4. (3.39)
Since Lgoes as M3by(3.37) andRTgoes as Mby(3.35), it follows from
(3.39) that
M3∝M2T2
so that
M∝T2. (3.40)
Using (3.37) and the fact we are assuming Teffto go as T, we can write
L∝T6
eff. (3.41)
We thus conclude that two important observable quantities of stars – theirluminosities and their effective surface temperatures – should be related asgiven by (3.41). A plot of luminosity versus surface temperature for a num-
ber of stars is known as the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram,o r HR diagram
in brief, after Hertzsprung (1911)a n d Russell (1913) who produced the ﬁrst
observational plots of this kind. For historical reasons, the convention is toplot the effective surface temperature T
effincreasing towards the left! We
shall explain the reason for this convention in the next section, where HRdiagrams of stars will be discussed in detail. Figure 3.3 shows a theoretical
HR diagram constructed from detailed numerical models of stars, where thedashed line indicates the slope that we would get if the scaling relation (3.41)
was strictly valid. We shall see in the next section that the scaling relation(3.41) matches the observational data also reasonably well. Thus, in spite of
various crude and questionable assumptions, we have managed to derive animportant scaling law which is not very far from the truth. Different points on
the curve in Figure 3.3 corresponds to stars of different masses, which are also
indicated.
A star lives as a normal star as long as it has got nuclear fuel to burn. Since
the amount of nuclear fuel is proportional to mass and the rate at which the
fuel is burnt is proportional to luminosity, the lifetime τof a star should be
given by
τ∝M
L. (3.42)
Making use of (3.37),w eh a v e

<<<PAGE 97>>>

3.5 A summary of stellar observational data 77
Fig. 3.3 The relation between luminosities and surface temperatures of stars as com-
puted by detailed stellar models. The dashed line indicates the slope that would result
ifLvaried as T6
eff. The masses of stars corresponding to different points on the curve
are also shown. Adapted from Hansen and Kawaler (1994, p. 40) who use the results of
Iben (1965) and Brunish and Truran (1982).
τ∝M−2. (3.43)
Hence, more massive stars live for shorter times. A more massive star has more
nuclear fuel to burn; but it burns this fuel at such a fast rate that it runs out ofthe fuel in a shorter time. This very important result that massive stars are short-lived helps us understand many aspects of observational data, as we shall see in
the next two sections.
3.5 A summary of stellar observational data
In the previous section, we arrived at some theoretical conclusions about how
various quantities connected with stars may be related to each other. Are these
conclusions borne out by observational data? Before we can answer this ques-
tion, we discuss brieﬂy how various stellar parameters are determined.
3.5.1 Determination of stellar parameters
For any star that is not too faint, it is possible to take the spectrum. So we ﬁrstdiscuss what we can learn from the spectrum. Then we point out what furtherinformation can be obtained if the star (i) is nearby or (ii) is in a binary system.

<<<PAGE 98>>>

78 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
Stellar spectra: surface temperature, composition, stellar classiﬁcation
We have seen in §2.4 that the surface of a star behaves approximately like a
blackbody, the main departure from the blackbody spectrum being the spectral
lines. Hence, by ﬁtting the spectrum of a star to a blackbody spectrum, it ispossible to estimate the effective surface temperature T
effof the star. One of the
easy things to measure of a star is its apparent magnitude in the U,BandV
bands as deﬁned in §1.4. As we pointed out in §1.4, the quantity B−Vis a
measure of the star’s colour. It is the effective surface temperature Teffwhich
determines where the peak of the spectrum will be and thereby determines thecolour of the star (a hotter star being bluish and a colder star reddish). We thus
expect a one-to-one correspondence between B−VandT
eff, at least for stars of
similar properties. Although we showed the theoretical HR diagram ( Figure 3.3 )
with Teffplotted on the horizontal axis, observational HR diagrams usually have
the directly measurable quantity B−Von their horizontal axes.
The composition of the star can be found out from its spectral lines. This is,
however, not as straightforward as one may at ﬁrst think. Let us explain this by
considering the example of hydrogen. Since all stars are predominantly made ofhydrogen, we may expect hydrogen lines to be present in the spectra of all stars.
In reality, hydrogen lines are found only in stars of intermediate temperature.
Hydrogen lines in the visible part of the spectrum consist of Balmer lines,which are produced due to atomic transitions to the n=2 atomic state from
higher states (n =3,4,... ). If the stellar surface temperature is too high, then
hydrogen is completely ionized and such atomic transitions do not take place.On the other hand, a low surface temperature would imply that all hydrogenatoms are mostly in the ground state n=1, with very few atoms occupying
the states n=3,4,.... Only for intermediate stellar surface temperatures, the
levels n=3,4,... are well populated and appropriate atomic transitions take
place to produce the Balmer lines. It was Saha (1921) who ﬁrst realized that the
strengths of spectral lines by themselves do not give us the composition of a
stellar atmosphere. Matter of the same composition can produce very different
spectra when kept at different temperatures. Saha (1920, 1921) developed his
famous theory of thermal ionization and provided a satisfactory explanationwhy spectra of stars with different surface temperatures look different.
Around 1890, a group of astronomers at Harvard Observatory led by
E. C. Pickering had developed a scheme of classifying stellar spectra in whicha particular type of spectrum would be denoted by a Roman letter. Saha’s workled to the realization that different spectral classes corresponded to different
surface temperatures of stars. The spectral classes in the order of progressively
decreasing surface temperature are O, B, A, F, G, K, M. Generations of astron-omy students remembered these spectral classes with the help of the mnemonic‘Oh be a ﬁne girl kiss me’, the ﬁrst letters of the successive words giving the
names of spectral classes. We pointed out in §3.4 that HR diagrams are plotted

<<<PAGE 99>>>

3.5 A summary of stellar observational data 79
with surface temperature on the horizontal axis increasing leftward. This is
because HR diagrams were originally constructed by plotting spectral classeson the horizontal axis, before it was realized that spectral classes corresponded
to surface temperatures.
Although spectral lines depend crucially on the surface temperature apart
from composition, it is possible to carry out a sophisticated analysis of stellar
spectra to determine the composition of the surface material of the star. We
have indicated in §2.4.3 the basic idea behind the formation of spectral lines
and discussed in §2.7 how an analysis of spectral lines can be carried on
in very simple situations. Further details of spectral analysis are beyond the
scope of this book. Apart from composition, spectral lines give us other crucial
information. The star’s velocity component along the line of sight would cause
a Doppler shift of spectral lines, and by measuring this Doppler shift, the line ofsight velocity of a star can be measured. Again, if the star is strongly magnetic,then one can hope to detect the Zeeman effect in the stellar spectra which would
give information about the magnetic ﬁeld.
Nearby stars: distance, luminosity
If a star is within a few pc, we can determine the distance of the star froma measurement of its parallax. Distances of about one hundred thousand stars
have been determined by the Hipparcos astronomy satellite devoted to accuratemeasurements of stellar positions ( Perryman et al. ,1995).
Once the distance to the star is known, we can ﬁnd the absolute magnitude
in any band by applying (1.8). The absolute magnitude in the Vband, known as
theabsolute visual magnitude, is denoted by M
Vand is a measure of the energy
the star is giving out in visible light. A star like the Sun may be giving outmost of its energy in the visible light. But stars with higher surface temperature
may be giving out energy predominantly in the ultraviolet and stars with lower
surface temperature in the infrared. Hence M
Vdoes not give a correct estimate
of the total luminosity of the star. If we could measure the total energy received
from the star in all wavelengths and calculated the absolute magnitude from that,
that would be called the absolute bolometric magnitude , denoted by Mbol.I fw e
know the surface temperature Teffof the star, then we can estimate the fraction
of the emitted energy which will go in the Vband. Hence, from a measurement
ofMV, it is possible to infer Mbolwhich is related to the luminosity of the star.
Thus, for nearby stars, once we have found out the distance, we also can inferthe luminosity (or M
bol)from a measurement of MV.
Binary stars: stellar mass determination
One of the fundamental parameters of a star is its mass. The mass of a starcan be estimated only from the gravitational attraction it produces and we canobserve the gravitational attraction only if there is a nearby object on which it

<<<PAGE 100>>>

80 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
acts. Luckily many stars are found in binary systems and one can determine
the masses of both the stars by observing the effect of each on the other. Somebinary stars are resolved through powerful telescopes. In other cases, the binary
nature is inferred from indirect evidence. If one star is much dimmer than the
other and the dimmer star sometimes blocks the light coming from the brighterstar, then we can observe a periodic variation of brightness. Such binaries arecalled eclipsing binaries . As the two stars in a binary system move around their
common centre of gravity, one star may sometimes be moving towards us andsometimes away from us, leading to a periodic variation in the Doppler shift ofspectral lines. Binaries displaying such periodically varying Doppler shifts intheir spectra are known as spectroscopic binaries.
Once the binary period and the velocities of the companions are known,
it is straightforward to apply Newtonian gravitational mechanics to calculatethe masses of the two companions (see, for example, B ¨ohm-Vitense, 1989,
Chapter 9). Since we can determine stellar masses only for stars in binary
systems, one worry is whether stars of which we know masses constitute an
unbiased statistical sample of stars. We shall discuss in §4.5 that binary stars
very close to each other can transfer mass between themselves and evolvedifferently from isolated stars. However, if the stars in the binary system are
sufﬁciently far away to ensure that mutual gravitational attraction does not
distort their shapes signiﬁcantly, then the nature of these stars would not betoo different from isolated stars and they can be taken as typical representativesamples in statistical studies of stars.
3.5.2 Important features of observational data
Mass–luminosity relation
If a star is both nearby and in a binary, then both its luminosity and mass
can be determined. Plotting luminosities and masses of such stars, we get
Figure 3.4 . Our simple theoretical considerations led to (3.37), implying that
luminosity should go as the cube of mass. The fact that a straight line ﬁts thedata reasonably well implies that Lindeed goes as M
n, the index nbeing given
by the slope of the straight line having value 3.7. Thus the very crude scalingarguments used in §3.4 brought us quite close to the truth.
HR diagram of nearby stars
For nearby stars, we can determine the luminosities and then plot the luminosi-ties against surface temperatures (obtained from the spectra). As we pointed outin the previous section, the diagram obtained in this way is known as the HR
diagram. Figure 3.5 shows the HR diagram of nearby stars based on the distance
measurements by the Hipparcos astronomy satellite ( Perryman et al. ,1995). It
may be noted that the quantities plotted on the axes are the colour index B−V

<<<PAGE 101>>>

3.5 A summary of stellar observational data 81
Fig. 3.4 The observational mass–luminosity relation. The different symbols correspond
to different types of binaries (i.e. visual binaries are indicated by crosses, spectroscopic
binaries by open squares, etc.). From B ¨ohm-Vitense (1989, p. 87), based on the data
presented by Popper (1980).
and the absolute visual magnitude MV, which are directly measured (rather
than TeffandLwhich are inferred from these measurements). Stars lying on
the right side of the diagram are reddish in colour, whereas stars lying on the
left side are bluish in colour. HR diagrams with MVplotted against B−Vare
also called colour–magnitude diagrams . Most stars seem to lie on a diagonal
strip in Figure 3.5 from the upper left corner to the lower right corner. This
diagonal strip is called the main sequence. We shall discuss the stars outside the
main sequence in the next section. The scaling laws discussed in the previous
section are expected to apply to the stars on the main sequence. If we consider
a median curve passing through the points on the main sequence, it will givea relation between M
Vand B−V. As we have already discussed, B−Vis

<<<PAGE 102>>>

82 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
Fig. 3.5 The HR diagram (or colour–magnitude diagram) of nearby stars, constructed
from the measurements by the Hipparcos astronomy satellite. From Perryman et al.
(1995). ( c/circlecopyrtEuropean Southern Observatory. Reproduced with permission from Astron-
omy and Astrophysics .)
in turn related to TeffandMVis related to the absolute bolometric magnitude
Mbol.Table 3.1 shows how these various quantities are related for stars lying
on the main sequence. Figure 3.6 showing the relationship between Mboland
Tefffor main sequence stars is made from the last two columns of Table 3.1 .
It is clear that a straight line is a good ﬁt. This straight line corresponds to a
scaling relation L∝Tn
effwith n=5.6. Our crude arguments in the last section
had given a remarkably close power law index of 6 (see (3.41))!
3.6 Main sequence, red giants and white dwarfs
Although most of the data points in Figure 3.5 lie on the diagonal strip called
the main sequence, there are also many data points in the upper right corner

<<<PAGE 103>>>

3.6 Main sequence, red giants and white dwarfs 83
Table 3.1 The relationship amongst colour index
B−V, absolute visual magnitude MV, effective
surface temperature Teffand absolute bolometric
magnitude Mbolfor main sequence stars. Adapted
from Tayler (1994, p. 17).
B−VM V logTeff Mbol
0.0 0.8 4.03 0.4
0.2 2.0 3.91 1.9
0.4 2.8 3.84 2.8
0.6 4.4 3.77 4.3
0.8 5.8 3.72 5.6
1.0 6.6 3.65 6.2
1.2 7.3 3.59 6.6
Fig. 3.6 The relation between MbolandTefffor stars lying on the median of the main
sequence, with a best ﬁt straight line. Based on data given by Tayler (1994, p. 17).
and a few data points in the lower left corner. The data points in the upper right
correspond to stars which are red in colour and have luminosities much larger
than the luminosities of red stars on the main sequence. Since unit areas ofall stars with the same surface temperature give out energy at approximately

<<<PAGE 104>>>

84 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
the same rate (due to the Stefan–Boltzmann law of surface emission from
blackbodies), the stars in the upper right corner have to be much larger in sizethan the red stars on the main sequence, in order to be much more luminous.
This clearly follows from (3.38). The stars lying in the upper right corner of
the HR diagram are, therefore, called red giants . The stars lying in the lower
left corner of the HR diagram are bluish-white in colour and have much smaller
luminosities compared to blue stars on the main sequence. By arguments similar
to what we have just given, these stars have to be much smaller in size compared
to bluish-white stars on the main sequence. So these stars in the lower left cornerof the HR diagram are called white dwarfs .
We have already provided a theoretical explanation of the main sequence.
The approximate scaling relation (3.41) derived in the previous section is a
reasonable ﬁt for the main sequence. We know that more luminous stars aremore massive. So the upper left corner of the main sequence corresponds tomore massive stars and the lower right corner to less massive stars. The mass
of a star determines at which point of the main sequence the star would lie.
The main sequence is essentially a sequence of stellar masses, with the massincreasing from the lower right towards the upper left. This should also be clearfrom the theoretical HR diagram shown in Figure 3.3 , in which the masses of
stars are demarcated.
Detailed explanations of red giants and white dwarfs will be provided in
the next two chapters. Here we make only a few general remarks. We shallsee in §4.3 that stars in the main sequence generate energy by converting
hydrogen into helium. While a steady energy generation goes on in this way,the internal thermal energy balances the gravity and the structure of the stardoes not change much with time. This means that the position of the star in
the HR diagram does not change much while hydrogen is being converted
into helium in its interior. However, when hydrogen is appreciably depletedin the stellar core, the nuclear energy generation drops and is not able tobalance the inward pull of gravity completely. This leads to a contraction of
the core and, by the Kelvin–Helmholtz arguments presented in §3.2.2,w e
know that this will cause the core to heat up. Detailed calculations show that
this process also dumps some heat in the surrounding layers of the star andinﬂates those layers. Red giant stars are believed to be caused in this way. We
shall see in §4.5 that several nuclear reactions can take place in the very hot
cores of red giants, leading to the production of various elements up to iron if
certain conditions are satisﬁed. Eventually, however, all possible nuclear fuelis exhausted and the star can no longer produce thermal energy by nuclear
reactions to balance gravity. What then happens? Since electrons are fermions,
they obey Pauli’s exclusion principle, i.e. two electrons cannot occupy the samequantum state. So electrons resist being pushed into very small volumes, oncethe density is sufﬁciently high and all the low-lying quantum states are ﬁlled.
The pressure arising out of this factor, called the electron degeneracy pressure,

<<<PAGE 105>>>

3.6 Main sequence, red giants and white dwarfs 85
will be derived in §5.2. We shall then show in §5.3 that, even in the absence
of other energy sources, the electron degeneracy pressure alone can balance
gravity if the mass of the star is less than the famous Chandrasekhar mass
limit. White dwarfs are supposed to be very dense, dead stars in which no
more nuclear reactions are taking place and gravity is balanced by the electrondegeneracy pressure of the dense stellar material. The surface temperature ofwhite dwarfs is a remnant of the heat produced in the gravitational contraction.
Eventually, after the white dwarf radiates out the heat, it will become a cold
dark object.
3.6.1 The ends of the main sequence. Eddington luminosity limit
The lightest stars on the main sequence at the lower right corner of the HRdiagram have masses of order 0 .1M
⊙, whereas the most massive stars at the
upper left corner have masses of order 100 M⊙. Why do all stars have masses in
this narrow range of about three orders of magnitude? Other stellar parameterslike luminosity and radius vary much more.
Let us ﬁrst point out what determines the lower limit of stellar mass.
As we shall point out in §8.3, stars form out of the gravitational collapse of
interstellar gas clouds. When a newly forming proto-star shrinks gravitationally,the Kelvin–Helmholtz theory outlined in §3.2.2 should hold and the proto-
star should become hotter while it shrinks. Eventually its interior may becomehot enough for nuclear reactions to start, causing the gravitational contraction
to halt. Thus the proto-star becomes a real star burning nuclear fuel inside.
However, if the mass of the proto-star is less than a lower limit, then the interiordoes not become hot enough for nuclear reactions to start, because the electrondegeneracy pressure halts the gravitational contraction before the temperature
can become sufﬁciently high. Such an object is called a brown dwarf . Detailed
theoretical calculations suggest that 0 .08M
⊙is the lower limit for the mass
of a star generating energy by nuclear reactions (see Exercise 5.9 ). A gravita-
tionally contracting object with less mass becomes a brown dwarf. A browndwarf will never have a surface temperature as high as that of even the least
massive stars. However, after its formation, for some time a brown dwarf willbe radiating away the heat produced during its gravitational contraction and canbe detected. The ﬁrst unambiguous detection of a brown dwarf was reported by
Nakajima et al. (1995).
Let us now turn our attention to very massive stars, with very high tem-
peratures inside. The radiation pressure becomes more important inside more
massive stars. You will learn a historically important argument for it when you
work out Exercise 5.5 inChapter 5. Eventually the very high radiation pressure
inside a massive star can make the star unstable. It is straightforward to show
that a high radiation pressure can lift the outer layers of a star. The energy ﬂux of

<<<PAGE 106>>>

86 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
radiation at the surface of a star with luminosity Land radius RisL/4πR2.I fχ
is the opacity, then ρχis the absorption coefﬁcient and the energy absorbed per
unit volume per unit time is ρχ(L/4πR2). The momentum associated with this
energy can be obtained by dividing this by c, which will give us the momentum
absorbed per unit time in a unit volume, which is nothing but the force exerted
on this unit volume. The star will be able to hold on to this outer layer ofgas only if the inward force of gravity is stronger than this force exerted by
radiation, i.e. if
GM
R2ρ>L
4πR2ρχ
c,
from which
L<4πcG M
χ. (3.44)
This limit of luminosity is known as the Eddington luminosity limit (Eddington,
1924). Note that the radius Rhas cancelled out of this expression. Since we have
the approximate relation (3.37) thatLgoes as M3, we can write L=λM3.I t
then follows from (3.44) that the Eddington limit will be violated if the mass of
the star were to be larger than Mmaxgiven by
λM2
max=4πcG
χ. (3.45)
While Mmaxgiven by (3.45) may be an absolute upper limit beyond which a
star’s outer layers would be blown off by radiation, in reality stars with mass
considerably less than this Mmaxbecome unstable due to radiation pressure and
are not able to exist (see, for example, Kippenhahn and Weigert ,1990, §22.4,
§39.5).
3.6.2 HR diagrams of star clusters
Many stars are found in clusters. There are some relatively loosely boundclusters, each having a few dozens of stars. Such loosely bound clusters arecalled open clusters. Of more interest to us are the globular clusters , which are
very tightly bound almost spherical clusters, containing of the order of 10
5stars.
Figure 3.7 shows a globular cluster. As we shall discuss in §6.1.2, the globular
clusters are found around the centre of our Galaxy. From an astrophysical pointof view, the main importance of a star cluster is that it gives us a group of starswhich are believed to have been born at about the same time and which are at
roughly the same distance from us.
If all the stars in a cluster are at the same distance d, then we see from
(1.8) that the difference between absolute magnitude and apparent magnitude

<<<PAGE 107>>>

3.6 Main sequence, red giants and white dwarfs 87
Fig. 3.7 A globular cluster of stars, photographed at Kavalur Observatory.
will be the same for all stars. Hence we can construct the HR diagram of a
star cluster by plotting the apparent magnitude (instead of absolute magnitude)against B−V.Figure 3.8 shows such an HR diagram of a globular cluster. One
can clearly see the main sequence. By using (1.8), one can easily ﬁnd out the
distance dof the globular cluster which will yield such values of the absolute
magnitude that the main sequence of the globular cluster will coincide with themain sequence of nearby stars as seen in Figure 3.5 . This is a very powerful
method of determining distances to star clusters.
The overall appearance of Figure 3.8 , however, is quite different from
Figure 3.5 . For example, in Figure 3.5 we ﬁnd that the main sequence continues
to values of B−Vless than 0.0 on the left side. On the other hand, the main
sequence in Figure 3.8 seems to end at around B−V=0.3. We know that main
sequence stars with lower values of B−Vcorrespond to more massive stars.
So the globular cluster is basically missing stars on the main sequence heavierthan a certain mass. The explanation for this is not difﬁcult to give. We have
already pointed out that more massive stars have shorter lifetimes (see (3.43)).
So, in a globular cluster of a certain age, stars heavier than a particular mass
would have ﬁnished their lives on the main sequence. As we shall see in §4.5,
stars lie on the main sequence as long as hydrogen is converted into helium.
After that, a star becomes a red giant as a result of the inﬂation of outer layers.
We see in Figure 3.8 that there is a branch of stars proceeding towards the region
of red giant stars (upper right corner) from the place where the main sequence

<<<PAGE 108>>>

88 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
Fig. 3.8 The HR diagram of stars in the globular cluster M3. From Johnson and
Sandage (1956). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from
Astrophysical Journal .)
seems to end abruptly. Presumably these are stars in a state of transition from
the main sequence to the red giant phase. Since this transition takes relatively
less time compared to lifetimes of stars, the probability of coming across stars
in this transitory phase is not very high in a random sample of stars. That is whywe see relatively few stars between the main sequence and the red giant phasein the HR diagram of nearby stars. After ﬁnishing the red giant phase, a star
may proceed towards becoming a white dwarf. Some points in Figure 3.8 seem
to correspond to such stars.
The stars at the abrupt turning point of the main sequence are the stars
which are just running out of hydrogen in the core. So the age of the globularcluster is essentially equal to the main sequence lifetime of these stars at the
turning point. Hence, from a theoretical estimate of the lifetimes of stars, onecan determine the age of a globular cluster simply by noting the turning point ofthe main sequence. Figure 3.9 is a composite HR diagram by superposing the
HR diagrams of several star clusters. The vertical axis displays the absolutemagnitude, which can be found easily after determining the distance of thecluster by matching the main sequence. The clusters with turning points lower

<<<PAGE 109>>>

Exercises 89
NGC 2362
h and χ Perseih and χ Persei
Pleiades
M41M41
M11M11
M67
H and P
752
SunNGC 752
–0.486420–2–4–6–8
0 0.4 0.8
(B –V )MV 
1.2 1.6 2.0HyadesComa
Praesepe
Fig. 3.9 A composite HR diagram sketching the extent of the main sequence for several
star clusters. From Sandage (1957). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced
with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)
down are clearly older. Detailed theoretical calculations suggest that the oldest
globular clusters are about 1 .5×1010yr old. This poses an important constraint
on cosmology, since the Universe could not be younger than this!
Exercises
3.1 Estimate the total thermal energy of the Sun from the fact that its internal
temperature is of order 107K. Show that this is of the same order as the rough
estimate of gravitational potential energy.
3.2 If the Sun was producing its energy by slow contraction as suggested by
Helmholtz and Kelvin, estimate the amount by which the radius of the Sun has
to decrease every year to produce the observed luminosity.

<<<PAGE 110>>>

90 Stellar astrophysics I: Basic theoretical ideas and observational data
3.3 Show that the radiation pressure at the centre of the Sun is negligible
compared to the gas pressure, by estimating the ratio of the radiation pressure
to the gas pressure.
3.4 The Sun has a convection zone from 0 .7R⊙to the solar surface. Find
out how density, pressure and temperature vary within this convection zone by
assuming that (i) equation (3.22) holds exactly inside the convection zone and
(ii) the convection zone contains a very small fraction of the Sun’s mass so that
the gravitational ﬁeld in the convection zone can be taken to be −GM⊙/r2.
(According to current solar models, the convection zone contains only about
2% of solar mass.)
3.5 Using the fact that the opacity in very hot stars is provided by Thomson
scattering, show that L/Mhas to be less than a critical value and ﬁnd its
numerical value. How does it compare with L⊙/M⊙?U s e(3.45) to estimate
the maximum mass Mmaxof a star such that the outer layers would be blown
off by radiation if the mass of the star was larger. (Note that stars with such
high mass actually do not exist.)
3.6 From Figures 3.5 and 3.8, estimate the distance of the globular cluster
M3 from us.3.7 Make a very rough estimate of the wavelengths at which a star of mass
9M
⊙and a star of mass 0 .25M⊙will give out maximum radiation.

<<<PAGE 111>>>

4
Stellar astrophysics II:
Nucleosynthesis and other
advanced topics
4.1 The possibility of nuclear reactions in stars
We have seen in the previous chapter that many aspects of stellar structure can
be understood without a detailed knowledge of stellar energy generation mech-
anisms. This is indeed fortunate because not much was known about energygeneration mechanisms when Eddington was carrying out his pioneering inves-tigations of stellar structure in the 1920s. Eddington (1920) correctly surmised
that the Kelvin–Helmholtz hypothesis of energy generation by contraction (see§3.2.2) could not possibly be true and stellar energy must be produced by sub-atomic processes. Nuclear physics, however, was still in its infancy and detailsof how the stellar energy is produced could not be worked out at that time.
With the rapid advances in nuclear physics within the next few years, it became
possible to work out the details of energy-producing nuclear reactions insidestars. To build sufﬁciently detailed and realistic models of stars and stellarevolution, a good understanding of energy generation mechanisms is essential.
We turn to this subject now.
Let us consider a nucleus of atomic mass Aand atomic number Z.I ti sm a d e
ofZprotons and A−Zneutrons. The mass m
nucof the nucleus is always found
to be less than the combined mass of these protons and neutrons. It is the energyequivalent of this mass deﬁcit which provides the binding energy of the nucleus
and is given by
E
B=[Zm p+(A−Z)mn−mnuc]c2. (4.1)
To ﬁnd out how tightly bound a nucleus is, we need to consider the binding
energy per nucleon
91

<<<PAGE 112>>>

92 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.1 A smooth curve showing the binding energy per nucleon, plotted against the
atomic mass number.
f=EB
A. (4.2)
Figure 4.1 s h o w sap l o to f ffor different atomic nuclei. It is seen that the
intermediate-mass nuclei around iron are most tightly bound. So energy is
released in two kinds of nuclear reactions: the fusion of very light nuclei intosomewhat heavier nuclei or the ﬁssion of very heavy nuclei into intermediate-
mass nuclei. Energy production in the interiors of stars is believed to be due to
nuclear fusion. We note that ffor helium is 6.6 MeV , which is about 0.007 of
the mass of a nucleon. Hence, if a mass M
⊙of hydrogen is fully converted into
helium, the total amount of energy released will be 0 .007M⊙c2. Dividing this
by the solar luminosity L⊙, we get an estimate of the lifetime of a star which
shines by converting hydrogen into helium, i.e.
τnuc≈0.007 M⊙c2
L⊙. (4.3)
On putting in the values of M⊙andL⊙, this turns out to be
τnuc≈1011yr,
which is much longer than the Kelvin–Helmholtz time scale given by (3.13) and
is of the same order as the age of the Universe.
All nuclei are positively charged and normally repel each other. Only when
two nuclei are brought within about 10−15m, can the short-range nuclear forces
overcome the electrical repulsion and the nuclei can fuse. A typical internuclearpotential is shown in Figure 4.2 . For two nuclei with atomic numbers Z
1and
Z2, the electrostatic potential is
1
4π/epsilon1 0Z1Z2e2
r.
The height of this potential at the nuclear radius r≈10−15m turns out to be
about Z1Z2MeV. At the centre of the Sun where the temperature is of order

<<<PAGE 113>>>

4.2 Calculation of nuclear reaction rates 93
Fig. 4.2 A sketch of a typical nuclear potential.
107K, the typical kinetic energy κBTof a particle is about a keV , which is
about 103lower than the electrostatic potential barrier between nuclei. Even
the centre of the Sun is not hot enough for the nuclei to overcome the mutual
electrical repulsion and come close together for nuclear fusion – according to
classical physics! However, one of the standard results of quantum mechanics
is that a particle can tunnel through a potential barrier. While studying α-decay,
Gamow (1928) calculated the probability for the α-particle to tunnel from the
inside of the nucleus to the outside by penetrating the potential barrier. The same
probability should hold for a particle to tunnel from the outside through the
potential barrier of the nucleus. On taking account of the tunnelling probability,it was found that nuclear fusion can indeed take place in the interior of the Sun(Atkinson and Houtermans, 1929).
The basic principles for calculating the rate of any nuclear reaction inside a
star will be discussed in the next section. Then in §4.3 we shall list some of the
speciﬁc nuclear reactions likely to take place in stellar interiors.
4.2 Calculation of nuclear reaction rates
Suppose a nucleus having charge Z1ecan react with a nucleus having charge
Z2e, their number densities per unit volume being n1and n2.W ew a n tt o
calculate the rate of the reaction, i.e. the number of reactions taking place perunit volume per unit time.
If both types of nuclei have a Maxwellian velocity distribution, it is straight-
forward to show that the probability of the relative velocity between a pair beingvalso follows a Maxwellian distribution
f(v)dv=/parenleftbiggm
2πκ BT/parenrightbigg3/2
exp/parenleftbigg
−mv2
2κBT/parenrightbigg
4πv2dv,

<<<PAGE 114>>>

94 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
where mis the reduced mass m1m2/(m 1+m2). In terms of the kinetic energy
E=1
2mv2,
the distribution can be written as
f(E)dE=2√πE1/2
(κBT)3/2exp/parenleftbigg
−E
κBT/parenrightbigg
dE. (4.4)
Ifσ(E)is the reaction cross-section between the two nuclei approaching each
other with energy E, then it is easy to see that the reaction rate is given by
r=n1n2/angbracketleftσv/angbracketright, (4.5)
where
/angbracketleftσv/angbracketright=/integraldisplay∞
0σ(E)vf(E)dE. (4.6)
From (4.5) and (4.6), it should be clear that we need only the reaction
cross-section σ(E)to calculate the reaction rate. We now discuss how this
cross-section can be found.
As we pointed out in §4.1, the typical particle energy in a stellar interior is
much less than the height of the potential barrier sketched in Figure 4.2 . Hence
the cross-section σ(E)has to depend on the probability of tunnelling through
this potential barrier. The quantum mechanical tunnelling probability through
such a barrier was ﬁrst calculated by Gamow (1928) and is reproduced in many
textbooks on nuclear physics (see, for example, Yarwood ,1958, §19.5). We
write down the expression without derivation (you are asked to do the derivation
inExercise 4.1 with suitable hints). For nuclei approaching each other with
energy E, the probability of tunnelling through the potential barrier is given by
P∝exp/bracketleftbigg
−1
2/epsilon10/planckover2pi1/parenleftBigm
2/parenrightBig1/2Z1Z2e2
√
E/bracketrightbigg
. (4.7)
Now, without the tunnelling probability, the reaction cross-section is expectedto go as approximately λ
2,w h e r eλ is the de Broglie wavelength. Since λ2∝
1/E, we can write down the cross-section including the tunnelling probability in
the form
σ(E)=S(E)
Eexp/bracketleftbigg
−b√
E/bracketrightbigg
, (4.8)
where
b=1
2/epsilon10/planckover2pi1/parenleftBigm
2/parenrightBig1/2
Z1Z2e2, (4.9)
andS(E)is a slowly varying function of E. It should be noted that the assump-
tion of slow variation of S(E)has its limitations. Occasionally the cross-section
of a nuclear reaction may become very large for a certain energy, as sketched in

<<<PAGE 115>>>

4.2 Calculation of nuclear reaction rates 95
Fig. 4.3 A sketch showing the variation of a nuclear reaction cross-section with energy
around a resonance.
Fig. 4.4 Variation with energy of the Gamow factor, the Maxwellian factor and their
product (the curve with the shading underneath).
Figure 4.3 . This is called a resonance. Only in the absence of resonances, can
we take S(E)to be a slowly varying function. Usually S(E)is determined from
laboratory experiments.
On substituting (4.4) and(4.8) into (4.6), we ﬁnally get
/angbracketleftσv/angbracketright=23/2
√πm1
(κBT)3/2/integraldisplay∞
0S(E)e−E/κBTe−b/√
EdE. (4.10)
The function exp (−E/κBT)decreases rapidly with E, whereas the other func-
tion exp (−b/√
E)increases rapidly with E,a ss h o w ni nFigure 4.4 .T h e i r
product has an appreciable value only for a narrow range of energy around E0.
We can replace the slowly varying function S(E)by its value S(E0)atE0and

<<<PAGE 116>>>

96 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
take it outside the integral. Then the integral in (4.10) is given by
J=/integraldisplay∞
0eg(E)dE, (4.11)
where
g(E)=−E
κBT−b√
E. (4.12)
The value of Jis given by the shaded area in Figure 4.4 .F r o mdg /dE=0, we
can ﬁnd the value of E0where the function g(E)is maximum, which gives
E0=/parenleftbigg1
2bκBT/parenrightbigg2/3
=/bracketleftbigg/parenleftBigm
2/parenrightBig1/2Z1Z2e2κBT
4/epsilon10/planckover2pi1/bracketrightbigg2/3
. (4.13)
Let the value of g(E)atE0be denoted by −τ,i . e .
τ=−g(E0)=3E0
κBT=3/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggm
2κBT/parenrightbigg1/2Z1Z2e2
4/epsilon10/planckover2pi1/bracketrightBigg2/3
. (4.14)
We can now expand g(E)in a Taylor series around the point E=E0,w h i c h
gives
g(E)=g(E0)+/parenleftbiggdg
dE/parenrightbigg
E=E0(E−E0)+1
2/parenleftbiggd2g
dE2/parenrightbigg
E=E0(E−E0)2+···
=−τ−τ
4/parenleftbiggE
E0−1/parenrightbigg2
+···
on calculating d2g/dE2from (4.12) and noting that dg/dE=0a t E=E0.
Substituting this in (4.11),w eg e t
J≈e−τ/integraldisplay∞
0e−τ
4/parenleftBig
E
E0−1/parenrightBig2
dE. (4.15)
Since the integrand makes signiﬁcant contributions only in a narrow range of E
around E0, we can replace the lower limit by −∞. Then the integral in (4.15)
becomes a Gaussian integral which can be evaluated easily and gives
J≈2
3κBT√πτe−τ. (4.16)
From (4.10) (keeping in mind that τgoes as T−1/3), we now have
/angbracketleftσv/angbracketright∝S(E0)
T2/3exp⎡
⎣−3/parenleftBigg
e4
32/epsilon12
0κB/planckover2pi12mZ2
1Z2
2
T/parenrightBigg1/3⎤⎦. (4.17)
Once S(E)for the nuclear reaction is found from laboratory experiments, the
reaction rate can be obtained by substituting (4.17) into (4.5).

<<<PAGE 117>>>

4.3 Nuclear reactions in stellar interiors 97
For calculating stellar models, we need to know the energy generation rate
by the nuclear reaction. If /Delta1Eis the energy released in this nuclear reaction,
then the energy generation rate per unit volume is r/Delta1E, with rgiven by (4.5).
This must be equal to ρε,w h e r eε is as deﬁned in §3.2.3,i . e .
ρε=r/Delta1E=n1n2/angbracketleftσv/angbracketright/Delta1E. (4.18)
IfX1andX2are the mass fractions of the two elements which take part in the
nuclear reaction, then n1andn2should respectively be proportional to ρX1and
ρX2. It is then clear from (4.17) and(4.18) that the nuclear energy generation
function εshould have the following functional dependence on various relevant
quantities:
ε=CρX1X21
T2/3exp⎡
⎣−3/parenleftBigg
e4
32/epsilon12
0κB/planckover2pi12mZ2
1Z2
2
T/parenrightBigg1/3⎤⎦. (4.19)
Once the coefﬁcient Cis estimated from the experimentally determined cross-
section S(E), we have the necessary input for stellar structure calculations.
The function εincreases with temperature sharply because of the exponential
involving temperature. Since Z
2
1Z2
2/Tappears in the exponential, it should be
clear that reactions involving heavier nuclei are much less likely compared to
reactions involving lighter nuclei at a given temperature. We now turn to the
speciﬁc nuclear reactions which are likely to take place inside stars.
4.3 Important nuclear reactions in stellar interiors
Although nuclear reactions inside stars involve no chemical burning, it is quitecustomary to refer to energy generation by nuclear reactions as nuclear burning
and the element which gets transformed in the nuclear reactions as nuclear
fuel. As we pointed out in the previous section, one needs an experimentallydetermined cross-section S(E)for a nuclear reaction to calculate the energy
generation by that reaction in stellar interiors. As we already pointed out,
typical particle energies in stellar interiors are of the order of keV . Laboratory
experiments are usually done for energies of order MeV so that the Coulombbarrier does not pose a big problem and the nuclear reactions become morelikely. From measurements of S(E)at MeV energies, one has to extrapolate to
keV energies for application to stellar interiors. For an account of the historicaldevelopment of this subject, the interested reader should be referred to the NobelLecture by Fowler (1984), who was a pioneer in the experimental measurement
of many cross-sections relevant for astrophysics. Fowler (1984) gives plots of
S(E)for many astrophysically relevant nuclear reactions.
In the early decades of the twentieth century, astronomers were not sure of
the composition of stars. However, by the time Russell (1929) carried out an

<<<PAGE 118>>>

98 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
extensive spectroscopic analysis of the Sun, it had become clear that the stars
are mainly made up of hydrogen. Also, it should be apparent from (4.19) that
hydrogen can ‘burn’ at a temperature lower than the temperatures necessary
to burn helium and other heavier elements with higher atomic number Z.
We believe that the main-sequence stars generate their energies by burning
hydrogen into helium. By the late 1930s, nuclear physics had developed sufﬁ-ciently to enable physicists to come up with schemes of likely nuclear reactions
inside stars.
Bethe and Critchﬁeld (1938) proposed what is now known as the proton–
proton orpp chain . The energy generation inside the Sun primarily takes place
due to this chain. In the ﬁrst two reactions of this chain, deuterium
2Ha n dt h e n
3He are produced as follows:
1H+1H−→2H+e++ν,
2H+1H−→3He+γ. (4.20)
After the production of3He, the reactions can proceed through three alternative
branches: pp1, pp2, pp3. The branch pp1 is by far the dominant branch for
conditions corresponding to the solar interior. It involves two nuclei of3He
producing a nucleus of4He:
pp1:3He+3He−→4He+1H+1H. (4.21)
On considering all the reactions in the pp1 branch, it should be clear that
effectively four1H nuclei combine to form one4He nucleus. The other two
branches ( pp2a n dpp3) start dominating only when the temperature is above
107K. They require the prior existence of4He and ﬁrst form7Be:
3He+4He−→7Be+γ. (4.22)
Afterwards7Be can lead to the following two kinds of reactions:
pp2:7Be+e−−→7Li+ν,
7Li+1H−→4He+4He. (4.23)
pp3:7Be+1H−→8B+γ,
8B−→8Be+e++ν,
8Be−→4He+4He. (4.24)
Our job is now to ﬁnd the energy generation function εfor the whole chain
of reactions. How can this be done? We note that the ﬁrst reaction in (4.20)
is mediated by the weak interaction (the emission of a neutrino is usually thesignature of a reaction being mediated by the weak interaction) and is a slow
reaction with a small cross-section. Even though some of the other reactionsmay be faster, they cannot proceed without the
2H nuclei which are produced in

<<<PAGE 119>>>

4.3 Nuclear reactions in stellar interiors 99
the ﬁrst slow reaction. It is thus the ﬁrst reaction which determines the reaction
rate in a steady state. In general, when a series of reactions will have to takeplace, the slowest reaction determines the rate at the steady state. However,
while calculating the energy generation, it is necessary to add up the energies
released in all the reactions in the chain. When all these are done carefully, theenergy generation rate εis given by
ε
pp=2.4×10−1ρX2/parenleftbigg106
T/parenrightbigg2/3
exp/bracketleftBigg
−33.8/parenleftbigg106
T/parenrightbigg1/3/bracketrightBigg
Wk g−1,(4.25)
when the contributions of pp2a n dpp3 branches are neglected. Here Xis the
mass fraction of hydrogen.
If carbon, nitrogen and oxygen are already present and can act as catalysts,
then hydrogen can be synthesized into helium by a completely different series
of nuclear reactions. This series of reactions, known as the CNO cycle ,w a s
independently suggested by von Weizs ¨acker (1938) and Bethe (1939). The
reactions in this cycle are the following:
12C+1H−→13N+γ,
13N−→13C+e++ν,
13C+1H−→14N+γ,
14N+1H−→15O+γ,
15O−→15N+e++ν,
15N+1H−→12C+4He. (4.26)
On adding up these reactions, the net result again is that four1H nuclei have
combined together to make one4He nucleus. Again, the reaction rate in the
steady state is governed by the slowest reaction in the cycle, which in this case
happens to be the fourth reaction in (4.26). The energy generation rate by the
CNO cycle is found to be
εCNO=8.7×1020ρXCNOX/parenleftbigg106
T/parenrightbigg2/3
exp/bracketleftBigg
−152.3/parenleftbigg106
T/parenrightbigg1/3/bracketrightBigg
Wk g−1,
(4.27)
where XCNO is the sum of the mass fractions for carbon, nitrogen and oxygen.
It should be noted that both (4.25) and(4.27) are of the same form as (4.19).
The variations of εppandεCNO as functions of Tare shown in Figure 4.5
for a typical stellar composition. It should be clear from this ﬁgure that for starslike the Sun with the central temperatures of order 10
7,t h e ppchain should be
the dominant energy generation mechanism. On the other hand, more massivestars with higher central temperatures generate energy predominantly by theCNO cycle.

<<<PAGE 120>>>

100 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.5 The variation with temperature of the energy generation rate by hydrogen
burning, for the two major reaction chains. From Tayler (1994, p. 92).
Apart from explaining the energy generation mechanism in stars, the other
important goal of nuclear astrophysics is to explain the abundances of various
elements in the Universe. As we shall see in §11.3, we believe that nuclear
reactions took place in the early Universe and some signiﬁcant fraction ofbaryonic matter was converted into helium. The helium synthesized in starsmakes additions to this primordial helium. The next important question ishow the heavier elements are produced. Gamow (1946) suggested that all the
elements were synthesized in the early Universe. We now think that this was awrong idea and heavier elements are synthesized in stars. Let us see how thiscan happen. After some helium has been synthesized from hydrogen by say pp
chain reactions, we shall have a mixture of hydrogen and helium nuclei. Let us
consider such a mixture. If heavier nuclei have to be built up from this, then the
obvious ﬁrst step may be either of these two reactions: (i) one hydrogen and onehelium nuclei combine to produce a nucleus of mass 5; (ii) two helium nucleicombine to produce a nucleus of mass 8. However, laboratory experiments
failed to discover any stable nucleus of mass 5 or 8. It became clear that these
two obvious nuclear reactions could not provide the next step of synthesizingheavier nuclei. Then how are heavier nuclei produced? This problem was solved
bySalpeter (1952), who suggested what is known as the triple alpha reaction .
In this reaction, three
4He nuclei combine together as follows:
4He+4He+4He−→12C+γ. (4.28)
Since this reaction involves three particles, it is much less likely to occur
compared to reactions involving two particles. Also, the Coulomb repulsion isstronger between helium nuclei than between the nuclei involved in ppchain
reactions, requiring a higher temperature (which should be evident from (4.19)).
In the conditions prevailing in the early Universe, this reaction is found tobe highly improbable and nucleosynthesis could not possibly proceed beyond

<<<PAGE 121>>>

4.4 Detailed stellar models 101
helium. Inside stellar cores, however, this reaction can take place when the
temperature is higher than 108K. But, even then, the rate would have been
too slow if the cross-section of this reaction was non-resonant. Hoyle (1954)
conjectured that there must be a resonance to make the reaction rate appreciable.This resonance was almost immediately found in laboratory experiments.
Detailed calculations show that central temperatures of main-sequence stars
are not high enough for the triple alpha reaction. So stars in the main sequence
generate energy by the ppchain (less massive stars) or CNO cycle (more
massive stars). When, however, hydrogen is exhausted in the core, hydrogen-
burning reactions can no longer halt the inward pull of gravity. The core thenstarts shrinking, as we shall discuss more in §4.5. As we shall see in the
next chapter, it is possible for gravity to be eventually balanced by degeneracypressure when the core density is sufﬁciently high (provided the core mass doesnot exceed the famous Chandrasekhar limit to be derived in §5.3). However,
while the core shrinks, its temperature rises by the Kelvin–Helmholtz arguments
given in §3.2.2. If the star is not too massive, then its central temperature may
never become high enough to start the triple alpha reaction and the star may
end up as a white dwarf with a helium core. In the case of very massive stars,on the other hand, the temperature of the shrinking core may become very high
for other nuclear reactions involving heavier nuclei to start. Once a new nuclear
reaction is ignited, it can halt the inward pull of gravity. After carbon has beensynthesized by the triple alpha process, the next heavier nuclei can be built upfrom carbon. There is a vast literature on the various nuclear reactions which
build up heavier nuclei. We shall not get into this complex subject here. In
sufﬁciently massive stars, it is believed that nuclear reactions can go all the wayup to the most stable nucleus, iron. So such stars may eventually have an iron
core, beyond which it is not possible to generate energy by nuclear reactions.
All possible nuclear reactions in stellar interiors were systematically discussedbyBurbidge, Burbidge, Fowler and Hoyle (1957). One important question is
why we see elements heavier than iron in the Universe, or why we even see
elements higher than helium in the solar system, since the Sun has not yet gone
beyond the stage of synthesizing helium from hydrogen. These issues will bediscussed in §4.7.
4.4 Detailed stellar models and experimental conﬁrmation
We explained in §3.3 how detailed stellar models are calculated. One of the
important inputs in a stellar model calculation is the nuclear energy generationrate. We have seen in §4.2 and §4.3 how this rate can be determined. So we
now understand in principle how a stellar model is constructed. The equation ofstate P(ρ,T,X
i), the opacity χ(ρ, T,Xi)and the nuclear energy generation
rateε(ρ, T,Xi)all depend on the chemical composition of the star. So we

<<<PAGE 122>>>

102 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Table 4.1 The standard solar model. The
density ρis in kg m−3. Adapted from
Bahcall and Ulrich (1988).
R/R⊙Mr/M⊙Lr/L⊙ T ρ
0.000 0.000 0.000 1.56e+7 1.48e+5
0.053 0.014 0.106 1.48e+7 1.23e+5
0.103 0.081 0.466 1.30e+7 8.40e+40.151 0.192 0.777 1.11e+7 5.61e+4
0.201 0.340 0.939 9.31e+6 3.51e+4
0.252 0.490 0.989 7.86e+6 2.09e+40.302 0.620 0.999 6.70e+6 1.20e+4
0.426 0.830 1.001 4.73e+6 2.96e+3
0.543 0.924 1.001 3.53e+6 8.42e+20.691 0.974 1.000 2.38e+6 2.05e+2
0.822 0.993 1.000 1.19e+6 6.42e+1
0.909 0.999 1.000 5.25e+5 1.87e+11.000 1.000 1.000 5.77e+3 0.00e+0
need to specify the composition, keeping in mind that the composition changes
continously due to nuclear reactions – at least in the core where these reactions
take place. To construct the model of a star of a deﬁnite mass, usually an initial
uniform composition is assumed and ﬁrst a stellar model is calculated on thebasis of it. This model would correspond to a star of this mass when it is justborn. Then one ﬁnds out how the composition of the core will change due to
nuclear reactions after some time. A stellar model calculated with this changed
composition corresponds to the star some time after it is born. By constructingsuccessive models with changed compositions, one ﬁnds how the star evolveswith time. While hydrogen is being converted into helium in the core of a star,
the overall structure of the star is found not to change much and the star lies
on the main sequence in the HR diagram. Only when hydrogen is depletedsufﬁciently in the core, drastic changes in the overall characteristics of the starstart taking place. We shall discuss these in the next section.
The age of the solar system is estimated by such methods as the analysis
of radioactive nuclei with long half-lives in the old rocks and meteorites. Webelieve the Sun to be about 4 .6×10
9yr old. So a standard solar model is
constructed by ﬁrst solving the stellar structure equations by assuming that the
present composition of the solar surface was initially the composition of the
whole Sun and then by advancing this model through 4 .6×109yr.Table 4.1
presents the standard solar model. Before discussing how this standard solarmodel has been beautifully conﬁrmed by recent experiments, we turn to some
other important points.
We showed in §3.4 that many properties of stars can be understood without
solving the stellar structure equations in detail. Now we want to discuss some

<<<PAGE 123>>>

4.4 Detailed stellar models 103
important results which follow from detailed stellar structure models. We saw
in§3.4 that more massive stars are more luminous and hotter, i.e. both their
surfaces and central regions are hotter than surfaces and central regions respec-
tively of less massive stars. It should be clear from Figure 4.5 that the CNO cycle
must be the main hydrogen burning process for more massive stars, whereas
theppchain is the main hydrogen burning process for less massive stars (up
to stars slightly heavier than the Sun). From the exponential factors in (4.25)
and (4.27), it follows that εCNO is a much more rapidly increasing function
of temperature than εpp. As a result, the CNO cycle in the core of a massive
star tries to create a steep temperature gradient. A steep temperature gradientis likely to violate the Schwarzschild stability condition (3.21), giving rise to
convection. Detailed calculations show that the massive stars have convectivecores, whereas the cores of less massive stars are stable against convection. Inthe case of less massive stars, the temperature in the outer layers just belowthe surface is less than the temperature in the outer layers of more massive
stars. A look at Kramers’s law (2.79) andFigure 2.8 should convince the reader
that the opacity should be higher in the outer layers of less massive stars. If
the energy ﬂux were to be carried by radiative transfer, it follows from (3.16)
that the temperature gradient will have to be steep if the opacity was high.
Again we expect the Schwarzschild condition (3.21) to be violated and the
energy ﬂux to be carried by convection in the regions where opacity is high.
To sum up, more massive stars have convective cores surrounded by stableenvelopes, whereas less massive stars have convective envelopes surrounding
stable cores.
It follows from the standard solar model that the Sun has a stable core up to
a radius of about 0.7 R
⊙, beyond which the temperature gradient is unstable and
heat is transported by convection. This theoretical conclusion is corroborated
by high-quality photographs of the solar surface like the one in Figure 4.6 .
This photograph really gives the impression that we are looking at the top ofa layer of convecting ﬂuid. Since the upcoming hot gases are brighter and the
downgoing cold gases are darker, we get the granular pattern which changes in
a few minutes.
One of the main triumphs of stellar structure theory is that it can account
for various properties of the stars on the main sequence (mass–luminosity
relation and colour–magnitude relation). We saw in §3.4 that even fairly crude
arguments based on the stellar structure equations give us a reasonable idea
how these relations arise. However, apart from explaining these relations, stellarstructure theory has led to very detailed stellar models constructed by many
theorists over the years. Is there some way to test if these detailed theoretical
stellar models are indeed close to reality? In other words, do densities, tem-peratures and pressures vary in the interiors of stars exactly in accordance withthese theoretical stellar models? Two recent developments described below give
us conﬁdence that the standard solar model describes the interior of the Sun

<<<PAGE 124>>>

104 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.6 A photograph of the solar surface showing the granulation pattern due to
convection (photographed with the Vacuum Tower Telescope of the Kippenheuer
Institut located in Tenerife). Courtesy: W. Schmidt.
extremely well and probably the same is true for theoretical models of stars with
other masses.
4.4.1 Helioseismology
This subject, which is the study of solar oscillations, began when Leighton,
Noyes and Simon (1962) discovered that the surface of the Sun is con-
tinuously oscillating with periods of the order of a few minutes. Weknow that an air column in a pipe vibrates only at some eigenfrequen-cies. A careful analysis of the solar oscillations revealed the existence of
many discrete frequencies. It became clear that the observed oscillations
are essentially superpositions of many modes with discrete eigenfrequen-cies. By now several thousands of eigenfrequencies have been measured veryaccurately.
The eigenfrequencies of an air column depend on the length of the column
and the sound speed inside it, since sound waves travel back and forth inside thecolumn to set up the standing modes. Similarly, the eigenmodes of the Sun arecaused by sound waves (we would call them ‘sound waves’ even though their
frequencies are usually outside the audible range) which interfere constructively
after passing through and around the Sun. Since different modes go up todifferent depths in the interior of the Sun, the analysis of many modes together

<<<PAGE 125>>>

4.4 Detailed stellar models 105
Fig. 4.7 The difference between the density inferred from helioseismology and the
density calculated from the standard solar model (divided by the density), as a function
of the solar radius. From Chitre and Antia (1999). ( c/circlecopyrtIndian Academy of Sciences.
Reproduced with permission from Current Science .)
tells us how the sound speed varies with depth in the interior of the Sun. The
sound speed is given by
cs=/radicalBigg
γP
ρ(4.29)
(see §8.3). Once sound speeds at different depths are inferred from helioseis-
mology, one can use (4.29) to determine the density as a function of depth inside
the Sun. Figure 4.7 shows how the density, inferred from helioseismology and
calculated from the standard model, differ from each other. The difference is
considerably less than 2% at all depths. Thus helioseismology has veriﬁed the
standard solar model to a very high degree of accuracy.
4.4.2 Solar neutrino experiments
We believe that energy inside stars is produced by nuclear fusion, because that
is the most satisfactory theoretical idea we have been able to come up with.However, we saw in §3.4 and §3.5 that many aspects of observational data
can be explained to a reasonable extent without any detailed knowledge of the
energy generation process. So, can we have an independent experimental check
that nuclear reactions are really taking place inside stars? The nuclear reactionstaking place in the interior of the Sun are listed in (4.20)–(4.24). It may be noted

<<<PAGE 126>>>

106 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
that a neutrino is a by-product in many of the reactions. Since neutrinos interact
with matter only through the weak interaction, most of the neutrinos created atthe centre of the Sun would come out without interacting with the material of the
Sun at all. Thus, at the Earth, we expect a ﬂux of neutrinos directly coming from
the centre of the Sun. Detecting this ﬂux of neutrinos is a sure way of conﬁrmingthat nuclear reactions are indeed taking place in the centre of the Sun. In the1960s the famous ﬁrst solar neutrino experiment began ( Davis, Harmer and
Hoffman, 1968). The ﬂux of neutrinos was detected, but the experimentally
measured ﬂux was found to be about one-third of what was theoretically pre-dicted. Let us take a more detailed look at the solar neutrino experiment.
We take stock of the nuclear reactions which produce neutrinos. In the ﬁrst
reaction of (4.23),
7Be gives rise to a neutrino besides a nucleus7Li. Since
there are only two end products, the conservations of momentum and energyeasily show that each of the product particles should have a speciﬁc value ofenergy. Actually, the
7Be neutrino can have two discrete energies: 0.38 MeV
and 0.86 MeV . There are two other important reactions producing neutrinos: (i)the ﬁrst reaction of (4.20) and (ii) the second reaction of (4.24). We would refer
to these neutrinos as ppneutrinos and
8B neutrinos respectively. In both these
cases, the neutrino is one of the three end products. So it is possible for the
neutrino to have a distribution of energy. The ppneutrinos have energy in the
range 0–0.4 MeV , whereas the8B neutrinos have the energy range 0–15 MeV .
Figure 4.8 shows the spectrum of neutrinos theoretically predicted by the stan-
dard solar model. It should be noted that the vertical axis is logarithmic andthe ﬂux of
8B neutrinos is several orders smaller than the ﬂux of ppneutrinos.
The ﬂux of8B neutrinos depends sensitively on the solar model, since these
neutrinos are produced in a reaction in the pp3 branch. This branch becomes
more important if the temperature is higher. In a different solar model with the
central temperature lower than what is predicted by the standard model, the8B
neutrino ﬂux can be considerably less. On the other hand, the ppneutrinos come
from the main nuclear reaction. The luminosity of the Sun ﬁxes the number of
reactions taking place per unit time and determines the ppneutrino ﬂux. The
value of this ﬂux, therefore, is independent of the solar model used.
Since neutrinos interact so weakly with matter, it is not easy to detect them.
The pioneering experiment of Davis used the following reaction
37Cl+ν→37Ar+e−, (4.30)
for which the threshold neutrino energy is 0.814 MeV , as indicated in Figure 4.8 .
So only the8B neutrinos can produce this reaction. A huge tank of the cleaning
ﬂuid C 2Cl4was placed deep underground in a gold mine, to cut down the
disturbances expected at the terrestrial surface. Neutrinos are the only particles
which penetrated to this depth and occasionally interacted with a37Cl nucleus
to produce37Ar. Since37Ar is radioactive, one could estimate the number

<<<PAGE 127>>>

4.4 Detailed stellar models 107
Fig. 4.8 The expected spectrum of the solar neutrino ﬂux, based on the standard solar
model. The detection ranges of the different experiments are indicated. Adapted from
Bahcall (1999).
of37Ar nuclei produced from the number of radioactive decays and thereby
ﬁnd the solar neutrino ﬂux. A convenient unit to express the neutrino ﬂux
measurement is SNU (Solar Neutrino Units), deﬁned as 10−36interactions per
target atom per second. The chlorine experiment of Davis has ﬁxed the ﬂuxto a value 2.56 ±0.23 SNU on the basis of 25 years of operation, whereas
the theoretical value predicted by the standard solar model is 7 .7±1.2S N U
(Bahcall ,1999). For many years, Davis’s experiment was the only solar neutrino
experiment and one possible explanation of the discrepancy was that the centraltemperature of the Sun could be less than what is predicted by the standard solar
model. Other neutrino experiments were planned to settle this question.
Two experiments in Japan – Kamiokande and SuperKamiokande – used
pure water, in which neutrinos with energy above 7 MeV can scatter elec-
trons to high velocities which produce Cerenkov radiation. Again only the
8B neutrinos could be detected and the ﬂux was found to be half of what
was theoretically predicted. However, using an array of Cerenkov detectors, itwas possible to ascertain the direction from which the neutrinos were comingand to show for the ﬁrst time that neutrinos were really coming from the Sun
(Hirata et al. ,1990).
It became of utmost importance to detect the low-energy ppneutrinos, since
the predicted theoretical ﬂux is independent of the solar model. Low-energy
neutrinos induce the following reaction in gallium
71Ga+ν→71Ge+e−. (4.31)

<<<PAGE 128>>>

108 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Hence one can use gallium as a detector of ppneutrinos. Two experiments using
gallium – GALLEX (Anselmann et al., 1995) and SAGE (Abdurashitov et al.,
1996) – have given the rate of 73 ±5 SNU, whereas the theoretical prediction
from the standard solar model is 129 ±8S N U( Bahcall ,1999). Although there
is virtually no uncertainty in the predicted ﬂux of ppneutrinos, gallium detectors
detect neutrinos from other reactions as well, giving rise to the uncertainty in
the theoretical ﬂux.
The results of the various solar neutrino experiments taken together left
little doubt that something must be happening to a part of the solar neutrinoﬂux so that a part is not detected by the detectors on the Earth. We know thatthere are three kinds of neutrinos: the electron neutrino, the muon neutrino and
the tau neutrino. If neutrinos have non-zero mass, then it can be shown that it
is possible for one type of neutrino to get spontaneously converted into othertypes. Such neutrino oscillations have been conﬁrmed recently by the SudburyNeutrino Observatory (Ahmad et al., 2002). The nuclear reactions in the Sun
produce electron neutrinos and all the solar neutrino experiments also detectelectron neutrinos only. Presumably, during the ﬂight from the Sun to the Earth,some of the electron neutrinos get converted into the other types and are notdetected in the solar neutrino experiments. This is now believed to be the reason
why the measured ﬂux is less than what is theoretically predicted.
4.5 Stellar evolution
We pointed out in §4.3 that a main-sequence star is expected to generate energy
steadily as long as hydrogen in the core is converted into helium. The luminosity
or the surface temperature of the star does not change much during this phasewhen it lies on the main sequence. Eventually, the hydrogen in the core of the
star is exhausted. What then happens to the star? This is the central question
of stellar evolution. Unfortunately, the only way of answering this questionis through very detailed numerical computations. Nothing much can be doneanalytically or on the basis of general arguments. Stellar evolution is a very
important topic for the professional astrophysicist and very large numbers of
detailed computations have been done by many groups on this subject. Thepicture which emerges from these computations is quite complicated in itsdetails. A star evolves through many very different stages. Also, stars of differ-
ent masses evolve very differently. To a physicist who is not interested in very
detailed astrophysical phenomenology, stellar evolution often appears to be amessy, confusing and unattractive subject. Since the emphasis of this book hasbeen on those astrophysical topics which are of interest to physicists, we refrain
from giving a detailed account of stellar evolution. There is another reason for
not getting into the details of the subject. The author of this book does not claimto have any particular insight into this subject. Instead of reading an account

<<<PAGE 129>>>

4.5 Stellar evolution 109
by this author, the readers will do much better to read the excellent reviews
ofIben (1967, 1974) or the relevant chapters from the book by Kippenhahn
and Weigert (1990, Ch. 31–34). The groups of Iben and Kippenhahn have been
responsible for some of the most thorough calculations of stellar evolution inthe last few decades. For a relatively non-technical but superbly written accountof the subject, see Tayler (1994, Ch. 6). We describe below only some of the
salient features of stellar evolution.
Once hydrogen is exhausted in the stellar core, not enough energy is gener-
ated there to balance the inward pull of gravity. As a result, the core of the starstarts shrinking and the gravitational potential energy released in the processgenerates heat, as suggested in the Kelvin–Helmholtz theory ( §3.2.2). We know
from the Kelvin–Helmholtz theory that the core would get hotter in this process.This has two important consequences.
(1) Heavier elements undergo nuclear fusion at higher temperatures, since
a stronger Coulomb barrier has to be overcome. When the core becomes
sufﬁciently hot, helium starts burning to produce carbon, halting the Kelvin–
Helmholtz contraction. When helium is exhausted, the same cycle repeats, untilthe core becomes hot enough for the next nuclear fuel to burn. In very heavystars, the core eventually ends up being iron, which has the most strongly
bound nuclei. On the other hand, for light stars, the core temperature may never
become high enough (before the electron degeneracy pressure halts the gravita-tional contraction) even for helium burning, so that the core remains a heliumcore. Very massive stars go through a complicated phase when different nuclear
fuels burn in different spherical shells of the star with different temperatures.
(2) The excess heat produced in the Kelvin–Helmholtz contraction of the
core inﬂates the outer layers of the star. Hence the star can bloat up to a hugesize, while its luminosity does not change that much, so that its surface tem-
perature drops. This causes the position of the star in the HR diagram to moveaway from the main sequence and follow the trajectory shown in Figure 4.9 .
Thus the star ends up being a red giant. Detailed computations show that the
trajectories of massive stars can be even more complicated than the trajectory
sketched in this ﬁgure, since the position of the star in the HR diagram changeswhenever a new nuclear fuel is ignited in the core of the star. Figure 4.10
shows theoretical trajectories of stars of different masses based on detailed
computations. Whenever a new nuclear fuel is ignited, there is a tendency of
the trajectory proceeding back towards the main sequence. It may be noted thatthe trajectories never move towards the right of the HR diagram beyond a certainregime, since it was shown by Hayashi (1961) that stellar models lying too far
on the right side of the HR diagram would be unstable and there would be aforbidden region there within which no stars can lie.
Eventually all nuclear fuels in the core that could be ignited at the prevailing
conditions are exhausted and no more nuclear energy is produced to halt the
gravitational contraction. If the mass of the core is less than a critical mass,

<<<PAGE 130>>>

110 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.9 A schematic trajectory of a star in the HR diagram. From Longair (1994,
p. 31), after a ﬁgure of Mihalas and Binney (1981).
then gravity inside it can be balanced by electron degeneracy pressure (to be
discussed in §5.2) when the density rises to sufﬁciently high values. Then the
core may stop shrinking any more. In such a situation, the bloated envelope ofthe star also cannot persist too long. There are various mass loss mechanisms
by which a large part of the outer envelope may be lost – either steadily or
more violently, as we discuss in the next two sections. Any remaining partof the envelope may again settle on the core, so that we ﬁnally may have acompact star, which has a hot white surface initially and then gradually cools.
Figure 4.9 shows the trajectory of the star as it evolves to become a white
dwarf. Most stellar evolution codes fail to predict very reliable trajectories in
the HR diagram in this phase, because many aspects of the theory are stillrather ill-understood. As we shall see in §5.3, the mass limit of white dwarfs
is about 1 .4M
⊙. However, considerably more massive stars also eventually may
end up as white dwarfs by losing a large part of the mass. If the ﬁnal massremains larger than this mass limit, then the other possible ﬁnal conﬁgurationsare neutron stars and black holes, to be discussed in the next chapter.
4.5.1 Evolution in binary systems
A signiﬁcant fraction of all stars are estimated to be in binary systems. If itis a close binary with the two stars very near each other, then their evolutions

<<<PAGE 131>>>

4.5 Stellar evolution 111
5
15 M
9 M
5 M
3 M
2.25 M
1.5 M
M4
Main sequence
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
4.4 4.2 4.0
log (temperature, K)3.8 3.6log L 
L 
Fig. 4.10 Theoretical trajectories in HR diagram of stars of different masses, based
on detailed computations. From Longair (1994, p. 33), after a ﬁgure of Mihalas and
Binney (1981).
can differ in important ways from the evolution of isolated stars. We shall see
in§5.5 and §5.6 that the topic of binary evolution is of great signiﬁcance in
understanding many astrophysical phenomena. We, therefore, make some briefremarks on the binary evolution problem.
The two stars in a binary system revolve around their common centre of
mass, with an angular velocity denoted by /Omega1. In a frame of reference rotating
with/Omega1, the two stars will be at rest. The force acting on a particle at rest in this
frame will be the gravitational attractions of the two stars plus the centrifugalforce. The effective potential will be given by
/Phi1=−GM
1
r1−GM 2
r2−1
2/Omega12s2, (4.32)
where r1andr2are the distances of the particle from the centres of the two
stars, whereas sis the distance from the rotation axis passing through the centre

<<<PAGE 132>>>

112 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.11 Equipotential surfaces of two stars rotating around a common centre of mass,
in the rotating frame of reference.
of mass. Figure 4.11 shows some of the equipotential surfaces in a typical case.
The surface of a star should be an equipotential surface, if we want to ensure
that there are no unbalanced horizontal forces at the stellar surface. Each of the
stars should extend up to some equipotential surface.
We notice in Figure 4.11 that equipotential surfaces near any one of the stars
go around that star alone. On the other hand, the equipotential surfaces far awaysurround both the stars. There is a critical surface made with the equipotential
surfaces around the two stars touching at a point L. This point is called the inner
Lagrange point , whereas the critical surface is known as the Roche lobe .W h e n
one of the stars becomes a red giant, its surface may bloat up to the Roche
lobe, after which the gas from the surface should start falling into the other
star through the inner Lagrange point. We shall discuss some consequences ofbinary mass transfer in §5.5 and§5.6. Such a mass transfer can lead to varieties
of complicated situations. The more massive star of the binary ﬁnishes its life
on the main sequence ﬁrst and becomes a red giant. If it succeeds in transferring
a signiﬁcant amount of mass to the other star, then this other star may becomemore massive and may start evolving faster.
4.6 Mass loss from stars. Stellar winds
When a star becomes a red giant, the gravitational attraction at its inﬂatedsurface becomes much smaller than that at an ordinary stellar surface. Thisreduces the star’s ability to hold on to the material on its surface and the surface
material may keep escaping. Even in the case of an ordinary star like the Sun,
material is continuously escaping from its corona in the form of a ﬂow knownas the solar wind. Let us consider why this happens.

<<<PAGE 133>>>

4.6 Mass loss from stars. Stellar winds 113
Although the temperature of the solar surface is about 6000 K, the corona
has a much higher temperature of the order of a million degrees. An elementary
discussion of some possible reasons for this high temperature of the corona will
be given in §8.9. Before the discovery of the solar wind, the corona was believed
to be in static equilibrium. We reproduce below a simple but famous derivation
byParker (1958), showing that a hydrostatic solution of the corona leads to
inconsistencies. Although the corona appears fairly non-spherical, one can try
to construct a ﬁrst approximate model of the corona by assuming spherical sym-
metry so that quantities like density and pressure can be regarded as functionsof radius ralone. Since the corona has very little mass, the gravitational ﬁeld in
the corona can be regarded as an inverse-square ﬁeld created by the mass of the
SunM
⊙. The hydrostatic equation (3.2) applied to the corona becomes
dP
dr=−GM⊙
r2μmH
κBP
T, (4.33)
w h e r ew eh a v em a d eu s eo f (3.23) to eliminate ρ.
Without bothering about what heats the corona, we shall assume that the
heat is produced in the lower layers of the corona so that outer regions of the
corona can be modelled by taking a boundary condition that T=T0at some
radius r=r0near the base of the corona. This is somewhat like calculating the
temperature distribution in a metal rod with one end heated in a furnace. If thetemperature of the furnace is given as a boundary condition, then the problemcan be solved without knowing whether the furnace is heated by charcoal, gas or
electricity. In the tenuous gas of the corona, conduction is the main mode of heat
transport. In steady state, we expect that the same heat ﬂux will pass throughsuccessive spherical surfaces in the outer corona. Let us consider a sphericalsurface at radius r. The heat ﬂux through unit area of this surface is given by
K(dT/dR),w h e r e Kis the thermal conductivity. Hence the heat ﬂux through
the whole spherical surface is
4πr
2KdT
dr,
which should be a constant for different r. It follows from the kinetic theory of
plasmas that the thermal conductivity Kof a plasma goes as the 5 /2p o w e ro f
temperature (see, for example, Choudhuri, 1998, §13.5). Hence we have
r2T5/2dT
dr=constant, (4.34)
of which the solution is
T=T0/parenleftBigr0
r/parenrightBig2/7
(4.35)

<<<PAGE 134>>>

114 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
satisfying the boundary conditions that T=T0atr=r0andT=0 at inﬁnity.
Substituting for Tin(4.33) from (4.35),w eg e t
dP
P=−GM⊙μmH
κBT0r2/7
0dr
r12/7,
of which the solution satisfying P=P0atr=r0is
P=P0exp/bracketleftbigg7GM⊙μmH
5κBT0r0/braceleftbigg/parenleftBigr0
r/parenrightBig5/7
−1/bracerightbigg/bracketrightbigg
. (4.36)
The surprising thing to note is that the pressure has a non-zero asymptotic value
asrgoes to inﬁnity. It is not possible to obtain a solution of the problem such
that both PandTare zero at inﬁnity. The asymptotic value of Pat inﬁnity is
much larger than the typical value of the pressure of the interstellar medium.
What is the signiﬁcance of this non-zero pressure at inﬁnity? Parker (1958)
concluded correctly that the hot solar corona could be in static equilibrium onlyif some appropriate pressure is applied at inﬁnity to stop it from expanding.Since there is nothing to contain the corona by applying the necessary pressure,
Parker (1958) suggested that the outer parts of the corona must be expanding in
the form of solar wind. The solar wind was detected from spacecraft observa-
tions just a few years after Parker’s bold prediction. Parker (1958) worked out
a detailed hydrodynamic model of the solar wind as well, which we shall not
discuss in this book. If the Sun were surrounded by a gas cloud with pressure
larger than the pressure at inﬁnity needed to maintain hydrostatic equilibrium,then we would have an inﬂow of gas into the Sun. Such a process is calledaccretion. The theory of spherical accretion was worked out by Bondi (1952).
It is basically the reverse of a spherical wind (see Choudhuri, 1998, §6.8).
The solar wind is an example of what is called a thermally driven wind. It
is caused by the high temperature of the corona, which makes it difﬁcult forgravity to hold on to the gas. There are other mechanisms of driving winds. We
pointed out in §3.6.1 that the radiation force in the outer atmosphere of a very
massive star may become comparable to gravity. This may cause a radiatively
driven wind. If a star is rotating very fast, that may lead to a centrifugallydriven wind. The Sun loses only about 10
−14M⊙yr−1due to the solar wind.
Because of the weak gravity at the surface of a red giant, often red giants havemuch stronger winds. It is possible for a star to lose a signiﬁcant fraction ofits mass while passing through the red giant phase. A dramatic conﬁrmation ofmass loss comes from the observations of what are called planetary nebulae .
Figure 4.12 shows a planetary nebula. Through the low-resolution telescopes of
earlier times, a planetary nebula looked somewhat like a planet. We now knowthat a planetary nebula is essentially the outer shell of a star which has beenblown off. At the centre of a planetary nebula, we usually ﬁnd the hot core of
the star, which is eventually expected to become a white dwarf. There is an even
more violent mass loss mechanism, a supernova, which we discuss now.

<<<PAGE 135>>>

4.7 Supernovae 115
Fig. 4.12 The Ring Nebula, a well-known planetary nebula, photographed with the
Hubble Space Telescope. Courtesy: NASA and Space Telescope Science Institute.
4.7 Supernovae
Chinese astronomers recorded that in the year 1054 a star in the Taurus constel-
lation became so bright that it was visible during daytime. Figure 4.13 shows
what a modern telescope ﬁnds in that spot of the sky. We see a luminous
gas shell, known as the Crab Nebula because of its crab-like appearance. Bycomparing photographs taken at intervals of a few years, one easily ﬁnds that the
shell is increasing in size and a simple backward extrapolation suggests that this
shell must have started from a very small size around 1054. Presumably, whatthe Chinese astronomers recorded was the explosion of a star which createdtoday’s Crab Nebula. Statistical estimates suggest that there should be about
30 such supernova explosions in our Galaxy in every 1000 years. However, we
are able to see only a very small fraction of our Galaxy in visible light, as weshall discuss in §6.1.3. Tycho and Kepler carefully studied two supernovae in
our Galaxy seen in the years 1572 and 1604 respectively. No supernova has
been observed in our Galaxy after the invention of the telescope! However, a
supernova was seen in 1987 in the Large Magellanic Cloud, which is a compan-ion to our Galaxy at a distance of about 55 kpc. Christened as SN 1987A, this

<<<PAGE 136>>>

116 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.13 The Crab Nebula, the remnant of the supernova seen from the Earth in
1054. Photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope. Courtesy: NASA, ESA, J. Hester
and A. Loll.
was the most thoroughly studied supernova in the history of astronomy and has
considerably increased our knowledge about supernovae. The energy involved
in a typical supernova explosion is estimated to be about 1045J.
By studying many supernovae, astronomers have concluded that supernovae
can be divided into two types: Type I supernovae and Type II supernovae,
which have certain different characteristics. These two classes are divided into
some subclasses, but we shall not get into those details here. Amongst Type I
supernovae, we shall conﬁne our attention to the subclass Type Ia. All TypeIa supernovae appear almost identical. They reach exactly the same maximumintrinsic luminosity and afterwards their luminosities also decrease in exactly
the same way. On the other hand, the Type II supernovae show some variations
from one supernova to the other. We summarize below our current ideas of thephysical mechanisms which trigger these two types of supernovae. The readersshould be warned to take these theoretical ideas as provisional and not yet
completely established.
Any model of Type Ia supernovae should explain why they always look
almost identical. Suppose a white dwarf is in a close binary system. When its

<<<PAGE 137>>>

4.7 Supernovae 117
companion becomes a red giant, it is possible for a mass transfer to take place
onto the white dwarf, as discussed in §4.5.1. We shall show in §5.3 that the
maximum mass which a white dwarf can have is the Chandrasekhar mass of
about 1.4 M⊙, beyond which it is not possible for electron degeneracy pressure
to balance gravity. Suppose the mass transfer increases the mass of the white
dwarf just beyond the Chandrasekhar mass. Then gravity cannot be balancedany more and the white dwarf star may have a catastrophic explosion, which
probably disrupts the star completely without leaving any remnant behind. If
all the Type Ia supernovae are produced in this way, by the explosions of whitedwarfs of identical mass under identical conditions, then it is certainly expectedthat all these supernovae should appear identical.
Type II supernovae are believed to take place in much more massive stars.
This is inferred from the fact that they usually take place in regions where starformation has taken place recently and massive stars, which are short-lived,are found only in such regions. When the core of the massive star completely
runs out of all nuclear fuels, it starts shrinking until the core density becomes
comparable to the density inside an atomic nucleus ( ≈10
17kg m−3). We shall
show in §5.4 that the neutron degeneracy pressure may balance gravity at
such densities. When this happens, the rapidly shrinking core suddenly stops
shrinking any more. The surrounding material falling inward with the core gets
bounced back when the collapse of the core is suddenly halted. Presumablythe Type II supernova is caused by the explosive bouncing off of the envelopesurrounding the newly formed neutron star core.
The variation of the supernova luminosity with time is called its light curve.
Figure 4.14 shows the light curve of SN 1987A, which was a Type II supernova.
A large portion of the light curve appears like an exponential decay (note that
the vertical axis in Figure 4.14 is logarithmic) with a half-life of about 77 days.
Now
56Co, which is a radioactive isotope of cobalt, decays into56Fe with a
half-life of 77.1 days. It is believed that copious amounts of56Co are produced
in a Type II supernova and it is the decay of this which is responsible for thelight curve.
We pointed out in §4.3 that nuclear reactions in the interiors of very massive
stars may convert the core into iron, which is the maximally bound nucleus, so
that no more nuclear burning is possible after its formation. How are the heavier
elements produced then? Our current view is that the elements heavier than iron
are synthesized in Type II supernovae, in a way suggested in a classic paperbyBurbidge, Burbidge, Fowler and Hoyle (1957). Let us summarize the main
ideas below. It is possible for an electron and a proton to combine to form a
neutron:
p+e
−→n+ν. (4.37)
However, since the mass of a neutron is more than the combined mass of a
proton and an electron, this reaction cannot proceed unless some extra energy is

<<<PAGE 138>>>

118 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.14 The light curve of SN 1987A. The dashed lines indicate how the number
densities of the radioactively decaying nuclei56Co and57Co would decline with time.
From Chevalier (1992). ( c/circlecopyrtNature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from
Nature.)
supplied. In a supernova explosion, electrons suddenly become highly energetic
and it becomes possible for the above reaction to proceed, producing largenumbers of neutrons and neutrinos. Now consider a nucleus of mass Aand
charge Z. The electrostatic repulsion of a heavy nucleus is much stronger than
that of a light nucleus. So another charged particle cannot easily come near theheavy nucleus. But the uncharged neutron can come close and get absorbed byit, increasing the mass of the nucleus to A+1. It is well known that nuclei
too massive for their charge Ztend to be unstable to β-decay. If the nucleus
emits a β-particle, we end up with a nucleus of mass A+1 and charge Z+1
starting from a nucleus of mass Aand charge Z. Heavier nuclei can be built up in
this way.
Our solar system has many elements heavier than iron which, as far as
our present understanding goes, could only be synthesized in a supernova.Presumably there was a very massive star in our neighbourhood before the solarsystem formed. This massive star must have ended its life in a supernova and
the debris of this supernova with heavy elements got mixed with interstellar gas,
out of which the solar system formed.
Our preceding discussion suggests that many neutrinos should be produced
by reaction (4.37) when the core collapses violently to trigger a Type II super-
nova. Evidence for this was found when 20 neutrinos from SN 1987A weredetected by two experiments – one of them being Kamiokande which we havediscussed in §4.4.2 in connection with solar neutrinos. The ﬂux estimated from

<<<PAGE 139>>>

4.8 Stellar rotation and magnetic ﬁelds 119
these neutrinos suggests that a very major portion of the gravitational potential
energy lost (in the core collapse to produce a neutron star) must be carried awayby the neutrinos. The arrival times of the neutrinos were spread over 12 s. If all
the neutrinos were emitted at the same time and had zero mass, then they would
have all travelled at speed cand should have arrived simultaneously. On the
other hand, if the neutrinos had mass, then the less energetic neutrinos wouldhave travelled slightly slower and one gets an upper bound of 20 eV for the
neutrino mass from the observed spread in arrival times. The reader is asked to
work this out in Exercise 4.6 . This is an upper bound, since it is possible that
the neutrinos were emitted at slightly different times and then travelled at thesame speed.
4.8 Stellar rotation and magnetic ﬁelds
In our discussion of stellar structure, we have assumed spherical symmetry.There are two factors which could cause departures from spherical symmetry ofa star – rotation and magnetic ﬁeld. We know quite a lot about the rotation and
magnetic ﬁeld of our nearest star – the Sun. Within the last few years, our knowl-
edge about the rotation and magnetic ﬁeld of other stars has also increased. Fornormal stars, the effect of rotation or magnetic ﬁeld is usually not enough tocause appreciable departures from spherical symmetry, which is the case for
the Sun. Even when stellar rotation or the stellar magnetic ﬁeld may not be
important from the point of view of stellar structure, they are certainly intriguingastrophysical effects which can have many other consequences. Before leavingthe subject of stellar astrophysics, here we provide a brief summary of what we
know about solar rotation and magnetic ﬁelds.
Solar rotation
It was known for a long time that the Sun does not rotate like a solid body. Theequator of the Sun rotates faster than the pole, taking about 25 days to go around
the rotation axis, whereas a point near the pole would take more than 30 daysto go around. It has now become possible to map the distribution of angularvelocity in the interior of the Sun with the help of helioseismology, which was
introduced brieﬂy in §4.4.1. We basically measure the eigenfrequencies of many
modes of oscillation in the Sun. Because of the spherical geometry, we expect
that the velocity associated with a normal mode must be of the form
v(t,r,θ,φ) =exp(−iω
nlmt)ξnlm(r)Ylm(θ, φ), (4.38)
where Ylm(θ, φ) is a spherical harmonic. If the Sun were non-rotating, it can be
shown that ωnlmwould be independent of m. In other words, the eigenfunctions
with the same nandl, but different m, would have the same frequencies. But

<<<PAGE 140>>>

120 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.15 The contours of constant angular velocity inside the Sun, as obtained by
helioseismology. The contours are marked with rotation frequency in nHz. It may be
noted that frequencies of 340 nHz and 450 nHz correspond respectively to rotationperiods of 34.0 days and 25.7 days. Courtesy: J. Christensen-Dalsgaard and M. J.Thomson.
rotation causes frequencies with different mto be split ( Gough, 1978). We point
out the analogy from atomic physics that the energy levels of the hydrogen atom
for different mare degenerate in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld. But a magnetic
ﬁeld lifts this degeneracy and splits the levels. In exactly the same way, the
rotation of the Sun lifts the degeneracy of eigenfrequencies with different m.
The amount of splitting of a mode depends basically on the angular velocity in
the region where the mode has the largest amplitude. By studying the splittings
of different modes having the largest amplitudes in different regions of the Sun,one can then obtain a map of how the angular velocity varies in the interior of
the Sun. Figure 4.15 shows a map giving the distribution of angular velocity in
the interior of the Sun. The Sun has a convection zone from 0.7 R
⊙toR⊙, within
which the variations of angular velocity are conﬁned, with a radial gradient of
angular velocity at the bottom of the convection zone.
Solar magnetic ﬁelds
It has been known in the Western world from the time of Galileo that the Sunoften has dark spots on the surface. Hale (1908) discovered Zeeman splitting
in the spectra of sunspots, thereby concluding that sunspots are regions of

<<<PAGE 141>>>

4.8 Stellar rotation and magnetic ﬁelds 121
Fig. 4.16 A newly formed bipolar sunspot pair, in which one spot is fragmented. From
Zwaan (1985). ( c/circlecopyrtSpringer. Reproduced with permission from Solar Physics.)
concentrated magnetic ﬁeld of order 0.3 T. This is the ﬁrst time that somebody
conclusively established the existence of magnetic ﬁelds outside the Earth’s
environment. Often one ﬁnds two large sunspots lying side by side at nearlythe same solar latitude. Figure 4.16 shows a sunspot pair in which one sunspot
is actually broken into several fragments, which is often the case. Hale et al.
(1919) discovered that two sunspots in such a pair have opposite polarities,making up a magnetic bipole. They also found that these magnetic bipolesare oriented in opposite directions in the two hemispheres. Figure 4.17 is a
magnetogram image of the whole solar disk, where regions of positive polarity
are indicated by white and regions of negative polarity by black, the regions
without appreciable magnetic ﬁeld being represented in grey. One notes thatmost bipolar magnetic regions are roughly aligned parallel to the solar equator.In the magnetic bipolar regions in the northern hemisphere, one ﬁnds the posi-
tive polarity (white) to appear on the right side of the negative polarity (black).
This is reversed in the southern hemisphere, where white appears to the left ofblack. We shall discuss in §8.6 how one theoretically explains these remarkable
observations.
Even before it was realized that sunspots are regions of strong magnetic
ﬁelds, it was discovered that the number of sunspots on the solar surfaceincreases and decreases in a cyclic fashion, with a period of about 11 years.

<<<PAGE 142>>>

122 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
Fig. 4.17 A magnetogram picture of the full solar disk. The regions with positive and
negative polarities are respectively shown in white and black, with grey indicating
regions where the magnetic ﬁeld is weak. Courtesy: K. Harvey.
There is a phase in the cycle when not many sunspots are seen. Then sunspots
start appearing at around 40◦latitude. As time goes on, newer sunspots tend
to appear at lower and lower latitudes. This is clearly seen in the so-called
butterﬂy diagram ﬁrst introduced by Maunder (1904). Figure 4.18 shows a
butterﬂy diagram in which the horizontal axis is time. At any particular time,
those ranges of latitude (vertical axis) are marked where sunspots appear.The butterﬂy pattern results from the equatorward shift of the latitude zones
where sunspots are seen. Eventually one ﬁnds only very few sunspots near the
equator. Then the next cycle begins with sunspots appearing again around 40
◦
latitude. It is found that the polarities of bipolar sunspots get reversed from one11-year cycle to the next. In other words, if we had taken a magnetogram exactly
like Figure 4.17 about 11 years before or after the time when Figure 4.17 was
produced, then we would see black on the right side in the northern hemisphere
and white on the right side in the southern. It thus implies that the period of the

<<<PAGE 143>>>

4.9 Extrasolar planets 123
Fig. 4.18 The butterﬂy diagram showing the distribution of sunspots in latitude (vertical
axis) at different times (horizontal axis). Courtesy: K. Harvey.
solar cycle is actually 22 years, if we want the magnetic ﬁeld to come back to
the initial conﬁguration.
Astronomers have got evidence that many other stars have large starspots
and also magnetic cycles like the Sun. Why do stars have magnetic ﬁelds at alland what gives rise to the cyclic behaviour of the magnetic ﬁelds? In §8.7 we
shall give a qualitative introduction to the complex subject known as dynamo
theory which seeks to answer this question.
4.9 Extrasolar planets
The study of planetary motions played a key role in the historical developmentof astronomy. The study of physical characteristics of planets, however, hasnow become a branch of science quite distinct from astrophysics and is usuallyreferred to as planetary science. In this book, we do not get into a discussion
of planetary science, since the methods and concepts used in planetary scienceare quite different from those used in modern astrophysics. But there is onequestion connected with planets which has always excited astronomers: do otherSun-like stars also have planets? The direct detection of a planet even around
a nearby star is still extremely difﬁcult with today’s observing techniques. The
best chance of discovering extrasolar planets is through indirect methods. Forexample, if a sufﬁciently heavy planet (like Jupiter or heavier) revolves around

<<<PAGE 144>>>

124 Stellar astrophysics II: Nucleosynthesis and other advanced topics
a star in a nearby orbit, its gravitational attraction would make the star also go
in a circular or elliptical orbit around the common centre of mass. This wouldmake the radial velocity of the star with respect to us vary periodically with
time, which can be detected from the Doppler shifts of the star’s spectral lines.
While there have been several claims in the past for the discovery of extrasolarplanets, Mayor and Queloz (1995) are credited with the ﬁrst discovery which
is accepted by astronomers to be genuine and which ushered in an era of many
subsequent discoveries of extrasolar planets in very rapid succession. There are
a few hundred conﬁrmed detections at the time of writing this book and the listis growing rapidly.
As we pointed out in §3.6.1 and shall discuss in more detail in §8.3, stars
form due to gravitational collapse of gas clouds in the interstellar medium.Planetary systems are also believed to form as a part of this star formationprocess. So presumably the planets can throw some light as to how starsform. Astrophysicists have yet to ﬁgure out what clues the recently discovered
extrasolar planets give of the star formation process.
Exercises
4.1 Consider a nucleus of charge Z1eapproaching another nucleus of charge
Z2ewith the energy of relative motion equal to E. According to classical
physics, the nuclei should not be able to come closer than a distance r1
given by
E=1
4π/epsilon1 0Z1Z2e2
r1.
Using the WKB approximation of quantum mechanics, show that the tun-
nelling probability of the two nuclei coming within the range of nuclear forcesis given by
P∝exp/bracketleftBigg
−2/integraldisplay
r1
r0/braceleftbigg2m
/planckover2pi12/parenleftbigg1
4π/epsilon1 0Z1Z2e2
r−E/parenrightbigg/bracerightbigg1/2
dr/bracketrightBigg
,
where mis the reduced mass and r=r0is the inner edge of the potential bar-
rier at the nuclear surface. You can easily work out this integral by substituting
r=r1cos2θand assuming r1/r0/greatermuch1. Show that the ﬁnal result is (4.7).
4.2 For two protons, show that the argument of the exponential given in the
nuclear energy generation rate expression (4.19) becomes what is given in
(4.25) .
4.3 According to current solar models, the centre of the Sun has a temperature
of about 1.56 ×107K, a density of about 1.48 ×105kg m−3and a chemical

<<<PAGE 145>>>

Exercises 125
composition given by XH=0.64, XHe=0.34, XCNO=0.015. Estimate the
amount of energy that is generated per unit volume at the centre of the Sun due
to the ppchain and the CNO cycle.
4.4 Make a very rough estimate of the time that an acoustic wave propagating
radially inward in the Sun would take to go from one end of the Sun to the otherend.
4.5 Near the orbit of the Earth, the solar wind has a velocity of about 400 km
s
−1and contains about 10 protons per cm3. Assuming that the solar wind
always had these characteristics during the Sun’s lifetime of 4 .5×109yr,
estimate the fraction of mass the Sun would have lost in the solar wind during
its lifetime.
4.6 Neutrinos from Supernova 1987A which reached the Earth travelling a
distance of 55 kpc were found to have energies in the range 6–39 MeV . If the
spread of 12 s in arrival times was caused by neutrinos of different energiestravelling at different speeds, show that the neutrino mass cannot be much
more than about 20 eV .

<<<PAGE 146>>>



<<<PAGE 147>>>

5
End states of stellar collapse
5.1 Introduction
We have seen in the previous two chapters that the gravitational attraction inside
a normal star is balanced by the thermal pressure caused by the thermonuclearreactions taking place in the stellar interior. Eventually, however, the nuclear
fuel of the star is exhausted and there is no further source of thermal pressure
to balance gravity. We have pointed out in §4.5 that such a star keeps on
contracting – unless some kind of pressure other than thermal pressure is
eventually able to balance gravity again. The aim of this chapter is to discuss
the possible end conﬁgurations of stars which have no nuclear fuel left in them.
We have to make use of one very important property of Fermi particles.
In a unit cell of volume h
3in the six-dimensional position-momentum phase
space, there cannot be more than two Fermi particles (one with spin up and theother with spin down). The electrons inside the stellar matter make up a Fermigas, and when the density inside the contracting star becomes sufﬁciently high,this electron gas becomes ‘degenerate’. This means that the theoretical limit of
two particles per unit cell of phase space is almost reached. We shall show in
§5.2 that such a degenerate Fermi gas exerts what is known as the degeneracy
pressure. White dwarf stars discussed in §3.6 are believed to represent stellar
conﬁgurations in which the inward pull of gravity is balanced by the degeneracy
pressure of the electron gas. The structure of white dwarfs is discussed in
§5.3, where we derive the famous result that a white dwarf conﬁguration ispossible only if the mass of the star is less than the Chandrasekhar mass limit ofabout 1.4 M
⊙.
Another possible end conﬁguration of stars is the neutron star conﬁgura-
tion. As we shall show in §5.4, at very high densities electrons are forced to
combine with the nuclei to produce matter primarily consisting of neutrons.Since neutrons are also Fermi particles, a gas of neutrons also exerts degeneracy
pressure. A neutron star is a stellar conﬁguration in which gravity is balanced
by the neutron degeneracy pressure. Since the equation of state of matter at the
127

<<<PAGE 148>>>

128 End states of stellar collapse
very high densities prevailing inside neutron stars is not accurately known, the
structure of neutron stars is not understood as well as the structure of whitedwarfs. Neutron stars also have an upper limit of mass like white dwarfs. But
this mass limit is not known very precisely due to the uncertainties in our
knowledge of the equation of state. Most comprehensive calculations suggestthat this mass limit is not more than 2 M
⊙.
Although neutron stars were theoretically postulated in the 1930s soon after
the discovery of the neutron, they remained a theoretical curiosity for more thanthree decades. Pulsars were discovered in 1968 and were quickly identiﬁed to berotating neutron stars. The very important ﬁeld of observational investigationsof neutron stars is summarized in §5.5–5.6.
The initial mass of a star does not necessarily have to be less than the mass
limit of white dwarfs or neutron stars for the star to end up into one of these con-ﬁgurations. We have pointed out in §4.6–4.7 that a star can lose a considerable
part of its mass during the late phases of evolution – in the form of a steady wind
during the red giant phase, or through more drastic ejection mechanisms like
the shedding of the outer shell as a planetary nebula or a supernova explosion.From statistical studies of various kinds of stars, it is inferred that stars lessmassive than about 4 M
⊙eventually become white dwarfs, whereas stars with
initial masses in the range 4 M⊙to 10 M⊙are believed to end up as neutron stars,
typically after undergoing a supernova explosion (see, for example, Shapiro and
Teukolsky, 1983, §1.3). Stars with initial masses more than 10 M⊙probably
cannot shed enough mass to become white dwarfs or neutron stars. They have
to go on contracting until the gravitational attraction is so strong that even light
cannot escape. The physics of this black hole conﬁguration will be discussed in
§13.3. However, we shall make some comments on the observational evidence
for black holes in §5.6.
5.2 Degeneracy pressure of a Fermi gas
The pressure in a gas arises from the random motions of the particles consti-tuting the gas. If 4π f(p)p
2dpis the number of particles having momentum
between pand p+dp(assuming the distribution function to be isotropic),
whereas vis the velocity of a particle having momentum p, then the pressure P
of the gas is given by a standard expression in kinetic theory
P=1
3/integraldisplay
vpf(p)4πp2dp. (5.1)
The reader should be able to derive it easily by considering a unit area on thewall of the gas container, ﬁguring out the distribution of particles hitting this
area in unit time and keeping in mind that the momentum changes in the elasticcollisions provide the pressure (Exercise 5.1).

<<<PAGE 149>>>

5.2 Degeneracy pressure of a Fermi gas 129
For an ordinary gas, on substituting the Maxwellian distribution in (5.1),t h e
pressure is found to be given by nκBT,w h e r en is the number of particles per
unit volume (Exercise 5.1). The pressure of stellar material containing different
types of particles is given by (3.23). It is clear that this pressure, which arises
out of thermal motions of particles, should go to zero at T=0 – provided we
assume the validity of classical physics. However, when a gas of Fermi particles
is compressed to very high density, many of the particles are forced to remain in
non-zero momentum states even at T=0, thereby giving rise to the degeneracy
pressure. When stellar matter is compressed, electrons become degenerate much
before protons and other nuclei. The reason behind this is quite simple. If thekinetic energy p
2/2m is equally partitioned amongst different types of particles,
the lighter electrons are expected to have smaller momenta. Hence they occupya much smaller volume of the momentum space and consequently their numberdensity in this region of momentum space is higher than the correspondingnumber density of heavier particles. At a density which makes electrons degen-
erate, the heavier particles still remain non-degenerate (i.e. their phase space
occupancy remains well below the theoretical limit). Electrons which occupyreal space volume Vand have momenta in the range d
3pin momentum space
have 2 Vd3p/h3states in phase space available to them (two being due to the
two spin states). If d3pcorresponds to the shell between pand p+dp,t h e n
the number of states per unit volume within this shell is clearly 8 πp2dp/h3.
The occupancies of these states are given by the Fermi–Dirac statistics (see, forexample, Pathria ,1996, Chapter 8). To make life simple, we shall neglect the
ﬁnite-temperature effects and assume that all states below the Fermi momentum
p
Fare occupied, whereas all states above pFare unoccupied. Then the number
density neof electrons is given by
ne=/integraldisplaypF
08π
h3p2dp=8π
3h3p3
F. (5.2)
If all states between pand p+dpare occupied, then 8π p2dp/h3must equal
4πf(p)p2dp, implying that f(p)in(5.1) should be 2/ h3ifp<pFand 0 if
p>pF. Hence
P=8π
3h3/integraldisplaypF
0vp3dp. (5.3)
We now use the relativistic expression that the momentum of a particle is givenbyp=mγv,w h e r e γis the Lorentz factor (see, for example, Jackson, 1999,
§11.5). Then
v=p
mγ=pc2
E=pc2
/radicalbig
p2c2+m2c4. (5.4)

<<<PAGE 150>>>

130 End states of stellar collapse
On using (5.3) and (5.4), the pressure due to the degenerate electron gas is
ﬁnally given by
P=8π
3h3/integraldisplaypF
0p4c2
/radicalbig
p2c2+m2ec4dp. (5.5)
Our aim is to derive an equation of state connecting the pressure and density.
Protons and other heavier nuclei present in the stellar material contribute to
density, but not to pressure because they are non-degenerate. Let us ﬁrst ﬁndout the relation between the density ρand the electron number density n
e.I f
Xis the hydrogen mass fraction, then the number density of hydrogen atoms
(which are ionized and no longer exist in atomic form) is Xρ/mH. These atoms
contribute Xρ/mHelectrons per unit volume. A helium atom has atomic mass 4
and contributes two electrons, i.e. the number of electrons contributed is 0.5 peratomic mass unit. For heavier atoms also, the number of electrons contributed
is usually very close to 0.5 per atomic mass unit. In other words, for helium
and atoms heavier than helium, the number of electrons is half the numberof nucleons. In a unit volume of stellar matter, these atoms provide a mass(1−X)ρ, which corresponds to (1−X)ρ/m
Hnucleons. There are (1−X)ρ/
2mHcorresponding electrons. Hence the electron number density is given by
ne=Xρ
mH+(1−X)ρ
2mH=ρ
2mH(1+X).
We write this in the form
ne=ρ
μemH, (5.6)
where μeis the mean molecular weight of electrons given by
μe=2
1+X. (5.7)
From (5.2) and(5.6), it follows that the Fermi momentum pFis given by
pF=/parenleftbigg3h3ρ
8πμ emH/parenrightbigg1/3
. (5.8)
On evaluating the integral (5.5) with this expression of pF, we get the equation
of state relating Pandρ. Here we shall only consider the two extreme cases of
the electrons being non-relativistic and fully relativistic. The reader is asked towork out the general case in Exercise 5.2.
When the electrons are non-relativistic, we can write
/radicalBig
p2c2+m2ec4≈mec2

<<<PAGE 151>>>

5.2 Degeneracy pressure of a Fermi gas 131
so that (5.5) gives
P=8π
15h3mep5
F.
On substituting from (5.8),w eh a v e
P=K1ρ5/3, (5.9)
where K1is given by
K1=32/3
20π2/3h2
mem5/3
Hμ5/3
e=1.00×107
μ5/3e(5.10)
if we use SI units. The above non-relativistic equation of state for degenerate
electrons was derived by Fowler (1926) who was the ﬁrst person to realize that
gravity inside a white dwarf must be balanced by electron degeneracy pressure.
When the electrons are fully relativistic, we can write
/radicalBig
p2c2+m2ec4≈pc
so that (5.5) gives
P=2πc
3h3p4
F.
On substituting from (5.8),w eh a v e
P=K2ρ4/3, (5.11)
where K2is given by
K2=31/3
8π1/3hc
m4/3
Hμ4/3
e=1.24×1010
μ4/3e(5.12)
if we use SI units.
We now have (5.9) and(5.11) giving the two extreme limits of the equation
of state of degenerate stellar matter, whereas the ideal gas equation of state is
given by (3.23). One important question is: which equation of state should be
used when? For a particular combination of ρandT, one of the expressions
(3.23), (5.9) or(5.11) would be the most appropriate. In other words, if we
make a diagram by plotting Tversus ρ, regimes where different expressions of
pressure should be used would correspond to different regions in this diagram.On a boundary between two such regions in the Tversus ρplot, the two
different expressions for pressure valid on the two sides of the boundary shouldgive the same value. Figure 5.1 shows the diagram constructed in this way,
indicating the regions of validity of the ideal gas equation of state (3.23),t h e
non-relativistic degenerate equation of state (5.9) and the relativistic equation of
state (5.11). Blackbody radiation at temperature Texerts pressure (1/3) a
BT4

<<<PAGE 152>>>

132 End states of stellar collapse
Fig. 5.1 Different regions in a density–temperature plot in which different equations of
state hold. The dashed line indicates the run of density and temperature in the interior
of the Sun. Adapted from Kippenhahn and Weigert (1990, p. 130).
and this also has to be included in a complete treatment. Figure 5.1 also indicates
the region where the radiation pressure is going to be the dominant pressure. The
dashed line corresponds to the run of temperature and density inside the Sun,indicating that the ideal gas equation of state is completely adequate in dealingwith stars like the Sun.
5.3 Structure of white dwarfs. Chandrasekhar mass limit
It should be clear from the previous section that the equation of state of degen-erate matter relates pressure with density (i.e. it does not involve temperature).
Suppose we now want to calculate the structure of a star entirely made of
degenerate matter (such as a white dwarf). The equations (3.25) and(3.26) alone
sufﬁce to formulate the problem completely if Pis known as a function of ρ
alone. Out of the three unknown variables ρ,PandM
rappearing in these two
equations, one is no longer independent and the other two can be obtained bysolving these two equations. The remaining two equations of stellar structure,(3.27) and(3.28), become redundant. Constructing the model of a star made of
degenerate matter is, therefore, a mathematically simpler and cleaner problem
than the problem of constructing the model of a normal star. We turn to this
problem now. We can easily combine (3.25) and(3.26) into one single equation
by eliminating M
r:
1
r2d
dr/parenleftbiggr2
ρdP
dr/parenrightbigg
=− 4πGρ. (5.13)
Given an equation of state of the form P(ρ), we can easily integrate (5.13).

<<<PAGE 153>>>

5.3 Structure of white dwarfs 133
The two limiting equations of state (5.9) and(5.11) are both of the form
P=Kρ(1+1
n)(5.14)
with nequal to 3/2 and 3 respectively for the non-relativistic and fully rela-
tivistic cases. A relation like (5.14) between density and pressure is called a
polytropic relation . We now write the density inside the star in the form
ρ=ρcθn, (5.15)
where ρcis the density at the centre of the star and θis a new dimensionless
variable which clearly has to have the value 1 at the centre. Substituting (5.15)
into (5.14),w eg e t
P=Kρn+1
ncθn+1. (5.16)
We also introduce another dimensionless variable ξthrough
r=aξ, (5.17)
where adeﬁned as
a=⎡
⎣(n+1)Kρ1−n
nc
4πG⎤⎦1/2
(5.18)
has the dimension of length. On using (5.15), (5.16), (5.17) and(5.18), the basic
structure equation (5.13) reduces to
1
ξ2d
dξ/parenleftbigg
ξ2dθ
dξ/parenrightbigg
=−θn, (5.19)
which is known as the Lane–Emden equation (Homer Lane, 1869; Emden,
1907). If the material inside a star satisﬁes the polytropic relation, the structure
of the star can be found by solving the Lane–Emden equation. Since this is a
second-order equation, we need two boundary conditions to integrate it. Oneboundary condition is obviously
θ(ξ=0)=1. (5.20)
The other boundary condition comes from the consideration that we do not wanta cusp in the density at the centre of the star, which implies
/parenleftbiggdθ
dξ/parenrightbigg
ξ=0=0. (5.21)
It may be noted that the polytropic relation and the Lane–Emden equation
played an important role in the history of stellar structure research. Some of
the early pioneers like Emden (1907)a n d Eddington (1926) tried to obtain
insights into the structures of stars by assuming the polytropic relation (5.14)
to hold inside stars and then by solving the Lane–Emden equation. We know

<<<PAGE 154>>>

134 End states of stellar collapse
that such an approach gives only a very approximate model of a normal star.
For understanding the structures of white dwarfs, however, this is the standardapproach.
We now need to solve the Lane–Emden equation (5.19) subject to the two
boundary conditions (5.20) and(5.21). It is possible to ﬁnd analytical solutions
ifnhas the values 0, 1 or 5 (see Exercise 5.4). Solving the Lane–Emden
equation numerically for other values of nis fairly straightforward. If nis less
than 5, then θfalls to zero for a ﬁnite value of ξ, which we denote by ξ
1.W e
interpret this as the surface of the star, where density and pressure as given by(5.15) and(5.16) have to go to zero.
We now want to show that it is possible to draw important conclusions
without actually solving the Lane–Emden equation. Suppose we have a groupof stars made up of matter satisfying the polytropic equation of state (5.14) with
a particular value of n. Different stars in this group will have different values
ofρ
c. We expect that a star with a particular value of ρcwill have a particular
value of radius Rand a particular value of mass M. We now want to ﬁnd out
howρc,RandMare related to each other amongst the stars in our group. If
ξ1is the value of ξwhere θgoes to zero, then the physical radius of the star is
given by
R=aξ1.
Looking at the expression of aas given by (5.18), we conclude that
R∝ρ1−n
2nc, (5.22)
since all the other quantities appearing in the expression of Rare the same for
all members in our group of stars. The mass of the star is given by
M=/integraldisplayR
04πr2ρdr=4πa3ρc/integraldisplayξ1
0ξ2θndξ. (5.23)
Again the integral/integraltextξ1
0ξ2θndξis going to be the same for all the members in
our group of stars. Noting the dependence of aonρc,w eﬁ n d
M∝/parenleftbigg
ρ1−n
2nc/parenrightbigg3
ρc,
i.e.
M∝ρ3−n
2nc. (5.24)
We have noted that n=3/2 substituted into (5.14) gives the non-relativistic
equation of state (5.9). On putting n=3/2i n (5.22) and(5.24),w eg e t
R∝ρ−1/6
c,M∝ρ1/2
c,

<<<PAGE 155>>>

5.3 Structure of white dwarfs 135
Fig. 5.2 The variation of radius with mass for white dwarfs. The solid curve corre-
sponds to the full solution, where the dashed curve is obtained by using the non-
relativistic equation of state (5.9). This ﬁgure is adapted from Chandrasekhar (1984),
where the unit of radius l1used on the vertical axis is deﬁned.
which combine to give
R∝M−1/3. (5.25)
This is the very important mass–radius relation of white dwarfs within which
matter satisﬁes the non-relativistic equation of state (5.9). The dashed line in
Figure 5.2 shows how radius varies with mass when (5.9) is used to solve the
structure of the white dwarf. It is clear that white dwarfs of increasing mass aresmaller in size.
We now need to consider the case of the relativistic equation of state (5.11),
which follows from (5.14) on taking n=3. A very surprising result is that the
mass Mbecomes independent of ρ
con substituting n=3i n (5.24).I no t h e r
words, the mass of a star obeying the relativistic equation of state (5.11) has a
ﬁxed value and can be obtained from (5.23). On multiplying (5.19) byξ2and
integrating from ξ=0t oξ=ξ1,w eg e t
/integraldisplayξ1
0ξ2θndξ=−ξ2
1/parenleftbiggdθ
dξ/parenrightbigg
ξ=ξ1. (5.26)
The integral in (5.23) can thus be replaced by |ξ2
1θ/prime(ξ1)|, where the prime
denotes differentiation with respect to ξ. Additionally, we substitute the expres-
sion of aas given by (5.18) into (5.23) and then put the expression (5.12) in the

<<<PAGE 156>>>

136 End states of stellar collapse
place of K. This ﬁnally gives
MCh=√
6
32π/parenleftbigghc
G/parenrightbigg3/2/parenleftbigg2
μe/parenrightbigg2ξ2
1|θ/prime(ξ1)|
m2
H. (5.27)
On solving the Lane–Emden equation numerically for n=3, we ﬁnd
ξ2
1|θ/prime(ξ1)|=2.018. Substituting the values of other quantities in (5.27),w eﬁ n d
MCh=1.46/parenleftbigg2
μe/parenrightbigg2
M⊙. (5.28)
We have come to the surprising conclusion that only this ﬁxed value of mass
is possible if the stellar material satisﬁes the relativistic equation of state (5.11)
exactly. This ﬁxed mass MChis taken as the unit of mass on the horizontal
axis of Figure 5.2 . To understand what is happening, we have to consider the
full equation of state following from (5.5) instead of considering the non-
relativistic and fully relativistic limits. Using this equation of state in (5.13),
one can ﬁnd out the variation of radius with mass. This problem was worked out
numerically by Chandrasekhar (1935). The solid curve in Figure 5.2 indicates
the results we get on using the full equation of state. For white dwarfs of smallermasses (which also have larger sizes), the interior density is not so high and
the non-relativistic limit of the equation of state holds. Hence the solid curve
coincides with the non-relativistic dashed curve on the left side of the ﬁgure. Forincreasing masses and larger interior densities, the Fermi momentum p
Fstarts
becoming larger as seen from (5.8).W h e n pFc≈mec2, the relativistic effects
become important and the dashed curve deviates from the solid curve. On com-paring (5.9) and(5.11), we ﬁnd that the relativistic effects make the equation of
state ‘less stiff’ or ‘softer’, i.e. the pressure does not rise with density as rapidlyas in the non-relativistic case. This is basically due to the fact that the speeds of
particles saturate at cand the pressure, which results from the random motions
of particles, cannot increase with density as rapidly as it was increasing before
the saturation. Matter with a softer equation of state is less efﬁcient in counter-acting gravity. As a result, we ﬁnd that the solid curve is below the dashed curve,
which implies that the radius of a white dwarf of given mass is less when the
complete equation of state (which is softer than the non-relativistic one) is used.Eventually, as we move towards the right side of the ﬁgure, the radius becomestoo small and the interior density becomes too high so that the relativistic limit
of the equation of state is approached. The mass M
Chcorresponding to the
relativistic limit of the equation of state is the limiting mass for which the radius
goes to zero. This is the celebrated Chandrasekhar mass limit (Chandrasekhar,
1931). It is not possible for white dwarfs to have larger masses.
White dwarfs usually form from the cores of stars in which hydrogen has
been completely burnt out to produce helium (and higher elements in somecircumstances). If the hydrogen mass fraction X≈0, then it follows from (5.7)

<<<PAGE 157>>>

5.4 The neutron drip and neutron stars 137
thatμe≈2. Hence (5.28) implies that the Chandrasekhar mass limit should be
around 1.4 M⊙. It is seen in Figure 5.1 that the equation of state starts becoming
relativistic when the density is of order 109kg m−3. This can be taken as the
typical density inside a white dwarf. If the mass is of order 1030kg, then the
radius has to be about 107m≈104km. This is indeed the typical size of a
white dwarf.
5.4 The neutron drip and neutron stars
Just as the degeneracy pressure of electrons supports a white dwarf against
gravity, the degeneracy pressure of neutrons supports a neutron star. Accord-
ing to astrophysical folklore, on hearing of the discovery of the neutron inCavendish Laboratory (Chadwick ,1932), Landau immediately suggested that
there can be stars primarily made up of neutrons. Unlike protons, neutrons are
electrically neutral and hence many neutrons can be brought together without
being disrupted by electrostatic repulsion. However, neutrons are known todecay according to the reaction
n→p+e+¯ν (5.29)
with a half-life of about 13 minutes. A reverse reaction is also in principle
possible:
p+e→n+ν. (5.30)
Since the neutron mass is more than the combined mass of a proton and an elec-
tron, the reaction (5.30) can take place only if some energy is supplied to make
up for this mass deﬁcit. Therefore, under ordinary laboratory circumstances,(5.30) is an unlikely reaction and free neutrons decay away following (5.29).
When matter is compressed to very high densities, things change drastically.
For simplicity, let us assume that the highly compressed matter consists ofelectrons, protons and neutrons (i.e. we do not include the possibility that nucleiform). As we already pointed out in §5.2, the electrons become degenerate with
the rise of density while the other heavier particles still remain non-degenerate.Suppose we want to put an additional electron in a region of high density. Weknow that all the levels are ﬁlled up to the Fermi momentum p
F, which is related
to the number density neof electrons by (5.2).L e t
EF=/radicalBig
p2
Fc2+m2ec4
be the Fermi energy associated with this Fermi momentum pF. Unless an energy
EF−mec2is added to an electron, it is not possible to put the electron in the
region of high density, since all the lower energy states are ﬁlled. Consider
the situation when this excess energy required becomes equal to or larger than(m
n−mp−me)c2, the amount by which the neutron mass exceeds the sum of

<<<PAGE 158>>>

138 End states of stellar collapse
the proton mass and the electron mass. In this situation, it will be energetically
favourable for the electron to combine with a proton to produce a neutron, inaccordance with (5.30), rather than to exist as a free electron (assuming that
neutrons are non-degenerate and a neutron can be created at the lowest energystate). The condition for this critical situation is
/radicalBig
p2
F,cc2+m2ec4−mec2=(mn−mp−me)c2,
where pF,cis the critical Fermi momentum. From this
mec2/parenleftBigg
1+p2
F,c
m2ec2/parenrightBigg1/2
=Qc2,
where Q=mn−mp. This equation can be cast in the following form to give
the critical Fermi momentum:
pF,c=mec/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggQ
me/parenrightbigg2
−1/bracketrightBigg1/2
. (5.31)
Since the Fermi momentum increases with density, we expect the Fermi
momentum to be less than pF,cwhen the density is below a critical density.
In this situation, free electrons are energetically favoured and we do not expectany neutrons to be present, since they would decay away following (5.29).T h e
critical density, at which the Fermi momentum becomes equal to p
F,c, can be
obtained by putting the values of fundamental constants in (5.31) to get pF,c,
then obtaining newith the help of (5.2) and multiplying nebymp+me(since
only protons and electrons are present below the critical density). This gives
ρc=1.2×1010kg m−3. (5.32)
When the density is made higher than this, the electrons start combining with
protons to give neutrons. This phenomenon is called the neutron drip. At densi-
ties well above the critical density, matter would mainly consist of neutrons.
These neutrons do not decay according to (5.29) which is now completely
suppressed, since there are no free states for the product electron to occupy
(below the very high Fermi level).
We presented above a simpliﬁed calculation of neutron drip without con-
sidering the possible formation of nuclei. When the existence of nuclei is
taken into account, the calculation becomes much harder. The interested reader
may look at Shapiro and Teukolsky (1983, §2.6) for a derivation. On making
various reasonable assumptions, the more realistic value of the critical density
for neutron drip is found to be 3 .2×1014kg m−3. Strictly speaking, the term
‘neutron drip’ refers to neutrons getting out of nuclei when the density is raised
above the critical density.
If a stellar core is compressed by some means to densities higher than what
is needed for the neutron drip, the core will essentially consist of neutrons.

<<<PAGE 159>>>

5.5 Pulsars 139
Since neutrons are Fermi particles like electrons and obey the Pauli exclusion
principle, neutrons also can give rise to a degeneracy pressure. While derivingthe degeneracy pressure due to electrons in §5.2, we had used the Fermi–Dirac
statistics, which tacitly assumes that the particles are non-interacting. This isnot that bad an assumption for the electron gas inside a white dwarf. However,when neutrons are packed to densities close to the density inside an atomicnucleus (which is the case in the interiors of neutron stars), the neighbouring
neutrons interact with each other through nuclear forces and it is no longer
justiﬁed to treat them as non-interacting particles. Hence ﬁnding an accurateequation of state for matter at such high densities is very difﬁcult and the subjectis still not on a very ﬁrm footing. Like the Chandrasekhar limit of white dwarfs,
neutron stars also have a mass limit. However, this mass limit is not known
very accurately due to the uncertainty in our knowledge of the equation of state.One can get an absolute theoretical limit by demanding that the equation ofstate cannot be so stiff that the speed of sound is larger than the speed of light
(Rhoades and Rufﬁni, 1974). While this absolute theoretical limit of neutron star
mass is 3.2 M
⊙, it is generally believed that the actual mass limit is somewhat
less than this and most likely around 2 M⊙.
Detailed calculations suggest that a neutron star typically has a radius of
order 10 km and internal density close to 1018kg m−3. We have pointed out
in§1.5 that general relativity can be neglected if the factor 2 GM/c2ris small
compared to 1. For a neutron star of mass M⊙and radius 10 km, this factor
is as large as 0.3. Hence general relativistic effects cannot be neglected in arigorous calculation. The hydrostatic equations (3.25) and (3.26) have to be
modiﬁed when general relativity is included, as shown by Oppenheimer and
Vo l k o ff (1939). It is beyond the scope of this elementary textbook to discuss
these relativistic corrections.
Neutron stars remained a theorist’s curiosity for many years. Baade and
Zwicky (1934) made a remarkable suggestion that a neutron star may form in a
supernova explosion. When a star of mass M
⊙collapses to a radius of 10 km,
the gravitational potential energy lost is of order 1046J, which is tantalizingly
close to the energy output of a supernova. If the gravitational energy lost in
the collapse of the inner core to form a neutron star is somehow dumped intothe outer layers of the star, then the outer layers can explode with this energy.
Nobody took this idea seriously until a dramatic conﬁrmation of this idea came
in the late 1960s, as we discuss in the next section.
5.5 Pulsars
A deﬁnitive observational conﬁrmation for the existence of neutron stars camewhen Hewish et al. (1968) discovered radio sources which were giving out
radio pulses at intervals of typically a second. The signal from such a source

<<<PAGE 160>>>

140 End states of stellar collapse
Fig. 5.3 Radio signals from the pulsar PSR 0329 +54, which has a period of 0.714 s.
Note that different pulses are not identical and some pulses are even missing.
called a pulsar is shown in Figure 5.3 . Soon after the discovery, Gold (1968)
identiﬁed pulsars as rotating neutron stars. The pulse period must be due to
some physical mechanism like rotation or oscillation. Theoretical estimates
of oscillation periods of white dwarfs or neutron stars show that they do notmatch the observed pulsar periods (oscillation periods of normal stars are muchlonger). If the pulsar period has to be identiﬁed with the rotation period of
some object, one has to make sure that the centrifugal force is not stronger
than gravity, i.e.
/Omega1
2r<GM
r2,
which implies
/Omega1<( Gρ)1/2. (5.33)
A rotation period of 1 s demands that the rotating object should have a densityhigher than 10
11kg m−3if it is not to be disrupted by the centrifugal force.
The pulsars with shortest periods could not be rotating white dwarfs (which
have densities of order 109kg m−3). The only possibility is that the pulsars are
rotating neutron stars.
When pulsars were found near the centres of Crab and Vela supernova
remnants, the idea of Baade and Zwicky (1934) that neutron stars are born in
supernova explosions got dramatic support. However, only a few clear pulsar
and supernova remnant associations are known. Most of these cases are forsupernova remnants which are not very old (less than 10
5yr). One possibility is
that many of the supernova explosions may be somewhat asymmetric and the
neutron stars may be born with a net momentum. So they move away from the
centres of the supernova remnants and are found associated with the remnantsonly if not too much time elapsed since the explosion. The other possibilities

<<<PAGE 161>>>

5.5 Pulsars 141
are: many supernovae may not produce neutron stars, or the neutron stars may
not be visible to us as pulsars.
This brings us to a central question: why do rotating neutron stars become
visible as pulsars? Presumably the radio emission is produced at the magneticpoles of the neutron star by complicated plasma processes which we shall notdiscuss in this book. Very often the magnetic axis is inclined with respect to therotation axis. When the magnetic pole gets turned towards the observer during a
rotation period, the observer receives the radio pulse. The duty cycle of a typical
pulsar (i.e. the fraction of time during which the radio signal is received) is lessthan 10%.
From where does the pulsar get the energy which is radiated away? The
rotational kinetic energy of the neutron star is believed to be the ultimate sourceof energy. As this energy source is tapped, the neutron star rotation slowsdown. The periods of all pulsars keep on increasing very slowly as a resultof this. The typical period increase rate is ˙P≈10
−15ss−1.T h i sg i v e st h e
pulsar lifetime P/˙P, which is of order 107yr. After a neutron star has existed
as a pulsar for time of the order of 107yr, presumably its rotation becomes
so slow that it can no longer act as a pulsar. From the period increase rate ofthe Crab pulsar, one can calculate the rotational kinetic energy loss rate (by
making some reasonable assumptions about mass and radius to get the moment
of inertia). This energy loss rate is about 6 ×10
31W (see Exercise 5.8 )a n d
turns out to be approximately the same as the rate of total energy emission fromthe whole Crab Nebula, which is several orders of magnitude larger than the
energy given out in the radio pulses. It thus seems that the energy for powering
the whole Crab Nebula ultimately comes from the rotational kinetic energy ofthe pulsar.
A rapidly rotating object like a pulsar is expected to be somewhat ﬂattened
near the poles. As the rotation slows down, the pulsar tries to take up a morespherical shape. Since the crust of a neutron star is believed to be solid, theshape of the neutron star cannot change continuously. When sufﬁcient stress
builds up due to the slowing down of the neutron star, the crust suddenly
breaks and the neutron star is able to take up a less ﬂattened shape, causinga decrease in the moment of inertia because more material is brought near therotation axis. When this happens, the moment of inertia changes abruptly and
the angular velocity increases suddenly to conserve the angular momentum,
leading to a decrease in pulsar period. Such sudden decreases of pulsar periodshave been observed and are known as glitches . Apart from these occasional
sudden glitches, pulsar periods steadily keep on increasing. Figure 5.4 shows
the variation of the period of a pulsar with time. Four glitches can be seen inthis ﬁgure.
Standard textbooks of classical electrodynamics usually derive the expres-
sion for energy loss from an oscillating dipole (see, for example, Jackson, 1999,
§9.2). It is instructive to show that the analogous expression for the energy loss

<<<PAGE 162>>>

142 End states of stellar collapse
Fig. 5.4 Variation of the
period of pulsar PSR
0833−45 from late 1968
to mid-1980. Four glitchesare seen. From Downs
(1981). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astro-
nomical Society. Repro-
duced with permission from
Astrophysical Journal .)
rate from an oscillating magnetic dipole mis
˙E=−μ0
6πc3|¨m|2.
If the variation of marises due to a magnetic dipole rotating about an axis with
an inclination α, then it follows that
˙E=−μ0/Omega14sin2α
6πc3|m|2, (5.34)
where |m|is the amplitude of the magnetic dipole and /Omega1is the angular velocity
of rotation. A simple way of modelling the emission from a pulsar is to treat
it as a rotating magnetic dipole. If the magnetic ﬁeld of the pulsar is of dipole
nature, then the magnetic ﬁeld at the pole is given by
Bp=μ0|m|
2πR3,
where Ris the radius of the neutron star. Writing 2π BpR3/μ0for|m|in(5.34),
we get
˙E=−2πB2
pR6/Omega14sin2α
3μ0c3.
If this energy comes from the rotational kinetic energy1
2I/Omega12(where Iis the
moment of inertia), then we must have
I˙/Omega1=−2πB2
pR6/Omega13sin2α
3μ0c3. (5.35)

<<<PAGE 163>>>

5.5 Pulsars 143
Once/Omega1and˙/Omega1of a pulsar have been determined, one can use (5.35) to obtain
the pulsar magnetic ﬁeld Bpby putting reasonable values of IandR.F o rt h e
Crab pulsar, this yields
Bp≈5×108T,
if we take sin α≈1. The magnetic ﬁelds of pulsars are the strongest magnetic
ﬁelds known to mankind. A possible reason for these very strong magnetic
ﬁelds will be pointed out in §8.5. It is true that the assumption used in deriving
(5.35), namely that the pulsar is a rotating magnetic dipole sitting in a vacuum,
is approximate. It was shown by Goldreich and Julian (1969) that a rotating
neutron star should be surrounded by a magnetosphere ﬁlled with plasma.
However, even on purely dimensional grounds, we expect something like (5.35)
to hold at least approximately.
5.5.1 The binary pulsar and testing general relativity
We now discuss a very intriguing object which was ﬁrst discovered by Hulse and
Taylor (1975). They found a pulsar with a mean period of 0.059 s. However, the
actual value of the period was found to vary above and below this mean value
periodically, with a period of about 8 hours. The most obvious explanation is
that the pulsar is orbiting around an unseen companion and the variation in thepulsar period is due to the Doppler effect. When the pulsar is moving towardsus, its period is observed to decrease, whereas when the pulsar is moving away,
the period increases. One can determine the masses of both the pulsar and the
unseen binary companion by analysing the various orbit parameters (see, forexample, Shapiro and Teukolsky ,1983, §16.5). Both the masses are found to be
close to 1.4 M
⊙. The unseen companion seems to have exactly the mass beyond
which the white dwarf conﬁguration is impossible. The unseen companion isvery likely to be another neutron star.
We thus have a remarkable system in which two neutron stars are orbiting
around each other, one of them acting as a pulsar. The orbit is found to be
highly eccentric, the eccentricity being 0.62. According to general relativity,
such an object would emit gravitational radiation, just as an orbiting chargewould emit electromagnetic radiation according to classical electrodynamics.As the system loses energy in the gravitational radiation, the two neutron stars
should come closer and the orbital period should decrease. Careful general
relativistic calculations suggest a value ˙P
orb=− 2.40×10−12for the orbital
period change. The measured value (−2.30 ±0.22)×10−12is in very good
agreement. This provides a test of general relativity to a high degree of precision
and provides an indirect conﬁrmation of the existence of gravitational radiation
(to be discussed in §13.5), which astronomers have yet to detect directly from
any astronomical system.

<<<PAGE 164>>>

144 End states of stellar collapse
5.5.2 Statistics of millisecond and binary pulsars
Backer et al. (1982) discovered a pulsar with a period of 1.56 ms, which was
considerably shorter than the period of any pulsar known at that time. The pulsar
with the second shortest period known at that time, the Crab pulsar, had a periodof 33.1 ms. Subsequently several other pulsars with periods less than 10 mswere discovered. One striking feature is that a majority of them were found in
binary systems. After measuring the period variation ˙Pof these millisecond
pulsars, their magnetic ﬁelds could be estimated by applying (5.35).M o s t
of the millisecond pulsars were found to have magnetic ﬁelds around 10
4T,
considerably less than the typical magnetic ﬁelds of ordinary pulsars (around10
8T).Figure 5.5 is a plot of magnetic ﬁeld Bagainst pulsar period of P.A
pulsar with known values of BandPis represented by a point in this ﬁgure.
Pulsars in binary systems are indicated by small circles. The ordinary pulsars
are towards the upper right part of the ﬁgure, whereas the millisecond pulsars
are towards the lower left. While very few of the ordinary pulsars are in binary
systems, many of the millisecond pulsars are found in binaries. It is clear thatthe ordinary pulsars and the millisecond pulsars make two very distinct
Fig. 5.5 The periods and magnetic ﬁelds (in G =10−4T) of different pulsars. Pulsars
in binary systems are indicated by circles. See text for explanations of death line and
Hubble line. After a neutron star is spun up by binary accretion, it is expected to end
up slightly below a line denoted as the spin-up line . The arguments for calculating this
line are not given here. From Deshpande, Ramachandran and Srinivasan (1995), based
on the pulsar parameters provided by Taylor, Manchester and Lyne (1993). ( c/circlecopyrtIndian
Academy of Sciences. Reproduced with permission from Journal of Astrophysics and
Astronomy.)

<<<PAGE 165>>>

5.6 Binary X-ray sources. Accretion disks 145
population groups. If a neutron star is rotating too slowly or has a too weak
magnetic ﬁeld, then presumably it would not act as a pulsar. The line markeddeath line inFigure 5.5 is a line beyond which a neutron star no longer acts as
a pulsar. One can obtain this death line by theoretical arguments based on thephysics of pulsar magnetospheres, which we shall not discuss here. As a pulsarbecomes older, its period becomes longer and it follows a trajectory movingtowards the right in Figure 5.5 . Eventually it crosses the death line and is no
longer visible as a pulsar. The age of a pulsar is approximately given by P/˙P.
TheHubble line inFigure 5.5 indicates a line below which the age of a pulsar
would be larger than the Hubble time (which is the approximate age of theUniverse, to be introduced in §9.3).
What is the relation of millisecond pulsars with ordinary pulsars? The fact
that millisecond pulsars are usually found in binary systems (those which arefound single probably had the binaries disrupted at some stage) has led to auniﬁed scenario in the last few years. When a neutron star is born, it is expected
to have values of rotation period Pand magnetic ﬁeld Btypical of an ordinary
pulsar. Suppose the neutron star is in a binary system. At some stage, the binary
companion may become a red giant and ﬁll up the Roche lobe. As discussedin§4.5.1, this would lead to a transfer of mass from the inﬂated companion
star to the neutron star. The binary X-ray sources to be discussed in §5.6 are
believed to be neutron stars accreting matter from inﬂated binary companions.Because of the orbital motion of the companion, the matter accreting onto theneutron star from its companion will carry a considerable amount of angular
momentum. This is expected to increase the angular velocity of the accreting
neutron star, leading to a decrease in rotation period. Eventually, when the redgiant phase of the companion star is over (it may become a white dwarf or
another neutron star), the neutron star which has been spun up by accreting
matter with angular momentum becomes visible as a millisecond pulsar witha short period P. It is necessary to provide an explanation of the magnetic
ﬁeld decrease as well. Various alternative theoretical ideas have been suggested.
One idea is that the accreted material on the neutron star covers up and buries
the magnetic ﬁeld so efﬁciently that very little magnetic ﬁeld is present at thesurface. A numerical simulation of this idea by Konar and Choudhuri (2004)
shows that this is possible and the surface magnetic ﬁeld decreases exactly by a
factor which is consistent with observational data.
5.6 Binary X-ray sources. Accretion disks
A second kind of evidence for the existence of neutron stars started coming
at about the same time when pulsars were discovered. Giacconi et al. (1962)
discovered several celestial X-ray sources with the help of Geiger counters

<<<PAGE 166>>>

146 End states of stellar collapse
sent aboard a rocket. After the satellite Uhuru devoted exclusively to X-ray
astronomy was launched, these X-ray sources could be studied in more detail.Most of these sources were found to be in the galactic plane, indicating that
they are galactic objects. It became possible to identify the optical counterparts
of some of these X-sources. The optical counterparts were invariably binarystellar systems. Something must be happening in these binaries to produce theX-rays.
Suppose we drop a mass mfrom a height hin a gravitational ﬁeld g.T h e
gravitational potential energy mgh is ﬁrst converted into kinetic energy, and
then, on hitting the ground, this energy is transformed into other forms such asheat and sound. Ordinarily, in this process, a very small fraction of the rest mass
energy mc
2is released. If, however, the mass mis dropped from inﬁnity to a
star of mass Mand radius R, then the gravitational energy lost is
GM
Rm=GM
c2Rmc2.
For a typical neutron star of mass 1 M⊙and radius 10 km, the factor GM/c2R
turns out to be about 0.15. Hence the loss of gravitational energy may be avery appreciable fraction of the rest mass energy, making such an infall of
matter into the deep gravitational well of a compact object like a neutron star atremendously efﬁcient process for energy release.
We have pointed out in §4.5.1 that there can be mass transfer between
the two stars in a binary system. Suppose one member of a binary is a com-pact object like a neutron star or a black hole, whereas the other memberis a star which has ﬁlled up the Roche lobe. Then the compact star willaccrete matter from its companion. The accreted matter loses a large amount
of gravitational potential energy while falling towards the compact star and
this energy presumably is radiated away. This seems to be the likely mech-anism by which most of the X-ray sources are powered. We pointed out in§5.5.2 that millisecond pulsars are believed to be neutron stars spun up by the
deposition of angular momentum in a binary mass transfer process. The X-ray binary sources are basically such systems caught in the act of such masstransfer. A millisecond pulsar is a possible end product after the mass transferis over.
Since the accreting material carries angular momentum, it is unlikely to fall
radially inward, but is expected to move inward slowly in the form of a disk asshown in Figure 5.6 . Such a disk is called an accretion disk. A particular parcel
of gas will follow a spiral path. A classic investigation of the accretion disk
physics is due to Shakura and Sunyaev (1973). Here we merely point out some
of the salient features. Just as the planets move in nearly circular orbits around
the Sun, a parcel of gas in an accretion disk also moves in a nearly circular

<<<PAGE 167>>>

5.6 Binary X-ray sources. Accretion disks 147
Fig. 5.6 Sketch of an accretion disk in a binary stellar system.
orbit. Balancing gravity by centrifugal force, we can easily ﬁnd that the angular
velocity at a distance ris given by
/Omega1=/parenleftbiggGM
r3/parenrightbigg1/2
. (5.36)
The angular velocities of planets around the Sun indeed vary as r−3/2, leading
to Kepler’s third law of planetary motion. Hence a circular motion satisfying(5.36) is often called Keplerian motion in astronomical jargon. If there was
no viscosity in the accretion disk, then parcels of gas could forever move inKeplerian orbits, just as planets seem to move forever around the Sun. However,the viscous drag between adjacent layers of gas moving with different angular
velocities causes material to spiral inward continuously in the inner regions of
the disk. As material spirals inward in the accretion disk losing gravitationalpotential energy, this energy is radiated away from the disk.
If the accreting material falls on a compact object of mass Mand radius R,
then a parcel of unit mass loses energy −GM/Rin falling onto that object and
this energy is radiated away. If ˙Mis the mass accretion rate, then we expect the
resultant luminosity to be
L=GM˙M
R. (5.37)
It is clear that the accretion rate ˙Mdetermines how luminous the source will be.
If the accretion rate is too high and the source is too luminous, then the outward
force on matter due to radiation pressure may be more than the inward pull due
to gravity. We have discussed this in §3.6.1 and came to the conclusion that
the luminosity cannot exceed the Eddington luminosity. Otherwise, matter willbe blown outward reducing the accretion rate until the accretion rate adjusts to
such a value that the luminosity does not exceed the Eddington luminosity. On
the basis of such arguments, we expect the luminosity of the brightest accretingobjects to be close to the Eddington luminosity. It is Thomson scattering which

<<<PAGE 168>>>

148 End states of stellar collapse
is the main source of opacity in accreting matter. Using the expression (2.84)
for opacity due to Thomson scattering, we ﬁnd the Eddington luminosity from
(3.44) as follows:
LEdd=4πcG Mm H
σT=1.3×1031/parenleftbiggM
M⊙/parenrightbigg
W, (5.38)
on putting values of various quantities. It is quite remarkable that the brightestX-ray sources are found to have luminosities close to 10
31W on the lower side.
If the luminosity as given by (5.37) is equal to the Eddington luminosity given
by(5.38), then we ﬁnd that the accretion rate is given by
˙M=1.5×10−8M⊙yr−1(5.39)
on taking M=M⊙,R=10 km. This is the typical accretion rate in binary
systems. Suppose the luminosity is emitted thermally from the neutron star
surface where the accreting material falls. The temperature Tof this region
can be found from
L=4πR2σT4.
On taking L=1031Wa n d R=10 km, the temperature is found to be about
2×107K. Blackbody radiation at this temperature peaks in the X-ray part of the
Fig. 5.7 Mass estimates of neutron stars in binary X-ray systems and in binary pul-
sars. From Longair (1994, p. 114) who credits J. Taylor for the ﬁgure. ( c/circlecopyrtCambridge
University Press.)

<<<PAGE 169>>>

Exercises 149
spectrum. Thus the theoretical model of accretion onto neutron stars gives a very
natural explanation of how the X-rays arise. For accretion onto white dwarfs, thetemperature would be much less and the radiation would not predominantly be
in the X-rays.
As we pointed out in §3.5.1, the mass of a star can be determined if
it is in a binary system. The masses of many neutron stars in binary X-
ray sources and binary pulsars have been determined. Figure 5.7 shows the
masses of several neutron stars which could be determined with reasonableaccuracy. All the masses are presumably below the upper mass limit of neutronstars (which is not accurately known). However, there are a few binary X-ray sources with accreting objects which possibly have masses higher than
3M
⊙. The best-studied of these objects is Cygnus X-1. It shows variabilities
in luminosity in different time scales. The central accreting object is believed to
be a black hole rather than a neutron star, since its estimated mass is well abovewhat would be the neutron star mass limit based on any reasonable equation
of state.
Exercises
5.1 Derive the general expression (5.1) for pressure in a gas by considering
a unit area on the wall of the gas container, ﬁguring out the distribution of
particles hitting this area in unit time and keeping in mind that the momentum
changes in the elastic collisions provide the pressure. From the expression of
the Maxwellian distribution given by (2.27) , ﬁgure out f(p)for that distribu-
tion and show that the pressure exerted is nκBT.
5.2 Work out the integral in (5.5) by substituting p=mecsinhθand show
that the general expression for the electron degeneracy pressure given by (5.5)
is equal to
P=πm4
ec5
3h3f(x),
where
f(x)=x(2x2−3)/radicalbig
x2+1+3s i n h−1x
andx=pF/mec. Evaluate f(x)numerically for various values of xand use
these numerical values to make a plot of log Pagainst log ρ. Indicate regions
of the plot corresponding to the two limiting equations (5.9) and(5.11) .
5.3 Carry out all the algebraic and numerical steps to obtain (5.9)–(5.12).
Then produce Figure 5.1 yourself by following the procedure mentioned in the
text. Justify this procedure by careful arguments.

<<<PAGE 170>>>

150 End states of stellar collapse
5.4 Consider the Lane–Emden equation
1
ξ2d
dξ/parenleftbigg
ξ2dθ
dξ/parenrightbigg
=−θn
to be solved with the boundary conditions
θ=1,dθ
dξ=0
atξ=0. Obtain analytical solutions for the cases n=0 and n=1.
[Hint: To solve for n=1, ﬁrst substitute
θ=χ
ξ,
where χis a new variable. Then show that this substitution transforms the
Lane–Emden equation to
d2χ
dξ2=−χn
ξn−1.]
5.5 Consider a star in which gas pressure and radiation pressure are both
important (i.e. the total pressure is the sum of the two). If the gas pressure
given by (3.23) is equal to a constant fraction βof the total pressure everywhere
inside the star, then show that the total pressure has to be related to the densityin the following way
P
tot=/parenleftBigg
3κ4
B
aBμ4m4
H/parenrightBigg1/3/parenleftbigg1−β
β4/parenrightbigg1/3
ρ4/3.
Now consider several stars with different masses having the same composition
(i.e. the same μ). Assuming that inside each of these stars the gas pressure
is everywhere a constant fraction βof the total pressure (but βhas different
values for different stars), show that βinside a star would be related to its
mass Mby an equation of the form
1−β
β4=CM2,
where Cis a constant which you have to evaluate. Show that βis smaller
for larger M, implying that radiation pressure is increasingly more important
inside more massive stars. This is a historically important argument ﬁrst givenbyEddington (1926, §84).
5.6 Those of you who are proﬁcient in doing numerical calculations with
computers can use the equation of state derived in Exercise 5.2 to solve
the structure equation (5.13). On solving the equation with a particular
value ρ
cof central density, you will get a model of a star with mass M
and radius R.P l o t Ras a function of Mand show that Rfalls to zero

<<<PAGE 171>>>

Exercises 151
when Mis equal to the Chandrasekhar mass. If you can do all these, then
you have repeated the calculation for which Chandrasekhar won the Nobel
Prize!
5.7 The Sun has a rotation period of about 27 days. If the Sun collapsed
to become a white dwarf conserving its angular momentum, what would be
the expected rotation period? What would be the rotation period if the Sun
collapsed to become a neutron star?
5.8 The Crab pulsar has period P=0.033 s and characteristic slowing time
P/˙P=2.5×103yr. Estimate the energy loss rate and the magnetic ﬁeld by
using (5.35) .
5.9 Determine the constant of proportionality in the mass–radius relation
(5.25) , using the fact that ξ1=3.65 and ξ2
1|θ/prime(ξ1)|= 2.71 for n=3/2. We
pointed out in §3.6.1 that the limiting mass of a brown dwarf is 0.08 M⊙.
Assuming that gravity is balanced by the electron degeneracy pressure, esti-
mate the radius of this limiting brown dwarf. If the brown dwarf formed by
gravitational collapse from a much larger size, estimate the thermal energy
acquired by the brown dwarf during its formation. Assuming the brown dwarfto have a uniform temperature (which is not too bad an assumption because thethermal conductivity of degenerate matter is high), estimate its temperature.
Note that the temperature has to be higher than 10
7for nuclear burning to
start.

<<<PAGE 172>>>



<<<PAGE 173>>>

6
Our Galaxy and its interstellar
matter
6.1 The shape and size of our Galaxy
When we look around at the night sky, we ﬁnd that the stars are not distributed
very uniformly. There is a faint band of light – the Milky Way – going aroundthe celestial sphere in a great circle. Even a moderate telescope reveals that theMilky Way is a collection of innumerable faint stars. Herschel (1785) offered
an explanation of the Milky Way by suggesting that we are near the centre of aﬂat disk-like stellar system. When we look in the plane of the disk, we see manymore stars than what we see in the other directions, thus producing the band ofthe Milky Way. After the development of photography, it became much easier
to record distributions of stars in different directions. In the beginning of the
twentieth century, Kapteyn attempted to put Herschel’s view on a ﬁrm footing,by undertaking a huge programme of counting stars in different directions andmeasuring their proper motions with a view of estimating distances. From a
painstaking statistical analysis of these data, it was inferred that we are at
the centre of an oblate stellar disk with a thickness of a few hundreds of pcand a disk radius of about a few kpc ( Kapteyn and van Rhijn, 1920; Kapteyn ,
1922). This model is usually referred to as the Kapteyn Universe, since it was
believed at that time that this was the whole Universe! Before we discuss howthe Kapteyn Universe was demolished by Shapley’s work and what is still ouraccepted view of our Galaxy got established, we want to say a few words aboutstar count analysis.
6.1.1 Some basics of star count analysis
We shall not discuss here the details of how the statistical analysis of star countdata is carried out. The interested readers may look at Chapter 4 of Mihalas and
Binney (1981). We just present some elementary considerations by assuming
153

<<<PAGE 174>>>

154 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
that the space around us is free of any absorbing material. Suppose we are
surrounded by identical stars of absolute magnitude Mdistributed in space with
a uniform density. We want to ﬁnd the number N(m)of stars which appear
brighter than apparent magnitude m. It should be clear from (1.8) that a star
would have apparent magnitude mif it is located at a distance
d=(10)1+0.2(m −M)pc. (6.1)
All stars within a sphere of size (4/3)π d3around us would appear brighter than
the magnitude m. The number N(m)of such stars, which is clearly proportional
tod3, can be written as
N(m)=C1100.6m, (6.2)
where C1is a constant. So, if we ﬁnd that the observed N(m)obeys (6.2) up to a
certain value of m, then we can conclude that stars are distributed uniformly up
to the distance dcorresponding to that mas given by (6.1). If the observed N(m)
falls below what is theoretically expected from (6.2) beyond a certain m,t h e nw e
know that we are reaching the edge of the system at the distance correspondingto that m. Checking whether the observed N(m)for a certain type of stars agrees
with (6.2) is a powerful test for ﬁnding if those stars are distributed uniformly
around us. This test can also be applied to study the distribution of galaxiesaround our Galaxy.
If we had an inﬁnite Universe uniformly populated with stars, then it can be
easily shown that the brightness of the sky would have been inﬁnite – a resultknown as the Olbers paradox (Olbers ,1826). The differential star count A(m)
(deﬁned such that the number of stars having apparent magnitude between m
andm+dmisA(m)dm) is obviously given by
A(m)=dN(m)
dm=C2100.6m, (6.3)
where C2=0.6C1ln 10. From (1.6), we know that the light received by us from
the star of apparent magnitude mcan be written as
l(m)=l010−0.4m. (6.4)
Hence the light received by us from stars with apparent magnitudes between m
andm+dmis
l(m)A(m)dm=l0C2100.2mdm
on substituting from (6.3) and (6.4). The total light received from all stars
brighter than mis then given by
L=/integraldisplaym
−∞l(m/prime)A(m/prime)dm/prime=l0C2/integraldisplaym
−∞100.2m/primedm/prime=K100.2m, (6.5)
where

<<<PAGE 175>>>

6.1 The shape and size of our Galaxy 155
K=l0C2
0.2l n1 0=3l0C1.
It is clear from (6.5) thatLdiverges exponentially with mas we include fainter
stars at greater distances which have increasingly larger values of m. Because of
the ﬁnite size of our Galaxy, we can get around the Olbers paradox for stars in
the Galaxy. However, we encounter this paradox again when we consider lightreceived by all the galaxies outside our Galaxy. The resolution of this paradoxfor galaxies will be discussed in §14.4.1.
Our elementary discussion of star count analysis has been based on the
assumption that all stars are alike. It is not very difﬁcult to extend this discussionfor a distribution of stars with different intrinsic properties (see Exercise 6.1).
Often one tries to count only stars of a particular spectral type which have
the absolute magnitudes lying in a narrow range. By obtaining the distribution
function N(m)for these stars in different directions and by comparing it with
the result (6.2) for uniform distribution, it is in principle possible to determine
the distances in different directions where these stars are under-abundant or
over-abundant, thereby generating a map of the density distribution of these
stars. Usually a particular telescope has a limit of apparent magnitude mto
which it can go. Intrinsically faint stars (with large M) reach the apparent
magnitude mat a relatively short distance, whereas intrinsically bright stars
(with smaller M) have this magnitude at a larger distance, as can be easily
seen from (6.1). Hence the telescope will show intrinsically bright stars at
large distances where intrinsically faint stars are no longer visible. If we doa statistical analysis of the data taken by this telescope without properly taking
account of this fact, then we may end up with the conclusion that intrinsically
bright stars are more abundant at large distances compared to intrinsically faintstars. This is called the Malmquist bias (Malmquist ,1924). In any statistical
analysis involving objects of different intrinsic luminosity, care has to be taken
to avoid this bias.
6.1.2 Shapley’s model
Even before the detailed papers on the Kapteyn Universe were published
(Kapteyn and van Rhijn, 1920; Kapteyn ,1922), a serious rival to this model
arose. In §3.6.2 we have discussed globular clusters, which are compact spher-
ical clusters of typically about 106stars. Shapley (1918) noted that most of
the globular clusters are found around the constellation Sagittarius in the sky.Shapley (1919) suggested that the centre of our Galaxy must be in the direction
of this constellation and the globular clusters must be distributed symmetrically
around this centre. Figure 6.1 shows an edge-on view based on our modern
perception of what the Galaxy would look like. The Galaxy has a thin disk with
a spheroidal bulge around its centre. The Sun is located in an outlying region

<<<PAGE 176>>>

156 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.1 A schematic edge-on view of our Galaxy. The position of the Sun is
indicated by ×.
of this disk indicated by ×inFigure 6.1 far away from the centre. About 200
globular clusters make up a roughly spherical halo around the galactic centre.
To establish the size of the Galaxy, we need to know the distances of
the globular clusters from us. For measuring distances of reasonably faraway
stellar systems, two kinds of stars with periodically varying luminosity –Cepheid variables and RR Lyrae stars – have proved very useful. Leavitt (1912)
discovered that there was a relation between the period and the apparent lumi-
nosity of Cepheid variables in the Small Magellanic Cloud (which we now
know to be a galaxy not far from our Galaxy), the brighter ones having longerperiods. Since all the Cepheid variables in the Small Magellanic Cloud areapproximately at the same distance from us, there must be a relation between
period and absolute luminosity of these stars. The period–luminosity relation of
Cepheid variables was established later when the distances (and hence absoluteluminosities) of some Cepheid variables could be determined (essentially bystudying Cepheid variables in star clusters within our Galaxy of which the
distances could be estimated). So, if you measure the period of a Cepheid vari-
able, you can infer its absolute luminosity and, by comparing with the apparentluminosity, you can then ﬁnd the distance. In other words, a measurement of theperiod of a Cepheid variable leads to a determination of its distance. Initially
it was thought that the Cepheid variables and RR Lyrae stars obey exactly
the same period–luminosity relation, leading to erroneous estimates of somedistances. Finally Baade (1954) showed that a Cepheid variable is somewhat

<<<PAGE 177>>>

6.1 The shape and size of our Galaxy 157
brighter than an RR Lyrae star with the same period, necessitating the revision
of many extragalactic distances.
Shapley (1919) used the RR Lyrae stars in some globular clusters to esti-
mate their distances. From these measurements, he concluded that the galacticcentre is situated at a distance of 15 kpc from us. The current best estimate forthis distance is about 8 kpc (see §7.4.1 of Binney and Merriﬁeld, 1998). The disk
of the Galaxy has a thickness of the order of 500 pc. The actual estimate of the
thickness depends on the kinds of stars we use to ﬁnd this thickness. The bright
O and B stars are usually found rather close to the mid-plane of the disk, suchthat one gets a lower value of the thickness of the disk on using these stars toﬁnd the thickness (the number densities of these stars fall with a scale height of
about 50 pc from the mid-plane). On the other hand, stars of the other types can
be found at greater distances from the mid-plane, their densities falling withmore typical scale heights of order 200 or 300 pc ( Gilmore and Reid ,1983).
Since O and B stars are short-lived, they are statistically younger than other
stars. So, presumably, as the stars grow older, they can acquire larger random
velocities, enabling them to rise further from the mid-plane against gravity. Weshall discuss this more in §7.6.2. Although we now know many more details not
known in Shapley’s time, our present view of the Galaxy is still essentially what
Shapley surmised.
While Shapley was establishing the size and shape of our Galaxy, a ﬁerce
debate was going on whether some of the nebulous objects seen in the sky
are outside our Galaxy or are inside it. Shapley (1921) believed that they are
inside. However, this question was settled very soon by Hubble (1922)b y
studying Cepheid variables in some of these nebulae and by demonstratingfrom the distance estimates that they must be independent stellar systems
outside our Galaxy. We shall discuss external galaxies in Chapter 9.S o m eo f
these have beautiful spiral structures. Figure 6.2 shows the Andromeda Galaxy,
which is the nearest large spiral galaxy. We believe that our Galaxy and the
Andromeda Galaxy are very similar in size, shape and appearance. If we go
outside our Galaxy and look at it, it would probably appear very similar to
Figure 6.2 .
6.1.3 Interstellar extinction and reddening
The main reason why the Sun was put in the centre of the Kapteyn Universe isthat the Milky Way looks reasonably symmetric around us. If the Sun is actuallyat the edge of our Galaxy, then why does the Milky Way look so symmetric? Ifthe interstellar space has some obscuring material, then we would not be able to
see too far into the galactic disk and our view of the disk would be symmetric,
even though the disk may actually extend much more in one direction than inthe other.

<<<PAGE 178>>>

158 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.2 The Andromeda Galaxy M31. Courtesy: Robert Gendler.
A clear proof of the existence of interstellar obscuration was provided
byTrumpler (1930), who made a statistical study of open clusters, which are
typically loosely bound clusters of a few dozen stars. Unlike globular clusters
many of which are found away from the galactic disk, the open clusters mostlylie in the disk of our Galaxy. Assuming that the open clusters are statistically
of the same size, one can estimate the distance from the angular size. Trumpler
(1930) found that the stars in more distant open clusters appeared dimmer than
what is expected from a simple inverse-square fall in intensity, clearly indicatingthat the starlight coming from distant clusters has undergone some attenuation.
A more detailed discussion of the interstellar medium will be taken up in §6.5
and§6.6. Here we just mention that the interstellar medium contains particles
of dust mixed with gas. It is the dust particles which are responsible for the
absorption of starlight.
We had written down (1.8) assuming that there was no interstellar absorp-
tion and intensity fell by a simple inverse-square law. In the presence of inter-stellar absorption, (1.8) should be modiﬁed to
m=M+5l o g
10d−5+Aλ, (6.6)
where Aλgives the dimming caused by the interstellar dust. Since dimming
implies an increase of the apparent magnitude m, it should be clear that Aλhas

<<<PAGE 179>>>

6.1 The shape and size of our Galaxy 159
to be positive. For visible light coming from stars in the galactic plane, a rough
rule of thumb for the dimming term is
AV≈1.5d, (6.7)
ifdis measured in kpc. In other words, the amount of dimming of visible light
with distance is approximately equal to 1.5 magnitude kpc−1in the galactic
plane. The subscript Vin(6.7) implies that we are considering the extinction
Aλin the Vband introduced in §1.4.
Since the dust particles absorb more light at the shorter wavelengths (on the
bluer side), distant stars appear redder. We saw in §1.4 that the redness of a star
is given by (B−V). As starlight passes through interstellar matter, its redness
measure (B−V)keeps increasing. The change in it is denoted by E(B−V)
and the rule of thumb for this in the galactic plane is
E(B−V)≈0.5d. (6.8)
Again dhas to be in kpc. Since both Aλand E(B−V)depend linearly on
the distance d, their ratio Aλ/E(B−V)is independent of dand is a measure
of interstellar extinction as a function of wavelength λ.Figure 6.3 plots the
Fig. 6.3 Ap l o to f E(λ−V)/E(B−V), which is a measure of light extinction by
interstellar dust, as a function of λ−1in the directions of a few stars. An ‘aver-
age’ extinction curve is also indicated. From Bless and Savage (1972). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican
Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)

<<<PAGE 180>>>

160 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
related quantity E(λ−V)/E(B−V), which is also a measure of interstellar
extinction, as a function of inverse wavelength in the directions of a few stars.
It is seen that there is an extinction peak around 2200 ˚A, which is usually
interpreted to be due to graphite present in the dust. Apart from this peak,a straight line would not be a too bad ﬁt for the absorption curve shown inFigure 6.3 . This implies that interstellar absorption roughly goes as λ
−1,w h i c h
is a much weaker dependence than the dependence λ−4expected from Rayleigh
scattering by molecules (see §2.6.1).
The existence of interstellar extinction and reddening makes the star count
analysis more complicated than what it would have been in the absence ofinterstellar matter. For example, the expression (6.2) forN(m)was obtained by
assuming no absorption. There are, however, systematic methods of handlingthe effects of interstellar matter in star count analysis, which we shall notdiscuss here. Luckily interstellar dust is conﬁned in a layer of thickness of about±150 pc around the mid-plane of the Galaxy, close to which we lie. So, when
we look in directions away from the galactic plane, our view is not impaired by
interstellar extinction or reddening. It was known for a long time that externalgalaxies could not be seen in a narrow zone near the galactic plane. This isknown as the zone of avoidance.
6.1.4 Galactic coordinates
We have introduced the widely used equatorial system of celestial coordinates in§1.3. While presenting many galactic observations, it is often useful to introduce
galactic coordinates. The galactic latitude bof an object is its angular distance
from the galactic plane, which is taken as the equator in this system. The galactic
longitude lis measured from the direction of the galactic centre, which is taken
to be at l=0
o,b=0o.
6.2 Galactic rotation
The gravitational ﬁeld at a point inside or near the Galaxy is expected to bedirected towards the galactic centre. How is this gravitational ﬁeld balanced, toensure that there is not a general fall of everything towards the galactic centre?
There are basically two ways of balancing gravity. A star may move in a circular
orbit such that the centrifugal force balances gravity (as in the case of planetsin the solar system). The other way of balancing gravity is through randommotions. Lindblad (1927) was the ﬁrst to recognize that our Galaxy must be
having two subsystems. Most of the stars in the disk move in roughly circularorbits around the galactic centre and constitute one subsystem. From the nearlyspherical shape of the halo of globular clusters, Lindblad (1927) guessed that

<<<PAGE 181>>>

6.2 Galactic rotation 161
this must be a non-rotating subsystem in which gravity is balanced by random
motions. At any particular instant of time, a globular cluster may be fallingtowards the galactic centre. Eventually, however, this globular cluster will come
out on the other side of the Galaxy because of the kinetic energy it gains in
falling towards the galactic centre. Although some individual globular clustersmay be falling towards the galactic centre and the others may be moving away,the overall statistical appearance of the system of globular clusters should not
change with time.
The Sun, in its orbit around the galactic centre, would circle around the
non-rotating subsystem of globular clusters. The line of sight component of the
relative velocity of the Sun with respect to a globular cluster can be determined
by measuring the Doppler shifts of lines in the spectra of stars in this cluster.
From the statistical analysis of such measurements for many globular clusters, itis possible to estimate the speed with which the Sun is going around the galacticcentre, if we assume that the system of globular clusters has zero net rotation
around the galactic centre. The best value for the speed of the Sun around the
galactic centre, usually denoted by /Theta1
0, is about /Theta10=220 km s−1. If the Sun is
located at a distance of R0=8 kpc from the galactic centre, then the period of
revolution of the Sun around the galactic centre is
Prev=2πR0
/Theta10≈2×108yr. (6.9)
Since the age of the Galaxy is believed to be of order 1010y r( a sw es h a l ls e e
in§9.3), the Sun had time to make not more than 50 rounds about the galactic
centre. The approximate mass Mof the Galaxy inside the solar orbit can be
estimated by balancing the gravitational and centrifugal forces:
GM
R2
0≈/Theta12
0
R0.
The gravitational ﬁeld would have been given by GM/R2
0exactly if the mass
inside the solar orbit were distributed in a spherically symmetric manner. On
substituting the estimated values of R0and/Theta10in the above approximate equa-
tion, we ﬁnd Mto be of order 1011M⊙.
As the gravitational ﬁeld of the Galaxy is expected to fall off with distance,
stars further out in the disk will have to move around the galactic centre withslower speeds. In other words, the disk of the Galaxy should have differential
rotation .Oort (1927) carried out a classic analysis to show how this can be
demonstrated by studying the motions of stars in the solar neighbourhood. We
now present this analysis, based on the simplifying assumption that all stars
move in exactly circular orbits. This assumption, of course, is not strictly true
and §6.3 is devoted to looking at the consequences of small departures from
exactly circular orbits.

<<<PAGE 182>>>

162 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.4 A sketch indicating the Sun and a star going around the galactic centre.
Figure 6.4 shows the Sun at a distance R0from the galactic centre moving
with speed /Theta10in a circular orbit. We consider a star at a distance dfrom the Sun
at galactic longitude l. As indicated in Figure 6.4 , this star is at a distance Rfrom
the galactic centre moving with circular speed /Theta1. Let us consider the triangle
made up by the lines R0,Randd.I fαis the angle made by the direction of the
star’s velocity /Theta1with d, then it follows from Figure 6.4 that the angle opposite
toR0in our triangle is 90◦+α. From the standard trigonometric properties of
a triangle, we have
R
sinl=R0
cosα(6.10)
and
R0cosl=d+Rsinα. (6.11)
The relative radial velocity of the star (along the line of sight) with respect to
the Sun is
vR=/Theta1cosα−/Theta10sinl=/parenleftbigg/Theta1
RR0−/Theta10/parenrightbigg
sinl
on making use of (6.10). Writing the angular velocities of the star and the
Sun as
ω=/Theta1
R,ω 0=/Theta10
R0, (6.12)
we get
vR=(ω−ω0)R0sinl. (6.13)

<<<PAGE 183>>>

6.2 Galactic rotation 163
The tangential velocity of the star with respect to the Sun is
vT=/Theta1sinα−/Theta10cosl=/Theta1R0cosl−d
R−/Theta10cosl
on substituting for sin αfrom (6.11). On making use of (6.12),t h i sg i v e s
vT=(ω−ω0)R0cosl−ωd. (6.14)
The very important expressions (6.13) and (6.14) give general expressions of
radial and tangential velocities of stars in the galactic disk moving in circular
orbits around the galactic centre. They can even be applied to stars far away
from the Sun.
We now consider stars in the solar neighbourhood for which d/lessmuchR0.F o r
such stars, we approximately have
R0−R=dcosl. (6.15)
We also can write
(ω−ω0)=/parenleftbiggdω
dR/parenrightbigg
R0(R−R0)=/bracketleftBigg
1
R0/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0−/Theta10
R2
0/bracketrightBigg
(R−R0)
on substituting from (6.12) forω.U s i n g(6.15),w eg e t
(ω−ω0)=/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0−/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
d
R0cosl. (6.16)
Substituting (6.16), we get from (6.13) that
vR=1
2/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0−/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
dsin 2l, (6.17)
whereas (6.14) gives
vT=/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0−/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
dcos2l−/Theta1
Rd.
Since cos2l=1
2(cos 2 l+1),w eg e t
vT=1
2/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0−/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
dcos 2 l−1
2/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0+/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
d. (6.18)

<<<PAGE 184>>>

164 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
We can ﬁnally write (6.17) and(6.18) in the form
vR=Adsin 2l, (6.19)
vT=Adcos 2 l+Bd, (6.20)
where
A=1
2/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0−/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
=−1
2R0/parenleftbiggdω
dR/parenrightbigg
R0(6.21)
and
B=−1
2/bracketleftBigg
/Theta10
R0+/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dR/parenrightbigg
R0/bracketrightBigg
(6.22)
are known as Oort constants.
The radial velocity vRof a star can be easily determined from the Doppler
shifts of spectral lines. Suppose we measure vRof many stars located at approx-
imately the same distance din the galactic plane. From (6.19), we expect vRto
vary as sin 2 lwith the galactic longitude of the star. Joy(1939) was one of the
ﬁrst astronomers to carry out such an analysis. Figure 6.5 from Joy(1939)s h o w s
radial velocities of four groups of Cepheid variables of which distances could
be estimated from periods, the members of each group lying at a ﬁxed distance
d. We clearly see a sinusoidal variation in vRwith the galactic longitude. Data
points not lying exactly on the ﬁtted curves indicate that stars do not move in
precise circular orbits. Since the amplitude of the oscillation is Ad, we can ﬁnd
the Oort constant Aif we know d. To determine the other Oort constant B,
we need to ﬁnd the tangential velocity vTof many nearby stars with respect to
some non-rotating frame (such as the frame provided by extragalactic objects).The determination of Bis more difﬁcult than the determination of Aand has
been discussed by Mihalas and Binney (1981). Before quoting the best modern
values of AandB, let us discuss the unit in which we should be expressing
Aand B. It should be clear from (6.19) and (6.20) that both Aand Bare
obtained by dividing velocities by distances. Since stellar velocities are usuallyexpressed in km s
−1, whereas galactic distances are expressed in kpc, it has
been the convention to express AandBin units of km s−1kpc−1. Even though
we could use a conversion factor between kpc and km to express AandBin
s−1(the dimensions of AandBare of inverse time), we follow the standard
convention. The most reliable modern values of the Oort constants are obtained
from the proper motion measurements by the Hipparcos astronomy satellite (our
Figure 3.5 showing the HR diagram of nearby stars is also based on data from
this satellite). They are

<<<PAGE 185>>>

6.2 Galactic rotation 165
Fig. 6.5 Radial velocities of four groups of Cepheid variables located at four different
distances. Note that the galactic coordinates indicated refer to the old system and not the
presently used system (in which the galactic centre is taken as zero). From Joy(1939).
(c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical
Journal.)
A=14.8±0.8k ms−1kpc−1, (6.23)
B=− 12.4±0.6k ms−1kpc−1(6.24)
as given by Feast and Whitelock (1997).

<<<PAGE 186>>>

166 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
6.3 Nearly circular orbits of stars
We assumed in §6.2 that all stars in the galactic disk move exactly in circular
orbits. In reality, however, we do not expect most stars to move in exactly
circular orbits, just as planets in the solar system do not move in exactlycircular orbits. We know that a planet moves in an ellipse, which is the orbit
in a gravitational ﬁeld falling as the inverse square of distance from the central
mass. Since the mass of the Galaxy is not concentrated in a central region butdistributed all over the Galaxy, we expect that the gravitational ﬁeld will notfollow a simple inverse-square law and the orbits in the galactic disk will not be
simple ellipses. We now want to ﬁnd out the orbit of a star by assuming that the
departure from a circular orbit is small.
Let/Theta1
circ(r)be the speed which a star will need to move in a circular orbit
at a distance rfrom the galactic centre. If fris the gravitational force at this
distance r, then we must have
fr=−/Theta12
circ
r. (6.25)
Let/Theta10=/Theta1circ(R0)be the circular speed where the Sun is located, at a distance
R0from the galactic centre. We can think of a frame of reference at the Sun’s
position moving with speed /Theta10in a circular orbit around the galactic centre.
This frame of reference is known as the local standard of rest (LSR). If a star has
a small velocity with respect to the LSR, then the orbit of the star can be found
by determining its movements with respect to the LSR by using a perturbation
technique.
6.3.1 The epicycle theory
We consider a star moving with speed /Theta10in a circular orbit at distance R0.
Suppose the star is suddenly given a small kick in the radial direction. According
to classical mechanics, its subsequent motion will be governed by the following
equations
¨r−r˙θ2=fr,
r2˙θ=constant
(see, for example, Goldstein ,1980, §3–2). Since the speed /Theta1in the θdirection
is given by /Theta1=r˙θ, the above two equations can be written as
¨r=/Theta12
r−/Theta12
circ
r, (6.26)
r/Theta1=R0/Theta10, (6.27)

<<<PAGE 187>>>

6.3 Nearly circular orbits of stars 167
using (6.25) to substitute for frand noting that the angular momentum of the
star remains R0/Theta10, which did not change when we gave the star a radial kick.
We now write
r=R0+ξ=R0/parenleftbigg
1+ξ
R0/parenrightbigg
(6.28)
and assume that ξ/lessmuchR0, since the star will not move too far away from the
circular orbit r=R0after receiving the small radial kick. We shall neglect the
quadratic and higher powers of ξin our discussion. Using (6.27), we clearly
have
/Theta12
r=R2
0/Theta12
0
r3≈/Theta120
R0/parenleftbigg
1−3ξ
R0/parenrightbigg
(6.29)
on making use of (6.28) and keeping only the linear term in ξ. We can write
/Theta1circ(r)≈/Theta1circ(R0)+/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dr/parenrightbigg
R0ξ≈/Theta10−(A+B)ξ, (6.30)
where AandBare the Oort constants deﬁned through (6.21) and(6.22).T h e n
it follows
/Theta12
circ
r=/Theta12
0/bracketleftBig
1−(A+B)
/Theta10ξ/bracketrightBig2
R0/parenleftBig
1+ξ
R0/parenrightBig≈/Theta120
R0/bracketleftbigg
1−2(A+B)
/Theta10ξ−ξ
R0/bracketrightbigg
. (6.31)
On noting that ¨r=¨ξand on making use of (6.29) and(6.31), we can write down
(6.26) in the following approximate form
¨ξ=2/Theta10
R0(A+B)ξ−2/Theta120
R2
0ξ.
On substituting
/Theta10
R0=A−B,
this leads to
¨ξ=4B(A−B)ξ,
which can be written as
¨ξ+κ2ξ=0, (6.32)
where
κ=/radicalbig
−4B(A−B) (6.33)
is a real quantity because Bis negative. It is clear that there will be a simple
harmonic motion of the star in the radial direction with respect to the circular

<<<PAGE 188>>>

168 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
orbit r=R0. The radial velocity /Pi1=˙rwith respect to the LSR also should
vary in a simple harmonic fashion and can be written as
/Pi1=/Pi10cosκt (6.34)
so that the displacement should be
ξ=/Pi10
κsinκt. (6.35)
Now we look at the motion in the θdirection. From the constancy of the
angular momentum r2˙θ,w eh a v e
˙θ=R0/Theta10
r2≈/Theta10
R0/parenleftbigg
1−2ξ
R0/parenrightbigg
.
Since the ﬁrst term /Theta10/R0corresponds to the motion of the LSR, the part
corresponding to the motion of the star with respect to the LSR is approximately
given by
/Delta1˙θ=−2/Theta10ξ
R2
0.
This translates into a linear velocity which, in the linear order in ξ,i s
/Delta1/Theta1=(R0+ξ)/Delta1˙θ=−2/Theta10ξ
R0=−2/Pi10/Theta10
κR0sinκt (6.36)
on substituting from (6.35). The corresponding displacement is
η=2/Pi10/Theta10
κ2R0cosκt.
Since it follows from (6.21), (6.22) and(6.33) that
/Theta10
κ2R0=(A−B)
−4B(A−B)=1
−4B,
we get
η=/Pi10
−2Bcosκt. (6.37)
It should be clear from (6.35) and(6.37) that the star moves in an ellipse
with respect to the LSR, while the LSR is revolving around the galactic centre,as shown in Figure 6.6 . The ancient Greek astronomers Hipparchus (2nd century
BC) and Ptolemy (2nd century AD) ascribed motions of a similar kind to
planets in their geocentric theory. Borrowing a term from ancient astronomy,
we call such motions epicyclic. The elliptical path of the star with respect to
the LSR is called an epicycle. It follows from (6.35) and (6.37) that the ratio

<<<PAGE 189>>>

6.3 Nearly circular orbits of stars 169
Fig. 6.6 A sketch showing the epicyclic motion of a star around the LSR.
of the semimajor axis (in the θdirection) to the semiminor axis (in the r
direction) is
/Pi10/2|B|
/Pi10/κ=/radicalBigg
A−B
|B|
on substituting for κfrom (6.33). Putting values of AandBas given by (6.23)
and (6.24), this ratio turns out to be 1.48. So the ellipse is elongated in the
tangential direction. The period of oscillation in the epicycle is related to the
revolution period in the following way
Posc
Prev=2π/κ
2πR0//Theta10=A−B√−4B(A−B)=1
2/radicalbigg
A−B
−B. (6.38)
On putting the values of AandB, this ratio of periods is found to be 0.74 for
stars in the solar neighbourhood. Since this ratio is not in general a rationalnumber for a star at an arbitrary distance from the galactic centre, the orbit of
the star will not close.
6.3.2 The solar motion
A star in the solar neighbourhood would not in general be at rest in the LSR,
but would move in an epicycle with respect to the LSR. Is the Sun at rest inthe LSR? Unless it is an unusual accident, we expect the answer to be ‘no’.
The motion of the Sun with respect to the LSR at the present epoch is called the
solar motion . This motion can be found out by studying the motions of the stars
in the solar neighbourhood and by assuming that these stars do not have any net

<<<PAGE 190>>>

170 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
drift in the radial direction or perpendicular to the galactic plane. This implies
/angbracketleft/Pi1/angbracketright=0, /angbracketleftZ/angbracketright=0. (6.39)
Here Zis the component of velocity perpendicular to the galactic plane and
/angbracketleft.../angbracketrightimplies averaging over stars in the solar neighbourhood. We have shown
in§6.3.1 that/Pi1for a particular star varies sinusoidally. The reader is asked in
Exercise 6.4 to show the same for Z. So it is no wonder that their averages will
be zero.
Let(/Pi1⊙,/Theta1⊙−/Theta10,Z⊙)be the components of solar motion. From the
Doppler shifts of spectral lines, we can ﬁnd the line of sight velocity of a
star with respect to the Sun, whereas the proper motion gives the velocity
perpendicular to the line of sight. Combining these measurements, one can ﬁndout the components /Pi1−/Pi1
⊙andZ−Z⊙of relative velocity, and then their
averages over the stars in the solar neighbourhood. Because of (6.39),w eh a v e
/angbracketleft/Pi1−/Pi1⊙/angbracketright=/angbracketleft/Pi1/angbracketright−/Pi1⊙=−/Pi1⊙ (6.40)
and similarly
/angbracketleftZ−Z⊙/angbracketright= − Z⊙. (6.41)
Thus these averages give us the components of solar motion, which arefound to be
/Pi1
⊙=− 10.0±0.4k ms−1,Z⊙=7.2±0.4k ms−1. (6.42)
Since the LSR itself does not have any /Pi1orZvelocities, it is relatively easy
to ﬁnd the components of solar motion with respect to LSR in these directions.
Now let us consider the θdirection. We certainly have
/angbracketleft/Theta1−/Theta1⊙/angbracketright= − (/Theta1⊙−/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright), (6.43)
which can be found out from the measurements of stellar velocities with respect
to the Sun. Now, if /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketrightis equal to the velocity /Theta10=/Theta1circ(R0)of the LSR, then
/Theta1⊙−/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketrightwould give the solar motion with respect to the LSR. But is it true
that/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright= /Theta10? From the epicycle theory presented in §6.3.1, especially (6.36),
it would seem that a star would simply oscillate forward and backward withrespect to the LSR and /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketrightaveraged over many stars in the solar neighbourhood
would give /Theta1
0. However, this result is a consequence of the assumption of
linearity. If we go beyond the linear theory, then we ﬁnd that the centre of the
epicycle, known as the guiding centre , moves slower than the LSR. The reason
is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd if we look at Figure 6.6 . Because of the curvature of the
path of the guiding centre, the length of the epicycle path on the outside (i.e.
away from the galactic centre) is larger than the length of the epicycle path on
the inside. From (6.27) the velocity /Theta1is less when the star is in the outer part
of the epicycle. Hence the star covers a longer path with a slower speed and the
average /Theta1of the star should actually be less than /Theta10. We missed this effect in

<<<PAGE 191>>>

6.3 Nearly circular orbits of stars 171
§6.3.1, since the curvature of the guiding centre path was not taken into account
in the linear theory. As we shall discuss in §7.6.2, things can be even more
complicated when we consider the fact that the guiding centres of different
stars in the solar neighbourhood may lie at different distances from the galactic
centre. We see from (6.43) that the solar motion in the θdirection is given by
/Theta1⊙−/Theta10=− /angbracketleft(/Theta1−/Theta1⊙)/angbracketright+/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright−/Theta1 0. (6.44)
Thus, apart from /angbracketleft(/Theta1−/Theta1⊙)/angbracketright, which is found from the observations of stellar
motions in the solar neighbourhood, we need to know how /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright differs from the
velocity of LSR /Theta10to ﬁnd out the solar motion in the θdirection. We shall
see in §7.6.2 how/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright−/Theta1 0can be found. Here let us only quote the ﬁnal
result that
/Theta1⊙−/Theta10=5.2±0.6k ms−1(6.45)
according to the current available data. The values quoted in (6.42) and(6.45)
are from Binney and Merriﬁeld (1998, §10.3.1).
The amplitude of the solar motion is of order 10 km s−1. The typical random
velocity of a star in the solar neighbourhood is also of this order. Then the ampli-tude of oscillation in the radial direction, which is given by /Pi1
0/κaccording to
(6.35), should be of order 1 kpc on taking /Pi10to be of order 10 km s−1.
6.3.3 The Schwarzschild velocity ellipsoid
A measurement of the velocities of stars in the solar neighbourhood may givethe impression that the distribution of velocities is random. In reality, however,most of the stars are moving in their epicyclic orbits. Since the typical amplitudeof radial oscillation is of order 1 kpc, stars with guiding centres lying within
a band of width 1 kpc on either side of R
0(the distance of the Sun from the
galactic centre) can come into the solar neighbourhood during their epicyclic
motions. Let the guiding centre of a star be at a distance r=Rgfrom the
galactic centre. We now want to apply the theory of §6.3.1 by assuming that
a radial displacement ξhas brought the star into the solar neighbourhood, i.e.
R0=Rg+ξ
so that
/Theta1circ(R0)=/Theta1circ(Rg)+/parenleftbiggd/Theta1
dr/parenrightbigg
ξ. (6.46)
In the place of (6.27),w eh a v e
R0/Theta1(R0)=Rg/Theta1circ(Rg)=(R0−ξ)/Theta1 circ(Rg),

<<<PAGE 192>>>

172 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
where /Theta1(R0)is the tangential speed of the star when it comes near the Sun and
is clearly equal to
/Theta1(R0)=/Theta1circ(Rg)/parenleftbigg
1−ξ
R0/parenrightbigg
. (6.47)
The relative tangential speed of the star with respect to the LSR is
/Theta1(R0)−/Theta1circ(R0)=−/bracketleftbigg/Theta1circ(Rg)
R0+d/Theta1
dr/bracketrightbigg
ξ
on substituting from (6.46) and(6.47). To the order in which we ignore terms
quadratic in ξ, the term within the square bracket should be equal to −2B,a s
seen from (6.22).T h e n
/Theta1(R0)−/Theta1circ(R0)=2Bξ=2B
κ/Pi10sinκt (6.48)
on making use of (6.35). Since the radial speed of the star is given by /Pi10cosκt
according to (6.34), we should have
/angbracketleft|/Pi1|/angbracketright
/angbracketleft|/Delta1/Theta1|/angbracketright=κ
−2B=/radicalbigg
A−B
−B(6.49)
on using (6.33).
It was proposed by Schwarzschild (1907) that the stars in the solar neigh-
bourhood would have an ellipsoidal distribution in the velocity space. In other
words, the number of stars with velocity components lying between /Pi1and
/Pi1+d/Pi1,/Theta1and/Theta1+d/Theta1,ZandZ+dZshould be
f(/Pi1, /Theta1, Z)d/Pi1d/Theta1dZ=Cexp/bracketleftBigg
−/Pi12
σ2
/Pi1−(/Theta1−/Theta10)2
σ2
/Theta1−Z2
σ2
Z/bracketrightBigg
d/Pi1d/Theta1dZ.
(6.50)
It should be clear that the random velocities in the randθdirections are
/angbracketleft|/Pi1|/angbracketright = σ/Pi1and/angbracketleft|/Delta1/Theta1|/angbracketright = σ/Theta1. It then follows from (6.49) that
σ/Pi1
σ/Theta1=/radicalbigg
A−B
−B,
which has the numerical value 1.48. We thus have the beautiful result thateven the ellipticity of the Schwarzschild velocity ellipsoid depends on the Oortconstants. Figure 6.7 shows the random velocities in different directions for
stars of different colours in the solar neighbourhood. It is seen that redder starstend to have more random velocities. However, the ratio of σ
/Pi1toσ/Theta1turns out
to be not very different from 1.48 for stars of any colour.

<<<PAGE 193>>>

6.4 Stellar populations 173
Fig. 6.7 The velocity dispersions for stars of different colours in the solar neighbour-
hood. From Dehnen and Binney (1998). ( c/circlecopyrtRoyal Astronomical Society. Reproduced
with permission from Monthly Notices of Royal Astronomical Society .)
6.4 Stellar populations
We have already pointed out in §6.2 that our Galaxy contains two subsystems.
One subsystem consists of stars in the disk which revolve around the galac-
tic centre in nearly circular orbits. We shall see in §6.5 that the interstellar
matter also revolves around the galactic centre with these stars and belongs
to this subsystem. The other subsystem contains the globular clusters which
have no systematic rotation around the galactic centre. Apart from globularclusters, the spheroidal component of our Galaxy (i.e. the bulge around thegalactic centre seen in Figure 6.1 ) belongs to this subsystem. For stars in the
spheroidal component also, gravity is balanced by random motions, since thesestars have very little systematic rotation. Additionally, the Galaxy has a non-rotating halo of stars. Although the density of stars in the halo is much lessthan the density of stars in the disk, even in the solar neighbourhood we see a
handful of stars with high random velocities which presumably belong to the
halo (we shall discuss this in more detail in §7.7). There are several distinct
differences between the physical characteristics of these two subsystems. Thestars in the non-rotating subsystem consisting mainly of the globular clusters
and the spheroidal component are mainly very old stars. The bright O and B
stars, which are short-lived, are not found in this subsystem, where formationof new stars does not take place. While discussing HR diagrams of globularclusters in §3.6.2, we already pointed out that these are very old systems in
which the main sequence does not go all the way to very luminous stars. Onthe other hand, star formation out of interstellar matter continuously takes placein the rotating subsystem comprising stars and interstellar matter in the galactic

<<<PAGE 194>>>

174 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
disk. We see O and B stars in this subsystem. Finally, the stars in the non-
rotating subsystem are deﬁcient in ‘metals’ (i.e. elements heavier than He suchas C, N and O, which are called ‘metals’ by astronomers) compared to stars in
the galactic disk belonging to the rotating subsystem. We pointed out in §4.3
and§4.7 that the heavier elements are produced inside stars and get strewn in
the interstellar matter when massive stars undergo supernova explosions. With
more and more supernova explosions, the interstellar matter of the Galaxy is
presumably getting more enriched with these heavier elements. The old stars
of the non-rotating subsystem must have formed from a primordial interstellarmatter which was not yet rich in metals. The stars in the other rotating subsystemare younger and formed out of interstellar matter after it became enriched with
metals.
Based on these considerations, Baade (1944) introduced the idea of two
stellar populations. The Population I stellar systems are relatively metal-rich,
contain interstellar matter and very bright O/B stars, and revolve around the
galactic centre to balance the pull of gravity. The Population II stellar systems
are comparatively metal-poor, contain no interstellar matter or O/B stars, andcounteract the gravitational ﬁeld of the Galaxy by having random motions. Thegalactic disk is the prime example of a Population I system, whereas the globular
clusters along with the spheroidal bulge and the halo belong to Population II.
Since we believe that all stars form out of interstellar matter, even Population IIsystems must have contained interstellar matter at some early stage out of whichthey formed, even though now they do not have much interstellar matter any
more. Presumably, all the interstellar matter has been used up in forming stars.
Even though a classiﬁcation into two distinct stellar populations may be anover-simpliﬁcation of a complex situation, the concept of stellar populations
has proved extremely useful and is still widely used by astronomers.
6.5 In search of the interstellar gas
We have seen in §6.1.3 that the existence of interstellar matter was established
from the extinction and reddening of starlight produced by the interstellar dust.
There was evidence that the interstellar space contained much more matter inthe form of gas rather than in the form of dust. For example, evidence forthe gas came from narrow absorption lines observed in the spectra of some
stars. A spectral line gets broadened due to the random thermal motions of the
atoms in the material which produces the spectral line (this is known as thermal
broadening). An absorption line produced in a stellar atmosphere is expectedto have a broadening appropriate for the temperature of the atmosphere. A
narrow absorption line in a stellar spectrum indicates that the line must be
produced by some considerably cooler gas, possibly distributed along the lineof sight between the star and us. However, much of this gas (outside some

<<<PAGE 195>>>

6.5 In search of the interstellar gas 175
limited regions as discussed in §6.6) emits no visible light. We shall discuss
in§7.6.1 an important limit on the density of interstellar matter known as the
Oort limit (Oort, 1932). It appeared that the mass in the interstellar matter may
be comparable to the mass contained in the stars in the solar neighbourhood.
Astronomers faced a peculiar problem in the 1930s and 1940s: even thoughthey became aware of the existence of a considerable amount of gas in theinterstellar space, they did not know how to study it systematically because
they were unable to detect any radiation coming from the gas.
After the advent of radio astronomy, van de Hulst (1945) ﬁnally suggested
a way out of the impasse when he predicted that the interstellar hydrogen gas
would emit radiation at the radio wavelength of 21 cm. The proton and the
electron in the hydrogen atom can have their spins either parallel or antiparallel.
The state with parallel spins has slightly higher energy than the state withantiparallel spins. When transition from the higher state to the lower statetakes place, radiation with wavelength 21 cm is expected to be emitted. This is,
however, a ‘forbidden’ atomic line and it is not easy to see this line in laboratory
experiments. Since interstellar space has a huge amount of hydrogen with verylow density such that an atom in the higher state is unlikely to de-excite due tocollisions, van de Hulst (1945) suggested that it should be possible to receive
emission from interstellar hydrogen at this spectral line. Within a few yearsof this remarkable prediction, emission from interstellar gas at this wavelengthwas detected independently by Ewen and Purcell (1951) and by Muller and Oort
(1951). The 21-cm line soon proved to be a very powerful tool for studying the
distribution of the interstellar gas.
If the emitting gas has any radial velocity along the line of sight, that would
cause the wavelength to shift from 21 cm. Since the intrinsic width of the 21-cmline from a cold gas would be narrow, it is ideally suited to measure the wave-
length shift which gives the radial velocity. Suppose in the direction of galacticcoordinates (l,b)we ﬁnd the intensity I(l,b,λ )as a function of wavelength.
Since the wavelength shift gives the radial velocity v
Rof the emitting gas, we
can write the intensity as I(l,b,vR). Of particular interest is the intensity in
various directions of the galactic plane for which b=0◦.Figure 6.8 shows
I(l,b=0◦,vR)plotted in the l–vRplane. The distribution of the interstellar
gas has to be found out from plots like this.
We consider a line of sight in the galactic plane as shown in Figure 6.9 .
We assume the interstellar gas to revolve around the galactic centre exactly incircular orbits. Then the radial velocity v
Rat different points along the line of
sight is given by (6.13). It is clear that |vR|should be maximum when |ω−ω0|
is maximum. Suppose ωincreases as we go closer to the galactic centre (which
is true except in a small region near the centre). Then |vR|should be maximum at
point 1 where the line of sight is tangent to the innermost circular orbit touchedby the path of light. We see in Figure 6.8 that, for a given l, the intensity drops
to zero beyond a certain value of |v
R|. This maximum |vR|should correspond

<<<PAGE 196>>>

176 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.8 The intensity I(l,b=0◦,vR)of the 21-cm line shown by grey scale in the
l–vRplane. As given by Binney and Merriﬁeld (1998), based on the data provided by
D. Hartmann. See Hartmann and Burton (1997) for details. Courtesy: D. Hartmann and
M. Merriﬁeld.
Fig. 6.9 A schematic line of sight
through the Galaxy, along which
we receive 21-cm emissions frominterstellar clouds.
to that point along the light path where it is tangential to an orbit (like point 1
inFigure 6.9 ). On applying (6.13), we then ﬁnd out ωat a distance r=R0sinl
from the galactic centre, since it is the circular orbit at this distance to which theline of sight is a tangent. It is possible to ﬁnd ωa saf u n c t i o no f rtill the solar
orbit at r=R
0. This method does not apply for determining ωbeyond R0,f o r
which we require other methods.
The interstellar gas is found to be quite clumpy. The clumps of interstellar
gas are referred to as clouds by astronomers. The clumpiness of the interstellar
gas can be easily inferred from the non-smooth distribution of the intensity
I(l,b=0◦,vR)seen in Figure 6.8 . Wherever there is a local peak of intensity
in the l–vRplane, we conclude that there must be a cloud in the ldirection
moving with radial velocity vR. Clouds located at points 2 and 3 in Figure 6.9
should have the same vR, which follows from (6.13). Hence, if we see a peak
in the intensity at this vR, we infer the existence of a cloud at 2 or 3. To
determine whether the cloud is at 2 or 3, we can look at the angular size of thecloud perpendicular to the galactic plane. If this size is large, then we expectthe cloud to be located at the nearer point. Proceeding in this way, we can

<<<PAGE 197>>>

6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 177
Fig. 6.10 The distribution of neutral hydrogen in the galactic plane, as found by Oort,
Kerr and Westerhout (1958) from 21-cm observations. ( c/circlecopyrtRoyal Astronomical Society.
Reproduced with permission from Monthly Notices of Royal Astronomical Society .)
reconstruct the gas distribution in the galactic plane from Figure 6.8 .W es h o wi n
Figure 6.10 the famous reconstruction due to Oort, Kerr and Westerhout (1958).
It is clear that the distribution of neutral hydrogen gas in the Galaxy is highly
non-homogeneous. We also notice that this distribution traces out the spiral arms
of the Galaxy.
During the last few decades, it has been established that the interstellar
medium (usually abbreviated as ISM) is an extremely complex system con-
taining several distinct phases. We now discuss the phases of the interstellar
medium and point out how we get information about them.
6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools
In§2.7 we discussed how one can analyse a spectral line which is formed by the
passage of radiation through an absorbing medium. However, when we analyse
radiation that has been emitted by the ISM or that has passed through the ISM,
we need to keep in mind that the ISM is far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
Hence usually the radiation present in the interstellar space would not be inequilibrium with matter, and Kirchhoff’s law (2.26) may not hold. While the

<<<PAGE 198>>>

178 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
results derived in §2.7 should hold for visible light passing through the ISM, it
is often necessary to study the radiative transfer through the ISM from a more
microscopic point of view than what we adopted in Chapter 2.
Let us consider two energy levels of some atom. The transitions between
these levels are accompanied by emission or absorption of photons with energy
hν0equal to the energy difference between the levels. We shall use the sub-
scripts uandlto denote the upper and lower levels. Let the atomic number
densities in the upper and lower levels be nuandnl. It is useful to develop
our discussion from the well-known Einstein coefﬁcients of radiative transitiontreated in many textbooks (see, for example, Richtmeyer, Kennard and Cooper,1969, §13.12). Let A
ulbe the coefﬁcient of spontaneous transition, whereas Bul
andBluare the coefﬁcients of induced transition. The number of spontaneous
transitions per unit volume per unit time is nuAuland the energy emitted in
these transitions is hν0nuAul. The energy emitted per unit volume per unit time
per unit solid angle is given by dividing this by 4π . This should be equal to the
emission coefﬁcient jνintegrated over the spectral line, i.e.
/integraldisplay
jνdν=hν0nuAul
4π.
Letφ(/Delta1ν) be the normalized line proﬁle where /Delta1νis the departure of the
frequency from the line centre at ν0and/integraltext
φ(/Delta1ν)d ν=1. Then jνshould be
of the form
jν=hν0nuAul
4πφ(/Delta1ν). (6.51)
In the presence of a radiation ﬁeld with energy density Uνgiven by (2.5),t h e
number of induced upward transitions per unit volume per unit time is nlBluUν,
whereas the corresponding number of downward transitions is nuBulUν.T h e
net energy absorbed per unit volume per unit time must be
Eabs=hν0
c(nlBlu−nuBul)/integraldisplay
Iνd/Omega1 (6.52)
on making use of (2.5). The energy absorbed from the beam Iνin unit volume
in unit time is ανIν. The energy absorbed from radiation coming from all direc-
tions is obtained by integrating this over all solid angles. So another expressionof
Eabsis given by again integrating this over the absorption line (presumably
ανis non-zero only for frequencies at which absorption takes place), i.e.
Eabs=/integraldisplay
dν/integraldisplay
ανIνd/Omega1. (6.53)
Comparing the above two expressions of Eabsand assuming for simplicity that
the absorption coefﬁcient ανalso has the same proﬁle φ(/Delta1ν), we conclude
αν=hν0
c(nlBlu−nuBul)φ( /Delta1 ν) . (6.54)

<<<PAGE 199>>>

6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 179
From (6.51) and(6.54), we see that the source function is given by
Sν=jν
αν=c
4πnuAul
nlBlu−nuBul. (6.55)
The Einstein transition coefﬁcients satisfy the following important relations
amongst themselves
Aul=8πhν3
c3Bul,guBul=glBlu, (6.56)
where guandglare the statistical weights of the upper and lower states. Since
the relations (6.56) follow from the fundamental transitions of the atom, they
should not depend on whether there is thermodynamic equilibrium around or
not. We, therefore, expect (6.56) to be valid even when our system is not in
thermodynamic equilibrium. However, only if the system is in thermodynamic
equilibrium, should we have the Boltzmann relation
nu
nl=gu
glexp/parenleftbigg
−hν0
κBT/parenrightbigg
. (6.57)
On using (6.56) and(6.57), it easily follows from (6.55) that the source function
Sνshould be equal to the Planck function Bν(T)as given by (2.6). This is the
case only when the system is in thermodynamic equilibrium. If the system isout of thermodynamic equilibrium, then (6.57) may not hold and consequently
the source function (6.55) may not be equal to B
ν(T).
For a system not in thermodynamic equilibrium, we have to determine the
population nifor a level iby solving microscopic rate equations. If Rijis
the transition probability from level ito level j,t h e nn i/summationtext
jRijgives the rate
of transitions out of level i. In the steady state, this has to equal the rate of
transitions into level ifrom all other levels jgiven by/summationtext
jnjRji. We thus have
ni/summationdisplay
jRij−/summationdisplay
jnjRji=0. (6.58)
We have one such equation for each atomic level i. If we can ﬁgure out the
transition rates Rijbetween various levels from fundamental physics, then we
can solve these simultaneous equations to determine the populations in thevarious levels.
Let us consider the simplest case of two levels uandlas an illustration. In
addition to the spontaneous emission and induced emission already discussed,there can be a transition from the upper level to the lower level by inelasticcollisions with electrons present in the system. We expect the transition ratedue to collisional de-excitation to be proportional to both the electron number
density n
eand the number density nuof atoms in the upper level. So we
can write this transition rate as γulnune. Similarly, there would be collisional
excitation of atoms from the lower to the upper level, in addition to transitions

<<<PAGE 200>>>

180 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
induced by radiation. Since the transition rates for u→landl→uhave to
balance in the steady state, we have
nu(Aul+BulUν+γulne)=nl(BluUν+γlune). (6.59)
The collisional transition rates should be independent of whether the radiation
ﬁeld is in equilibrium with matter. Hence, if we can derive any relation amongstthem under the assumption of full thermodynamic equilibrium, then that rela-tion should hold even when we do not have radiation in equilibrium with matter.
The relations amongst the Einstein transition coefﬁcients are always given by
(6.56). Under the condition of thermodynamic equilibrium, U
νfollows from
(2.6) and the Boltzmann relation (6.57) holds. On making use of them, we ﬁnd
that(6.59) holds only if
glγlu=guγulexp/parenleftbigg
−hν0
κBT/parenrightbigg
. (6.60)
This should be valid even when no radiation ﬁeld is present.
In the interstellar medium, we often have atoms excited to a higher level
collisionally. Then the excited atoms return to the lower level either throughcollisions or through the spontaneous emission of photons. If the energy density
of radiation is negligible, then we can put U
ν=0i n (6.59) and obtain
nu
nl=γlune
Aul+γulne.
On making use of (6.60), this becomes
nu
nl=gu
glexp/parenleftbigg
−hν0
κBT/parenrightbigg
.1
1+(Aul/γulne). (6.61)
It is clear that we would get back the Boltzmann distribution (6.57) if spon-
taneous emission is absent (i.e. if Aul=0). The spontaneous emission makes
some atoms de-excite from the upper level and thereby decreases the population
of the upper level compared to what we have got from the Boltzmann distribu-tion (6.57).
In this simple example of an atom with two levels, we ﬁnd that the upper
level gets de-populated. However, this is not a generic result. If there is atleast one more level of the atom to which transitions from the lower levelare preferred, then it is possible for the upper level to be over-populated (see
Exercise 6.6).
We now list the different phases of the interstellar medium and point out
how we get information about them.
6.6.1 H Iclouds
The neutral atomic hydrogen in the interstellar space is often referred to as H I.
We see in Figure 6.10 that the distribution of H Iinside the Galaxy is highly

<<<PAGE 201>>>

6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 181
non-uniform. The clouds of H Iconcentration typically have densities of order
106–108particles m−3and temperatures of order 80 K. Although they may
occupy only 5% of the volume of the interstellar space, they contribute nearly
40% of the mass of the interstellar matter. In the direction perpendicular to the
galactic plane in the solar neighbourhood, H Iclouds are found mostly within
a distance of about 100 pc from the mid-plane. The 21-cm line is the mostimportant diagnostic tool for studying H
Iclouds. However, they can also be
studied by analysing the narrow absorption lines in the visible and UV partsof the stellar spectra, caused by the absorption of starlight by the interstellargas at certain deﬁnite wavelengths. The low temperature of the gas ensuresthat the thermal broadening of the lines is much less than what would have
been the case if they were formed in the stellar atmosphere. As discussed in
§2.7, the composition of the interstellar gas can be determined from an analysisof these narrow absorption lines. It is found that elements like carbon, oxygenand nitrogen are much less abundant in the interstellar gas clouds compared
to what we believe to be the cosmic composition. The usual reason given for
this is that these elements are locked up in the dust grains (discussed in §6.1.3)
which are present within the clouds. We still do not have a very good idea about
the composition of the dust grains. However, as we pointed out in §6.1.3,a
perusal of the extinction curve by dust grains suggests that carbon in the formof graphite should be an important component.
Much of the information about the neutral hydrogen gas in interstellar
space comes from the 21-cm line. As we pointed out in §6.5, along the line of
sight, there would be clouds moving with different radial velocities due to thedifferential rotation of the Galaxy. These clouds would emit at slightly differentwavelengths. To focus on the basic physics, let us consider the simple situation
of one optically thin cloud in the line of sight. It will produce a narrow emission
line at a wavelength close to 21 cm. If there is a background radio source with acontinuum spectrum, we also expect to see an absorption line at this wavelength.Let us now consider how we can extract important information about interstellar
hydrogen from the emission and absorption lines.
In the upper level of the 21-cm transition, the spin of the electron and
the proton are parallel, giving a combined spin of 1. It is a standard result of
quantum mechanics that this level should have the statistical weight g
u=3,
whereas the lower state with antiparallel spins should have the statistical weight
gl=1. For T=80 K, the difference of energy hν0between these levels is small
compared to κBTand the exponential factor in (6.57) is close to 1, such that
nu/nl=3. If nHis the number density of hydrogen atoms, then
nu=3
4nH,nl=1
4nH (6.62)
are the number densities of hydrogen atoms in the upper and lower levels. For anoptically thin source, it easily follows from the radiative transfer equation (2.12)

<<<PAGE 202>>>

182 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
that the speciﬁc intensity is given by/integraltext
jνds, and the total intensity of emission
in the spectral line is
I=/integraldisplay
ds/integraldisplay
jνdν.
On substituting from (6.51) and(6.62), this becomes
I=3
16πhν0Aul/integraldisplay
nHds. (6.63)
It is known that Aul=2.85×10−15s−1for the 21-cm transition, which means
that an atom in the upper level is expected to make a downward transition once
in 107yr. It is no wonder that the 21-cm emission is difﬁcult to produce in a
laboratory setup, since a collisional downward transition would be much more
likely. It follows from (6.63) that a measurement of Ig i v e su st h ev a l u eo f/integraltext
nHds, since all the other things are known. If we have an idea of the path
length through the cloud, we get an estimate of nH.
We now consider the absorption line. For an optically thin obstacle, it would
follow from (2.20) that the intensity after passing through the obstacle would be
Iν(τν)=Iν(0)e−τν, (6.64)
where Iν(0)is the intensity of the background source. Hence the depth of the
spectral line depends on the optical depth τν=/integraltext
ανds, which we now estimate.
On making use of (6.56) and (6.57), the expression (6.54) for the absorption
coefﬁcient becomes
αν=hν0
cnlBlu/bracketleftbigg
1−exp/parenleftbigg
−hν0
κBT/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
φ(/Delta1ν). (6.65)
Since hν0/lessmuchκBTfor the 21-cm line, we get
αν=hν0
cnlBluhν0
κBTφ(/Delta1ν).
Making use of (6.56) and(6.62), this becomes
αν=3
32πnHAulhc2
ν0κBTφ(/Delta1ν).
Hence the optical depth is given by
τν=3
32πAulhc2
ν0κBφ(/Delta1ν)/integraldisplaynH
Tds. (6.66)
It follows from (6.64) that the 21-cm absorption line gives us the integral
/integraldisplaynH
Tds
along the line of sight, whereas the 21-cm emission line gives the integral/integraltext
nHds,a sw es a wi n(6.63). By combining the information obtained from the

<<<PAGE 203>>>

6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 183
emission and the absorption lines, we can estimate the temperature of the neutral
hydrogen gas.
It may be noted that we used the opposite limit hν0/greatermuchκBTin§2.7,
where we considered visible light passing through H Iregions. In that limit,
the exponential term in (6.65) would be negligible so that we had a different
expression (2.87) for the optical depth. We had used the oscillator strength f
in our discussion in §2.7, whereas we are now using the Einstein coefﬁcients.
These are obviously related quantities (Exercise 6.5).
6.6.2 Warm intercloud medium
Let us now consider what happens to the emission and the absorption lines at21 cm if the hydrogen gas is warmer. Certainly the line proﬁle φ(/Delta1ν) should get
broader due to thermal broadening. However, the total intensity at the emission
line, as given by (6.63) should not change. On the other hand, the absorption line
should become much weaker because the optical depth, as given by (6.66),i s
inversely proportional to temperature. Suppose, along our line of sight, we haveboth a cold cloud and some warm gas. What kinds of emission and absorption
lines should we get? Since the warm gas would not absorb much because ofits higher temperature, the absorption line will be a narrow line due to theabsorption by the cloud. On the other hand, there will be both narrow-line
emission from the cloud and broad-line emission from the warm gas. Thus the
emission line should look like a narrow line above a broad shoulder. Hence, ifneutral hydrogen gas in two phases with differing temperatures is present alongthe line of sight, it is in principle possible to isolate the two phases from a careful
study of the emission and absorption lines at 21 cm.
Figure 6.11 shows the 21-cm emission line from the ISM close to a back-
ground radio source (top) as well as the 21-cm absorption line produced by
the ISM in the spectrum of the background radio source (bottom). A careful
look makes it clear that the emission line has a broader shoulder at the base,
whereas the absorption line is narrow. Thus it appears that the 21-cm emissionand absorption lines actually support the view that interstellar space containsneutral hydrogen in two distinct phases. We have already discussed the cloud
phase. The space between clouds (as much as 40% of the interstellar space)
appears ﬁlled with much warmer neutral hydrogen gas, with a temperature ofabout 8000 K and density in the range of 10
5–106particles m−3.T h i si st h e
second important phase of the ISM with a much lower density compared to the
clouds.
6.6.3 Molecular clouds
The ISM is known to contain varieties of molecules including some reasonably
complex organic molecules. Usually these molecules are found in the cool

<<<PAGE 204>>>

184 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.11 The 21-cm emission line from the ISM close to the background radio source
3C 353 (top panel) and the 21-cm absorption line produced by the ISM in the spectrum
of 3C 353 (bottom panel). From Radhakrishnan et al. (1972). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomi-
cal Society. Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)
dense regions of the ISM. These molecular clouds have densities more than 109
particles m−3and temperatures in the range 10–30 K. Even though these clouds
occupy less than 1% of interstellar space, they may contribute signiﬁcantly to
the mass of the ISM (as much as 40%). One important question is how the
complex molecules form in these clouds. The subject of interstellar chemistryis still in its infancy. Many molecules are supposed to have been synthesized onthe surfaces of dust grains.
Most molecules in the ISM are studied through the molecular radio lines.
The hydrogen molecule H
2is believed to be the most abundant molecule. Since
this molecule does not have any radio lines, its presence is inferred from the

<<<PAGE 205>>>

6.6 Phases of the ISM and the diagnostic tools 185
absorption lines in the UV spectra of background sources. Perhaps the most
extensively studied interstellar molecule is carbon monoxide CO, since it hasvery convenient radio lines arising from transitions between various rotational
levels. A standard result of molecular physics is that frequencies in the rotational
spectra should be equally spaced and be multiples of a fundamental frequency(see Exercise 6.7). The fundamental frequency for CO is 115 GHz, correspond-
ing to a wavelength of 2.6 mm. The next higher frequencies are at 230 GHz,
345 GHz, and so on. The distribution of CO in the Galaxy has been studied
quite extensively and is found to be somewhat different from the distribution ofneutral hydrogen H
I. Not much CO is found beyond 10 kpc from the galactic
centre, whereas H Ican be found at much greater distances.
A very big surprise was to ﬁnd that the intensity of some sources in speciﬁc
molecular lines (such as OH lines) was abnormally high. If the sources wereassumed to be optically thick in the spectral lines and the speciﬁc intensity wasequated to the Planck function B
ν(T), then temperatures as high as 109Kw e r e
inferred! The favoured explanation is that this high intensity is not caused byabnormally high temperatures, but by maser action. In our discussion of thetwo-level atom leading to (6.61), we saw an example in which the upper level
is de-populated compared to what we expect in thermodynamic equilibrium.
In more complex situations involving more levels, the upper level can become
over-populated (see Exercise 6.6 ). Ifn
u/nl>gu/gl, then it is easy to see from
(6.54) that the absorption coefﬁcient ανshould be negative. In such a situation,
a beam of radiation keeps getting stronger while passing through the material
rather than being attenuated.
Molecular clouds, which are often of gigantic size, are of great interest to
astrophysicists as birthplaces of stars. Many molecular clouds are believed tobe contracting slowly under self-gravity and stars would eventually form in the
central regions. Figure 6.12 shows such a molecular cloud from which stellar
‘eggs’ seem to be emerging. We shall discuss more about star formation in §6.8
and in §8.3.
6.6.4 H IIregions
A UV photon with wavelength shorter than 912 ˚A can ionize a hydrogen atom
by knocking off the electron from the ground level n=1. The O and B stars,
which have high surface temperatures, emit copious amounts of UV photons.Since these stars are short-lived (see §3.4), they are found in regions where
star formation has recently taken place. We pointed out above that the cores ofmolecular clouds collapse to produce stars. Once the stars have been formed, the
UV photons from the O and B stars ionize the ISM around them. Such regions
of ionized hydrogen are called H
IIregions . The typical temperatures of such
regions are of order 6000 K.

<<<PAGE 206>>>

186 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.12 The molecular cloud in M16, within which new stars are being born. Photo-
graphed with the Hubble Space Telescope. Courtesy: NASA, ESA, Space Telescope
Science Institute, J. Hester and P. Scowen.
The H IIregions are often found to be approximately spherical in shape and
are known as Str¨omgren spheres. It is not difﬁcult to estimate the Str ¨omgren
radius RSof such a sphere ( Str¨omgren, 1939). In a steady state, the number
of ionizations in a unit volume within the Str ¨omgren sphere has to balance the
number of recombinations. Since the recombination rate should be proportional
to the number of protons npand the number of electrons ne, we can write the
number of recombinations in unit volume in unit time as αnpne,w h e r e αis the
recombination coefﬁcient. This has to equal the number of ionizations in unit
volume in unit time. Hence the total number of ionizations within the Str ¨omgren
sphere must be (4π/ 3)R3
Sαnpne. If the central star emits NγUV photons per
unit time with wavelength shorter than 912 ˚A, then we must have
Nγ=4
3πR3
Sαnpne. (6.67)

<<<PAGE 207>>>

6.7 The galactic magnetic ﬁeld and cosmic rays 187
This is the relation which determines the sizes of Str ¨omgren spheres.
If the recombination process involves a free electron jumping to the ground
level n=1, then a UV photon would be emitted. However, if the free electron is
ﬁrst captured in the n=2 level and then it only makes a transition to the n=1
level, then we would get two photons, one of which will be within the visible
range. Very often an electron cascades through several energy levels, therebyemitting many photons. The H
IIregion is one phase of the ISM which can be
studied by the visible light emitted by it. When an electron makes a transitionbetween two relatively high levels (say from n=100 to n=99), a radio photon
is emitted, and even such radio emissions from H
IIregions have been detected.
Additionally, the hot gas in the H IIregions also emits bremsstrahlung (see
§8.12) with a continuous spectrum in the radio range.
Apart from hydrogen emission lines, the H IIregions radiate in emission
lines from partially ionized atoms of elements like carbon, nitrogen and oxygen.Many of these emission lines, lying often in the visible part of the spectrum,
correspond to ‘forbidden’ transitions with very slow transition rates. These lines
are difﬁcult to observe under laboratory conditions where the excited atoms aremore likely to de-excite collisionally rather than by emitting a photon. Underthe low-density conditions of interstellar space where collisions are much rarer,
the excited atoms get a chance to de-excite by emitting a photon, even though
this corresponds to a very slow transition. For any particular spectral line, thereis a critical density beyond which the collisional de-excitation takes over andthe emission line is quenched.
6.6.5 Hot coronal gas
A supernova explosion spews out hot gas in the interstellar space. Many super-nova remnants are observationally known. It is thought that hot gases from very
old supernovae ultimately ﬁll up the interstellar spaces not occupied by the other
phases (McKee and Ostriker, 1976). The coronal gas may have temperaturesof the order of 10
6K, but very low densities of about only 103particles m−3.
This gas may occupy as much as 50% of the interstellar space, even though it
contributes very little to the mass of the ISM. We shall see in §8.12 that hot
gases emit radiation by the process of bremsstrahlung. The hot coronal gas in
the Galaxy emits soft X-rays, which is the chief diagnostic tool for studying thisphase.
6.7 The galactic magnetic ﬁeld and cosmic rays
There is a large-scale magnetic ﬁeld in the interstellar space of our Galaxy.This was ﬁrst inferred when Hiltner (1954) was measuring the polarization

<<<PAGE 208>>>

188 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
of starlight and found that the light from most stars is slightly polarized. It is
believed that interstellar grains are generally non-spherical and can be alignedby the galactic magnetic ﬁeld, making the ISM act like a polarizing medium in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. It should be mentioned that the alignment
of grains involves some subtle physics and is not exactly analogous to thealignment of a compass needle by a magnetic ﬁeld. Here we shall not get intothe physics of grain alignment and light polarization, which was investigated by
Davis and Greenstein (1951). A reader interested in knowing more about this
subject should consult Chapter 8 of Spitzer (1978).
The nature of starlight polarization depends on the direction in which the
star is seen. Figure 6.13 shows light polarizations of stars located in different
galactic coordinates, the lengths of the small line segments indicating the
magnitudes of polarization and their inclinations indicating the directions ofpolarization. In the direction of the galactic magnetic ﬁeld, we do not expect tosee any systematic polarization. This happens approximately in the directions
l≈60
◦andl≈240◦inFigure 6.13. These longitudes roughly correspond to
the spiral arm in the solar neighbourhood. When we look at right angles withrespect to these directions (i.e. with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld), we see themaximum polarization, as expected from common sense. The polarization of
starlight thus establishes that our Galaxy has a magnetic ﬁeld running along the
spiral arm. However, to estimate the amplitude of the magnetic ﬁeld, we need atheory of grain alignment, which involves many uncertainties.
Signals from pulsars (introduced in §5.5) provide a method for estimating
the galactic magnetic ﬁeld. Not only are pulsars interesting objects by them-selves, the signal from a pulsar gives us important information about the inter-stellar medium lying between the pulsar and us. We know that electromagnetic
waves travelling in empty space are non-dispersive. However, we shall see in
§8.13 that the speed of an electromagnetic wave passing through a plasma
varies with the frequency of the wave. Since there are some free electrons inthe interstellar space, the ISM can act like a plasma. Radio waves of lower
frequency travel more slowly through the interstellar plasma. The effect on
much higher-frequency visible light is practically negligible. When we analysethe pulse received from a pulsar, we ﬁnd that higher-frequency waves arriveslightly before lower-frequency waves. The usual interpretation is that the pulsar
emitted waves at all the frequencies simultaneously, but the lower-frequency
waves got delayed while passing through the ISM. The reader is asked at theend of Chapter 8 Exercise 8.8 to show that the variation of arrival time with
frequency is given by
dT
a
dω=−e2
/epsilon10mecω3/integraldisplay
neds, (6.68)
where neis the electron number density in interstellar space and the integral
is over the path from the pulsar to us. Since nein the solar neighbourhood is

<<<PAGE 209>>>

Fig. 6.13 The polarization of starlight measured for stars in different galactic coordinates. The length of the line segment indicates the amplitude
of polarization for a star, whereas its direction indicates the polarization plane. From Mathewson and Ford ( 1970). ( c/circlecopyrtRoyal Astronomical Society.
Reproduced with permission from Memoirs of Royal Astronomical Society .)

<<<PAGE 210>>>

190 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
around 105m−3, a knowledge of/integraltext
nedsfrom the time dispersion measurement
can give an estimate of the distance of the pulsar. The signals from pulsars are
also polarized. It can be shown that the magnetic ﬁeld present in the plasma
can make the plane of polarization rotate, the rotation being more for lower
frequencies. A theoretical derivation of this phenomenon, known as Faraday
rotation , can be found in §12.5 and §12.6 of Choudhuri (1998). The variation
of the plane of polarization with frequency can be shown to be
dθ
dω=−e3
/epsilon10m2ecω3/integraldisplay
neB/bardblds, (6.69)
where B/bardblis the component of the magnetic ﬁeld parallel to the line of sight.
Thus the time dispersion gives the integral/integraltext
neds, whereas the angular dis-
persion gives the integral/integraltext
neB/bardblds. An estimate of the magnetic ﬁeld can be
found from the ratio
/integraltext
neB/bardblds/integraltext
neds
between these two integrals. From the measurements of time dispersions and
angular dispersions of many pulsars, the galactic magnetic ﬁeld is estimated tohave the value (2–3)×10
−10T. As we already pointed out, the mean magnetic
ﬁeld is believed to run along the spiral arm of the Galaxy, although the ﬂuctua-tions around the mean are probably as large as the mean.
Associated with the galactic magnetic ﬁeld, there are highly energetic
charged particles spiralling around the ﬁeld lines. It was discovered by Hess
(1912) that the Earth is continuously bombarded by cosmic rays coming from
above the Earth’s atmosphere. We shall discuss in §8.10 that the energetic
charged particles of the cosmic rays are believed to be accelerated in supernovablast waves. Then they spiral around the galactic magnetic ﬁeld and ﬁll up
the Galaxy. It will be shown in §8.11 that relativistically moving charged
particles spiralling around a magnetic ﬁeld give out a kind of radiation known as
synchrotron radiation . For cosmic rays spiralling around the galactic magnetic
ﬁeld, the synchrotron spectrum lies mainly in the radio regime. Radio telescopes
have detected synchrotron radiation not only from our Galaxy but also from
other similar galaxies, making it clear that other similar galaxies also havemagnetic ﬁelds and cosmic rays.
The energy density B
2/2μ 0associated with the galactic magnetic ﬁeld is
of order 10−14Jm−3. It is found that H Iclouds have typical random turbulent
velocities of order 10 km s−1(just like stars as pointed out in §6.3). One can
easily check that the kinetic energy density ρv2/2 associated with interstellar
turbulence is of the same order as the energy density of the magnetic ﬁeld.
The energy density associated with cosmic ray particles is also estimated to
be comparable. There thus appears to be a remarkable equipartition of energy
amongst the gas, the magnetic ﬁeld and the cosmic rays. Where does the galactic

<<<PAGE 211>>>

6.8 Thermal and dynamical considerations 191
magnetic ﬁeld come from and why do we have this remarkable equipartition?
In§8.7 we shall give an introduction to the dynamo theory – a theory which
explains how turbulent motions in a plasma can generate magnetic ﬁelds under
certain circumstances. Since the turbulent motions of the interstellar gas are
responsible for the galactic magnetic ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld is then respon-sible for the acceleration and conﬁnement of cosmic rays within the Galaxy,perhaps an equipartition of the kind we ﬁnd is not totally surprising. However,
it is difﬁcult to go beyond such hand-waving arguments and give very rigorous
justiﬁcations.
6.8 Thermal and dynamical considerations
It should be clear to any reader by now that the ISM is an immensely complexsystem. Why does the ISM have several different phases in different regions ofspace instead of being a more uniformly spread gas? We, of course, know that
the ISM is continuously disturbed by external sources. Supernova explosions
keep adding more hot coronal gas to the ISM. Newly born O and B stars keepionizing portions of the ISM to create H
IIregions. However, these external
disturbances alone cannot explain why the neutral gas is found in such distinct
phases as H Iclouds and the warm intercloud medium. Why don’t we see a more
continuous distribution of densities and temperatures of the neutral gas?
Any phase of the ISM is giving out energy in the form of radiation. In §6.6
we have discussed the kinds of radiation emitted by the different phases. Let /Lambda1
be the rate at which energy is lost from unit volume in unit time. Often /Lambda1is
referred to as the cooling function . If the system is to remain in a steady state,
then an equal amount of energy has to be supplied. The energy gained by the
ISM per unit volume per unit time is called the heating function and is denoted
by/Gamma1. The energy dumped by the supernova explosions into the ISM and the UV
photons from very hot stars absorbed in the ISM certainly make contributions tothe heating function /Gamma1. Another important contribution comes from cosmic rays.
An energetic charged particle passing through matter can ionize some atoms and
can lose some energy to the surrounding medium in this process. One important
contribution to /Gamma1comes from the ionization losses of cosmic ray particles.
Certainly
L=/Lambda1−/Gamma1=0 (6.70)
is a necessary condition for the thermal equilibrium of any phase of the ISM.However, it is not a sufﬁcient condition. It was argued by Field (1965) that such
a thermal equilibrium can exist only if (∂
L/∂T)>0. Even without a detailed
analysis, we can see how such a condition may arise. Let us think what wouldhappen if the opposite (∂
L/∂T)<0 were to hold. Suppose a system is in
equilibrium with L=0. Some disturbance causes its temperature to decrease

<<<PAGE 212>>>

192 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
Fig. 6.14 A schematic sketch of Las a function of Tfor a system which has two
possible stable equilibrium conﬁgurations.
slightly. This will increase Lif(∂L/∂T)<0 holds. Since Lis the net energy
loss rate, an increase in Lwould mean that the system would start losing energy
at a faster rate, leading to a further decrease in temperature. This causes a
runaway situation and the system goes on becoming colder. Thus, once theequilibrium is disturbed, the system moves further away from equilibrium.
Suppose
Las a function of Tlooks as sketched in Figure 6.14 .T h e nA
and B are the two possible regions of stable equilibrium where (∂L/∂T)>0.
Thus the system can be in stable equilibrium corresponding to the temperaturesat A and B, with the intermediate temperatures ruled out. Field, Goldsmith and
Habing (1969) proposed that the H
Iclouds and the warm intercloud medium
correspond to the two distinct thermal equilibrium states of the neutral gas.
Apart from the thermal balance, there has to be a force balance also in the
ISM to ensure that no large-scale motions are driven by unbalanced forces. As
we shall see in §8.2, a ﬂuid system like the ISM basically can have two impor-
tant kinds of forces, arising from pressure gradients and gravitational ﬁelds
respectively. Let us ﬁrst consider the pressure gradient forces. A large variationof pressure within the ISM would lead to gas ﬂows from regions of high pressure
to regions of low pressure. In spite of the very different physical conditions
within the various phases of ISM, their pressures are comparable. This is seen inFigure 6.15, which plots the temperature Tagainst the particle number density
n. The different phases of the ISM correspond to different regions in this ﬁgure.
The pressure nκ
BTwould be constant along the straight lines. The H Iclouds
and the intercloud medium are clearly in pressure equilibrium, with the otherphases also having pressures not differing widely.

<<<PAGE 213>>>

6.8 Thermal and dynamical considerations 193
Fig. 6.15 Different phases of the ISM indicated in a temperature Tversus number
density nplot. The pressure would be constant along the dashed straight lines in this
ﬁgure.
We at last come to the balance of gravitational forces. The ISM moves in
circular orbits around the galactic centre such that the centrifugal force balances
the dominant radial component of gravity. In the direction perpendicular to the
galactic plane, the gravitational ﬁeld is directed towards the mid-plane of the
Galaxy. The hydrostatic equilibrium has to be maintained in this direction.The pressure of the neutral gas, in conjunction with the pressure of the magneticﬁeld and cosmic rays, ensures that the ISM occupies a layer of thickness
about 200 pc around the mid-plane of the Galaxy.
For a complicated system like the ISM, considering the force balance alone
is not sufﬁcient to determine the equilibrium. One needs to check if the equi-
librium is stable. We shall show in §8.3 that, if a sufﬁciently large region of the
ISM becomes over-dense, then the enhanced gravity of that region may causethe gas of that region to collapse further. This is the celebrated Jeans instability
(Jeans, 1902), which triggers the process of star formation. We believe that the
cores of some molecular clouds are such collapsing regions where stars are
ultimately born. However, the Jeans instability allows us to understand only how
the collapse is initiated. The subsequent progress of the collapse is an extremelycomplex process and is still poorly understood. For example, a simple estimateshows that the mass of a collapsing over-dense region has to be much more than
the masses of individual stars (see §8.3). Obviously the collapsing cloud has to
fragment into individual stars at some stage of the collapse. The distribution of
masses amongst the newly forming stars was studied by Salpeter (1955) from

<<<PAGE 214>>>

194 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
observational data. If ξ(M)dMis the number of stars born with masses between
MandM+dM, then the Salpeter initial mass function is
ξ(M)dM∝M−2.35dM. (6.71)
We still do not have a proper theoretical explanation of this initial mass function.
Star formation is one of the important theoretically ill-understood problems
of modern astrophysics. Observationally also this is a process impossible to
study directly, since the dust particles present in a molecular cloud make the
core region inaccessible in visible light. However, as the cloud collapses and
becomes hotter, the dust particles emit in the infrared. The infrared observationshave revealed a very complicated scenario. The cores of the clouds do notcollapse in a spherically symmetric fashion. The angular momentum present
in a typical gas cloud (due to the rotation of the Galaxy) makes the collapsing
core take the shape of a disk. One of the most striking discoveries of infraredastronomy is that there are often bipolar outﬂows from the polar regions of these
collapsing disks. The Doppler shifts of molecular lines give the speeds of such
outﬂows, which can sometimes be as large as 100 km s
−1.
Exercises
6.1 We have presented a very elementary discussion of star count analysis in
§6.1.1 by assuming that all stars have the same absolute magnitude Mand
there is no absorption in interstellar space. Now assume that a fraction of
stars/Phi1(M)dMhave absolute magnitudes between MandM+dM, whereas
a(r)is the change in magnitude of a star at a distance rdue to absorption.
Suppose A(m)dmis the number of stars within a solid angle ωhaving apparent
magnitude between mandm+dm.I fD(r)is the number density of stars at a
distance r, show that
A(m)=ω/integraldisplay∞
0/Phi1[m+5−5l o g10r−a(r)]D(r)r2dr.
Show that this expression reduces to the form (6.3) if all stars have the same
absolute magnitude with no absorption and are uniformly distributed.
6.2 The interstellar medium in the galactic disk diminishes the luminosity of
stars by about 1.5 magnitude (i.e. increases the magnitude by 1.5) per kpc.
Show that this implies that the brightnesses of stars fall off with distance rin
the galactic disk as
e−αr
r2.
Find the value of α.

<<<PAGE 215>>>

Exercises 195
6.3 Suppose the gravitational ﬁeld is falling as r−2in a region of the Galaxy.
Find the AandBconstants, as deﬁned by (6.21) and(6.22) , for such a region.
Show that the frequency of the epicyclic motion is going to be equal to the
angular velocity. What is the physical signiﬁcance of this?
6.4 Make a simpliﬁed model of the galactic disk by assuming it to be an
inﬁnite sheet of constant thickness with constant density inside. Show that
a star displaced from the mid-plane of the Galaxy in the vertical directionundergoes simple harmonic oscillations around the mid-plane (assuming thatthe star always remains within the region of constant density). Taking the
density in the mid-plane to correspond to about 5 ×10
6hydrogen atoms m−3,
estimate the period of oscillation. How does it compare with the period of
revolution of a star in the solar neighbourhood around the galactic centre?
6.5 LetBlube the Einstein coefﬁcient for transition from the lower level lof
an atom to its upper level u, separated by energy hν0. The oscillator strength
ffor this transition as introduced in §2.7 satisﬁes
e2
4/epsilon10mef=hν0Blu.
Show that this relation makes the discussions in §2.7 and§6.6 consistent with
each other.6.6 Consider an atom with three levels denoted by 1, 2 and 3 in order of
increasing energy. Suppose no transitions take place between the upper two
levels 2 and 3. Writing balance equations of the type (6.59) and assuming
that the radiation present is not strong enough to make radiative transitionsimportant, show that
n
3
n2=g3(1+A21/neγ21)
g2(1+A31/neγ31)e−E23/κBT.
Here all the symbols have obvious meanings. It is clear that we shall havethe Boltzmann distribution law when n
eis large. Discuss the conditions which
would lead to population inversion. If there is no transition between the uppertwo levels, then this population inversion may not give rise to maser action.But this simple example of a three-level system should give some idea of howpopulation inversions can arise.
6.7 We have pointed out in §6.6.3 that CO molecules in molecular clouds emit
at frequencies which are integral multiples of 115 GHz. If Iis the moment of

<<<PAGE 216>>>

196 Our Galaxy and its interstellar matter
inertia of the molecule around an axis perpendicular to the axis of the molecule,
then show that the energy levels of the molecule are given by
EJ=/planckover2pi12
2IJ(J+1),
where Jcan have integral values. If the selection rule /Delta1J=− 1 has to be
obeyed for emission, then show that the emission spectrum should be as seen.
Make an estimate of the distance between the carbon and the oxygen atoms in
the molecule.

<<<PAGE 217>>>

7
Elements of stellar dynamics
7.1 Introduction
Since gravity is a long-range attractive force, any star in a galaxy attracts all the
other stars in the galaxy all the time. For simplicity, we can regard the stars aspoint particles. Then a galaxy or a star cluster can be regarded as a collection of
particles in which all the particles are attracting each other through an inverse
square law of force. The aim of stellar dynamics is to study the dynamics of such
a system of self-gravitating particles. We, of course, know that there is also gas
between the stars in a galaxy, which can add extra complications. However, it
is generally believed that stellar dynamics holds the key to understanding thestructure of galaxies or star clusters.
We have discussed our Galaxy in Chapter 6 and shall discuss external
galaxies in Chapter 9. Although some galaxies are irregular in appearance, we
shall see in §9.2 that most galaxies have very regular shapes. The fundamental
question of stellar dynamics is: why do collections of self-gravitating massparticles tend to take certain particular conﬁgurations in preference to many
other possible conﬁgurations? A fully satisfactory answer to this question is still
not known. Hence the subject of galactic structure is on a much less ﬁrm footingcompared to the subject of stellar structure. We know that the gravitationalattraction of the stars has to be balanced by their motions, to ensure that the
stars do not all fall towards the centre of the stellar system together due to their
mutual gravitational attraction. The considerations involved here are analogousto the considerations of why the gas particles in an atmosphere do not all settleat the bottom, even though they are pulled by gravity downwards. It is basically
the random motions of the gas particles which prevent this from happening.
We shall see in §7.2 that the motions (they need not necessarily be random) of
stars can ‘balance’ the gravity in such a way that the system remains in a steadystate. We shall obtain a relation connecting the total kinetic energy with the
total gravitational energy. However, going beyond this to calculate the detailed
structure of a galaxy or a star cluster is not easy.
197

<<<PAGE 218>>>

198 Elements of stellar dynamics
If the mass and the chemical composition of a star are given, we saw in
Chapter 3 how the structure of the star can be theoretically calculated. We do
not have to know the details of the initial conditions, such as the nature of the
gas cloud from which the star formed. In the case of a galaxy, is it even in
principle possible to calculate its structure from a knowledge of, say, the massdistribution of the stars which make up the galaxy and the total kinetic energy?Or do the details of the initial conditions in the formation stage of the galaxy
determine what the galaxy is going to be like?
Let us consider the particles of a gas in a container. We know that the
velocity distribution of the particles would obey a universal law: the Maxwellian
velocity distribution given in (2.27). It can be shown from the principles of
statistical mechanics that this distribution corresponds to a conﬁguration ofmaximum probability. That is why the gas is likely to be found in this conﬁg-uration. Suppose we do something to make the velocity distribution of the gasvery different from a Maxwellian. If the gas is again left to itself, the velocity
distribution will relax to a Maxwellian after a few collisions. In a typical system
of stars, the probability of an actual physical collision between two stars isvery low. A star usually moves in a smooth gravitational ﬁeld produced by allthe stars around it. However, when two stars come sufﬁciently close to each
other, their trajectories are deﬂected by mutual gravitational interaction. In a
stellar system, such encounters between stars play the role of collisions andtend to relax the velocity distribution of the stars. We shall discuss in §7.3
how the collisional relaxation time in a stellar system can be estimated. Simple
estimates show that the relaxation time of a typical galaxy is much longer than
the age of the Universe and galaxies must be unrelaxed system. On the otherhand, the relaxation time of globular clusters is less and they are expected to
be systems in which collisional relaxation is important. The subject of stellar
dynamics is usually divided into two parts. Collisional stellar dynamics deals
with stellar systems in which collisional relaxation has been important, whereascollisionless stellar dynamics deals with stellar systems in which we can ignore
collisions.
One may naively expect that collisional relaxation would lead to an equilib-
rium conﬁguration with the stars obeying the Maxwellian distribution. We shallshow in §7.4 that this naive expectation leads to inconsistencies, since self-
gravity is not compatible with thermodynamic equilibrium. Hence collisionalstellar dynamics is a much more complex subject than what one may expect.Other than showing that a simple thermodynamic equilibrium is not possible,we shall not be able to go into the details of this subject. An elementary
introduction to collisionless stellar dynamics will be presented in §7.5 and
§7.6. Although we cannot calculate the detailed structures of collisionless stellar
systems from ﬁrst principles, we shall see that various aspects of stellar motionsin galaxies are inter-related and can be understood from a stellar dynamical
analysis.

<<<PAGE 219>>>

7.2 Virial theorem in stellar dynamics 199
It should be emphasized that the aim of this chapter is only to give the read-
ers a feeling of what the subject of stellar dynamics is like. For a full treatment
of stellar dynamics, which is beyond the scope of this elementary book, the
readers should consult books like Binney and Tremaine (1987). Even topics of
considerable astrophysical interest are left out because their stellar dynamical
analysis involves rather advanced theoretical techniques. An example of sucha topic is the theory of spiral structures in galaxies. We shall see in §9.2 that
many galaxies have spiral structures. The most successful effort in explainingthe spiral structures theoretically is the density wave theory of Lin and Shu
(1964), which we shall not be able to discuss because of its complexity. For anexcellent non-technical account of the subject, the readers are urged to look up
Shu (1982, pp. 275–281).
7.2 Virial theorem in stellar dynamics
Since the inward pull of gravity inside a star is balanced by thermal energy, we
saw in §3.2.2 that there is a relation between the gravitational potential energy
and the total thermal energy, as given by (3.10), which is known as the virial
theorem. We now consider a collection of particles attracting each other throughgravity. If this collection is in a steady state (i.e. if its overall size is neitherincreasing nor decreasing), then it is the motions of the particles in the collectionwhich must balance the inward gravitational pull. We thus expect a relation
between the total gravitational potential energy and the total kinetic energy of
the system, which must be analogous to (3.10). We now derive such a relation,
which is valid for both collisionally relaxed and unrelaxed systems.
Let the position and the velocity of the i-th particle at an instant of time be
x
iandvirespectively. The momentum of the particle is pi=mivi.W eh a v e
d
dt(pi.xi)=dpi
dt.xi+pi.dxi
dt=Fi.xi+2Ti, (7.1)
where Fiis the force acting on the i-th particle and Tiis its kinetic energy. We
now integrate (7.1) over a sufﬁciently long time τand divide all the terms by τ.
This gives
1
τδ(pi.xi)=Fi.xi+2Ti, (7.2)
where the overline indicates averaging over this time interval τ, while δ(pi.xi)
is the difference between the values of pi.xiat the beginning and the end of
the interval. We can write an equation like (7.2) for each of the particles in the
collection. On summing them up, we have
1
τδ/parenleftBigg/summationdisplay
ipi.xi/parenrightBigg
=/summationdisplay
iFi.xi+2T, (7.3)

<<<PAGE 220>>>

200 Elements of stellar dynamics
where T=/summationtext
iTiis the total kinetic energy of the system. For a system with
size not changing in time, we do not expect the value of/summationtext
ipi.xito change with
time. Hence the left-hand side of (7.3) must be zero, leading to
/summationdisplay
iFi.xi+2T=0. (7.4)
Now the force on the i-th particle due to all the other particles is
Fi=/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iGm imj
|xj−xi|3(xj−xi)
so that
/summationdisplay
iFi.xi=/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iGm imj
|xj−xi|3(xj−xi).xi. (7.5)
It is to be noted that the double summation on the right-hand side implies a
summation over all possible pairs of particles. For a particular pair of particles
iandj, it is obvious that the summation will have two terms
Gm imj
|xj−xi|3[(xj−xi).xi+(xi−xj).xj]=−Gm imj
|xj−xi|.
Then, from (7.4) and(7.5),w eh a v e
2T−/summationdisplay
all pairsGm imj
|xj−xi|=0. (7.6)
We can write this equation as
2T+V=0, (7.7)
where
V=−/summationdisplay
all pairsGm imj
|xj−xi|(7.8)
is the total gravitational potential energy. The virial theorem for stellar dynam-
ics, as given by (7.7), has the same form as the virial theorem (3.10) for stellar
structure. We have the thermal energy instead of the kinetic energy in the virial
theorem for stellar structure. However, since the thermal energy is nothing butthe kinetic energy of the gas particles in the stellar interior, the basic physics
is the same in both the cases.
Suppose we have a cluster of Nstars each having mass m.T h e r ea r e
N(N−1)/2≈N
2/2 pairs in the system and the gravitational potential energy
of a typical pair is
Gm2
/angbracketleftR/angbracketright,

<<<PAGE 221>>>

7.3 Collisional relaxation 201
where /angbracketleftR/angbracketrightis the average distance between the stars in the pair, which must be
of the same order as the radius of the star cluster. Noting that 2 T=Nm/angbracketleftv2/angbracketright,
we have from (7.6) that
Nm/angbracketleftv2/angbracketright≈N2
2Gm2
/angbracketleftR/angbracketright,
from which
/angbracketleftv2/angbracketright≈GM
/angbracketleftR/angbracketright, (7.9)
where M=Nm is the mass of the star cluster. Astronomers use (7.9) quite
regularly to estimate masses of star clusters. One can estimate the velocity
dispersion /angbracketleftv2/angbracketright1/2from Doppler measurements of spectral lines of the stars in
the cluster. If the distance to the cluster is known, then we can get /angbracketleftR/angbracketrightfrom the
apparent size of the cluster. The only remaining quantity in (7.9) is the cluster
mass M, which can then be calculated.
Suppose the velocity dispersion in a star cluster of mass Mand radius Ris
less than what would be expected from (7.9). Then gravity cannot be balanced
by the motions of stars and the cluster has to shrink in size. In this process, thegravitational potential energy will decrease. This gravitational potential energyhas to go into the kinetic energy of the stars, making the velocity dispersionlarger. Eventually, if the velocity dispersion becomes large enough to satisfy
(7.9), the cluster will stop shrinking in size any further. While applying the
virial theorem (7.9), one should ensure that the system is gravitationally bound
and is virialized. Otherwise, the application of the virial theorem may lead to
erroneous results.
7.3 Collisional relaxation
After establishing the virial theorem which should be valid for any gravitation-ally bound stellar system in steady state (i.e. which is not growing or shrinking
in size), irrespective of whether the system is collisionally relaxed or not, we
now come to the important question of estimating the collisional relaxation timeof a stellar system.
Let us consider a galaxy or a cluster with stars of mass m. Suppose a star is
moving with speed v. If no other star is very close, then this star will move in
a smooth gravitational ﬁeld collectively produced by all the stars in the system.On the other hand, if another star happens to be close by, then the trajectory ofthis star may get deﬂected by the gravitational attraction of the other star, and
we would refer to this as a collision. This statement may appear vague. How
close do the two stars have to be in order for their interaction to be called a
collision? We give a working deﬁnition. If the deﬂection of the trajectory of the

<<<PAGE 222>>>

202 Elements of stellar dynamics
Fig. 7.1 A sketch of a collision between two stars.
star involves a change in momentum at least as large as the original momentum
of the star, then we would regard it as a collision. Using this working deﬁnition,
we now determine the distance bfrom the trajectory of the star within which
another star has to be in order for their interaction to qualify as a collision.
Figure 7.1 shows a star initially moving in a straight line with speed v. Another
star is at a distance bfrom the trajectory. If this is a limiting collision, then
the change in momentum of the moving star should be equal to its originalmomentum mv. Now, when the two stars are close, the force of gravity between
them is of order Gm
2/b2. The two stars are close to each other for an interval of
time of order b/vduring which this gravitational force acts. Hence the change
of momentum of the moving star (which should be in a direction perpendicularto its original momentum) is of order
/Delta1p≈Gm
2
b2b
v.
Equating this to mv, the limiting distance bfor a collision is given by
b≈Gm
v2. (7.10)
In unit time the moving star sweeps out a volume πb2vwithin which another
star has to lie for a collision to take place. If nis the number density of stars,
then the number of collisions per unit time is given by πb2vn. The typical time
between collisions is the inverse of this. Since this collision time is the time inwhich the memory of any initial velocity distribution is effectively erased, wecall it the relaxation time T
rel. This is given by
Trel≈(πb2vn)−1≈v3
πnG2m2(7.11)
on substituting for bfrom (7.10).I f vis in km s−1andnis the number per pc3,
then this becomes
Trel≈1010v3
nyr (7.12)
if we take m≈M⊙. A more rigorous treatment of collisional relaxation would
involve an integration over the effects of stars at different distances. See pp.
187–190 of Binney and Tremaine (1987) for a rigorous treatment. The simple
estimate given above gives the correct order of magnitude of the relaxation
time Trel.

<<<PAGE 223>>>

7.3 Collisional relaxation 203
Table 7.1 Relaxation times for different stellar systems.
v(in km s−1) n(in pc−3) Trel(in yr)
Galaxy 100 0.1 1017
Open cluster 0.5 1 109
Globular cluster 10 1031010
Table 7.1 gives the typical stellar velocity v, stellar number density nand
collisional relaxation time Trel(calculated by using (7.12)) for different stellar
systems. The age of the Universe is of order 1010yr. It is clear that a galaxy
would not have sufﬁcient time for collisional relaxation. On the other hand, a
cluster of stars may at least be partially relaxed.
Since the collisional relaxation time in a galaxy is so enormous, one
may tend to think that the stellar velocity distribution in a galaxy would becompletely unrelaxed and would have the signature of some initial primordialvelocity distribution. This is not entirely correct. We saw in §6.3.3 that there is
an ellipsoidal distribution of velocity amongst stars in our neighbourhood. If agalaxy forms by contracting from a larger volume, then the gravitational ﬁeld ata point inside the galaxy will keep changing drastically during the contractiontime. It can be shown that a rapidly changing gravitational ﬁeld has some effects
analogous to the effects of collision ( Lynden-Bell, 1967). This is called violent
relaxation .
We end this discussion of collisional relaxation by pointing out an interest-
ing relation. A star moving with speed vinside a stellar system of size Rtakes
time of order R/vto cross the system. Hence
T
rel
Tcross≈v4
πnG2m2R(7.13)
on substituting from (7.11). If the system is in virial equilibrium, then v2should
be equal to GNm/Rby(7.9),w h e r e Nis the total number of stars in the system.
Then from (7.13) we have
Trel
Tcross≈(GNm/R)2
πnG2m2R≈N2
πnR3≈N, (7.14)
since N≈πnR3. Hence, if a stellar system of Nstars is in virial equilibrium,
then the collisional relaxation time is Ntimes the crossing time for a typical
star in the system.

<<<PAGE 224>>>

204 Elements of stellar dynamics
7.4 Incompatibility of thermodynamic equilibrium
and self-gravity
If a stellar system has lasted for enough time for collisional relaxation to take
place, what should it relax to? This is a question much more difﬁcult to answerthan what would appear at the ﬁrst sight. We know the answer to the similar
question for a gas in a container. No matter what initial velocity distribution
we create for the gas particles, collisions would make the velocity distributionrelax to a Maxwellian, which is the distribution appropriate for thermodynamicequilibrium of the system. We may naively expect a similar thermodynamic
equilibrium to be established in the relaxed stellar system. Suppose we consider
a stellar system made of stars of the same mass, which we take as the unit ofmass. The energy of a star at position xmoving with velocity vis given by
E(x,v)=1
2v2+/Phi1(x), (7.15)
where /Phi1(x)is the gravitational potential at the point x. In thermodynamic
equilibrium, we would expect the distribution function for the stars to be
f(x,v)=Ae−βE(x,v)=Ae−β[1
2v2+/Phi1(x)], (7.16)
where Ais a normalization constant and we use the standard convention that
f(x,v)d3xd3vis the number of stars within volume d3xhaving the ends of
their velocity vectors lying within the volume d3vin the velocity space. If we
consider a region of the Earth’s atmosphere over which temperature does notvary much, then we would ﬁnd air molecules to obey a distribution functionlike (7.16),w h e r e/Phi1( x)would be the potential due to the Earth’s gravitational
ﬁeld. In a stellar system, however, we have an additional requirement of self-consistency that the gravitational potential has to be due to stars in the stellarsystem itself. We shall now show that, if we demand self-consistency, then thedistribution function (7.16) would lead to absurd conclusions.
Let us begin by explaining the meaning of self-consistency a little bit
more. Suppose we have a distribution function like (7.16) depending on the
gravitational potential /Phi1(x)and we are somehow able to guess or know the
gravitational potential /Phi1(x). Then we know the spatial dependence of the dis-
tribution function from (7.16) and can ﬁnd out the density of stars in various
regions of space. On using Poisson’s equation for gravitation, a knowledge ofdensity would lead to a determination of gravitational potential /Phi1(x).I ft h i s
/Phi1(x)turns out to be the same /Phi1(x)we began with and used in the distribution
function while calculating density, then our solution is self-consistent.
We now try to impose this condition of self-consistency mathematically on
the distribution function (7.16). The density at the position xis given by
ρ(x)=/integraldisplay
f(x,v)d
3v=C
4πGe−β/Phi1( x)(7.17)

<<<PAGE 225>>>

7.4 Thermodynamic equilibrium and self-gravity 205
on using (7.16) and writing
/integraldisplay∞
0Ae−βv2/24πv2dv=C
4πG.
On substituting (7.17) in Poisson’s equation
∇2/Phi1=4πGρ,
we get
∇2/Phi1=Ce−β/Phi1. (7.18)
Self-consistency essentially requires that /Phi1(x)should satisfy (7.18).I fw ea r e
able to solve (7.18) to obtain /Phi1(x)and use that in the distribution function
(7.16), then everything will turn out to be consistent.
For simplicity, let us assume the stellar system to be spherically symmetric
and try to solve (7.18) in that situation. Then /Phi1(x)becomes a function of r
only and we need to keep only the radial derivatives in the expression of the
Laplacian. In this situation, (7.18) reduces to
1
r2d
dr/parenleftbigg
r2d/Phi1
dr/parenrightbigg
=Ce−β/Phi1( r). (7.19)
It follows from (7.17) that
/Phi1(r)=−1
βln4πGρ(r)
C.
Substituting this in (7.19), we get an equation for ρ(r)as follows
1
r2d
dr/parenleftbigg
r2d
drlnρ/parenrightbigg
=− 4πGβρ. (7.20)
This equation has to be solved with the boundary condition that there should beno cusp at the origin, i.e.
dρ
dr=0a tr=0.
Instead of trying to ﬁnd the full solution of (7.20) (which is not difﬁcult to do
numerically), let us ﬁgure out the asymptotic form of the solution for large r.
Let us see if a solution of the form
ρ(r→∞)=ρ0
rb
works at large r. On substituting this in (7.19),w eg e t
−b
r2=− 4πGβρ0
rb.

<<<PAGE 226>>>

206 Elements of stellar dynamics
This can be satisﬁed only if b=2, leading to the conclusion that density has to
fall off as
ρ(r→∞)∝1
r2
to meet the requirement of self-consistency. It is trivial to show that the total
mass would diverge to inﬁnity for such a density distribution. Thus, if we beginwith the thermodynamic distribution (7.16), the requirement of self-consistency
forces us to the absurd conclusion that the total mass of the system has to beinﬁnite! A stellar system of ﬁnite mass (i.e. ﬁnite number of stars) cannot relaxto the thermodynamic distribution given by (7.16).
It is possible to construct well-behaved self-consistent solutions of spheri-
cally symmetric stellar systems if the distribution function f(x,v)is assumed
to depend on energy E(x,v)in certain particular ways, i.e. different from
the exponential dependence assumed in (7.16). The reader may look up §4.4
ofBinney and Tremaine (1987) for some such solutions. Such solutions are
of great mathematical interest as examples of self-consistent solutions forstellar systems. However, there is no physical reason why the distributionfunction should have the form necessary for obtaining these self-consistentsolutions. The fact that the distribution function corresponding to thermo-
dynamic equilibrium leads to unphysical results merely shows that thermo-
dynamic equilibrium is not possible for a self-gravitating system (i.e. a systemin which the gravitational attraction of one part on another is important). Ifthe stellar system does not have an end state of thermodynamic equilibrium,
what then is the outcome of collisional relaxation in a stellar system? Pre-
sumably such systems keep on evolving, usually leading to the formationof black holes in the central regions. Many galaxies and star clusters areindeed believed to have black holes in their centres. Chapter 8 of Binney and
Tremaine (1987) gives an introduction to the collisional evolution of stellar
systems.
Although a detailed discussion of the collisional evolution of stellar systems
is beyond the scope of the present book, we point out one important effect. For
stars to fall into the deep potential well at the centre of the stellar system, it
is necessary for them to lose some kinetic energy through a frictional process.Since stars do not physically collide with each other, it may seem at the ﬁrstsight that there is no friction in the system. However, Chandrasekhar (1943)
derived the famous result that a star moving through a stellar system shouldencounter a drag opposing its motion, giving rise to a frictional term in theevolution equation. Let us qualitatively explain why this should be so. Supposea star has moved from point Pto point Qas shown in Figure 7.2 . While passing
from PtoQ, the star attracted the surrounding stars towards itself. Hence we
expect the number density of stars around PQ to be slightly larger than that
ahead of Q. The star at Q, therefore, experiences a net gravitational attraction

<<<PAGE 227>>>

7.5 Boltzmann equation for collisionless systems 207
Fig. 7.2 The illustration of dynamical fric-
tion. A star has moved from PtoQcreating
a region of enhanced density of surrounding
stars behind it.
in the backward direction (i.e. in the direction of QP). This important effect is
known as dynamical friction.
7.5 Boltzmann equation for collisionless systems
After discussing the difﬁculty of obtaining realistic solutions of collisional
stellar systems, let us now look at collisionless stellar systems. Since differentinitial conditions may produce different types of collisionless stellar systems,we would not expect to obtain unique models of such systems from basic
principles alone. Since the probability of two stars coming sufﬁciently close
to each other (such that their trajectories are appreciably deﬂected) would befairly low in a collisionless system, a typical star would move in the smoothgravitational ﬁeld produced by all the other stars in the system collectively. As
all stars move in this way, the distribution function of stars f(x,v)may change
with time. We now derive the equation which describes how the distribution
function would change with time. This equation, known as the collisionless
Boltzmann equation, is a special form of an equation ﬁrst derived by Boltzmann
(1872) while studying the dynamics of gas particles and is the fundamentalequation in collisionless stellar dynamics.
Let us consider the six-dimensional phase space made up of three compo-
nents of the position vector xand three components of the velocity vector v.
All stars are assumed to be identical particles with the same mass. A star atposition xwith velocity vis represented by a point in this phase space. Hence
a stellar system of Nstars would correspond to Npoints in this phase space.
The distribution function f(x,v)is nothing but the density of points at (x,v)in
this phase space. As the position and the velocity of a star change with time, thepoint in the phase space corresponding to this star will trace out a trajectory inthe phase space. Since all the points in the phase space keep moving, the densityof points f(x,v)may in general be expected to change in time. One can prove a
very important result known as Liouville’s theorem if the particles in the system
obey Hamiltonian dynamics, i.e. if the dynamics of the particles can be obtainedfrom a Hamiltonian of the form H(x,v). Liouville’s theorem is a fundamental

<<<PAGE 228>>>

208 Elements of stellar dynamics
result in statistical mechanics and is proved in many standard textbooks (see,
for example, Landau and Lifshitz, 1980, §3; Pathria ,1996, §2.2; Choudhuri,
1998, §1.4). We therefore quote it without proof. Let us consider the trajectory
of a point in the phase space. If we keep on considering the distribution function
f(x,v)along the trajectory as the trajectory is being traced out in time, then we
would ﬁnd that the distribution function does not change (provided, of course,
the dynamics is Hamiltonian). Mathematically it can be represented as
df
dt=0, (7.21)
where d/dtrepresents the time derivative as we move along the trajectory.
A point in the phase space located at (x,v)at time twill get shifted to
(x+˙xδt,v+˙vδt)at time t+δt, as the point moves along the trajectory.
Hence
df
dt=lim
δt→0f(x+˙xδt,v+˙vδt,t+δt)−f(x,v,t)
δt. (7.22)
Expansion in a Taylor series to linear terms in δtgives
f(x+˙xδt,v+˙vδt,t+δt)=f(x,v,t)
+/summationdisplay
iδt˙xi∂f
∂xi+/summationdisplay
iδt˙vi∂f
∂vi+δt∂f
∂t.
Substituting the above expression in (7.22),w eh a v e
df
dt=∂f
∂t+/summationdisplay
i˙xi∂f
∂xi+/summationdisplay
i˙vi∂f
∂vi.
It thus follows from (7.21) that
∂f
∂t+/summationdisplay
i˙xi∂f
∂xi+/summationdisplay
i˙vi∂f
∂vi=0, (7.23)
which is the collisionless Boltzmann equation . As we already pointed out, this
equation holds only if the dynamics in the phase space can be obtained froma Hamiltonian of the form H(x,v). This is the case if all the stars move in a
smooth gravitational ﬁeld. However, if two stars collide, then the gravitational
potential will have to be a function of the positions of both the stars and a
Hamiltonian of the form H(x,v)will not be able to describe the collision. Thus
(7.23) is valid only in the absence of collisions. When collisions are important,
the right-hand side of (7.23) ceases to be zero (see, for example, Choudhuri,
1998, §2.2).
While considering a stellar system, it is often convenient to use cylindrical
coordinates (r,θ,z)instead of Cartesian coordinates. Writing the components
of velocity in cylindrical coordinates as /Pi1=˙r,/Theta1=r˙θ,Z=˙Z, it is easily seen

<<<PAGE 229>>>

7.5 Boltzmann equation for collisionless systems 209
that the collisionless Boltzmann equation takes the form
∂f
∂t+/Pi1∂f
∂r+/Theta1
r∂f
∂θ+Z∂f
∂z+˙/Pi1∂f
∂/Pi1+˙/Theta1∂f
∂/Theta1+˙Z∂f
∂Z=0. (7.24)
If we take the mass of particles to be equal to unity, then the Lagrangian of a
particle (or a star) is given by
L=1
2(˙r2+r2˙θ2+˙z2)−/Phi1(r,θ,z).
On substituting this in Lagrange’s equation (see, for example, Goldstein ,1980),
the three components of the equation of motion are found to be
¨r−r˙θ2=−∂/Phi1
∂r,
d
dt(r2˙θ)=−∂/Phi1
∂θ,
¨z=−∂/Phi1
∂z.
These three equations can be written as
˙/Pi1=/Theta12
r−∂/Phi1
∂r,
/Pi1/Theta1+r˙/Theta1=−∂/Phi1
∂θ,
˙Z=−∂/Phi1
∂z.
On making use of these equations, (7.24) can be written as
∂f
∂t+/Pi1∂f
∂r+/Theta1
r∂f
∂θ+Z∂f
∂z+/parenleftbigg/Theta12
r−∂/Phi1
∂r/parenrightbigg∂f
∂/Pi1
−/parenleftbigg/Pi1/Theta1
r+1
r∂/Phi1
∂θ/parenrightbigg∂f
∂/Theta1−∂/Phi1
∂z∂f
∂Z=0, (7.25)
which is the form of the collisionless Boltzmann equation used extensively in
stellar dynamics.
If we are somehow able to determine the complete distribution function
f(r,θ,z,/Pi1,/Theta1, Z,t), then we would have full information about the dynamics
of the stellar system. As we would not expect to determine the dynamics ofan unrelaxed system without a knowledge of the initial conditions, it shouldbe clear that we cannot obtain a full solution of the distribution function onthe basis of (7.25) alone. What information does (7.25) provide then? It is the
same equation as (7.21), which tells us that the distribution function should
not change along a trajectory in phase space. Suppose I
1,I2,...are some
constants of motion which do change along a trajectory. If the distribution

<<<PAGE 230>>>

210 Elements of stellar dynamics
function is a function of these constants of motion alone, i.e. if we can write
it as f(I1,I2,... ) , then it can be easily shown that this distribution function
should satisfy (7.21). For an axisymmetric stellar system, the total energy Eand
the angular momentum component Lzshould be constants of motion. Hence a
distribution function of the form f(E,Lz)should satisfy (7.25). The early years
of stellar dynamics research were marked by a search for a third integral ofmotion. If the gravitational potential /Phi1is provided by the stars themselves, then
we have to impose the condition of self-consistency as we saw in §7.4.A n y
arbitrary function of EandL
zthat satisﬁes the self-consistency requirement
is an admissible solution of the collisionless Boltzmann equation (7.25).T h i s
equation, therefore, does not give us a unique solution in a particular situation.
7.6 Jeans equations and their applications
Although the collisionless Boltzmann equation (7.25) alone does not provide
a complete solution to the dynamics of a stellar system, we shall now show
that this equation can be used to derive several important conclusions regarding
stellar motions in our Galaxy.
We consider a galaxy which is axisymmetric and is in a steady state. Then
the derivatives with respect to θandtcan be set to zero, so that (7.25) becomes
/Pi1∂f
∂r+Z∂f
∂z+/parenleftbigg/Theta12
r−∂/Phi1
∂r/parenrightbigg∂f
∂/Pi1−/Pi1/Theta1
r∂f
∂/Theta1−∂/Phi1
∂z∂f
∂Z=0. (7.26)
Let us consider some dynamical variable q(r,θ,z,/Pi1,/Theta1, Z), which would have
a particular value at each point of the phase space. The energy as given by(7.15) is an example of such a dynamical variable. Now think of all stars in a
unit volume of physical space. These stars would have different velocities and
would in general have different values of q. The average value of qfor stars in
this unit volume, indicated by /angbracketleftq/angbracketright, would be given by
n/angbracketleftq/angbracketright=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
qf d/Pi1d/Theta1dZ, (7.27)
where we carry out the integration over all possible velocities and nis the
number density given by
n=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
fd/Pi1d/Theta1dZ. (7.28)
We now derive a very useful equation by multiplying (7.26) by/Pi1and then
integrating over all velocities. Since integration over velocities commutes withdifferentiation with respect to rorz, the ﬁrst two terms give
∂
∂r(n/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright)+∂
∂z(n/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright),

<<<PAGE 231>>>

7.6 Jeans equations and their applications 211
where the averages /angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketrightand/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketrightare deﬁned through (7.27). The third term
gives
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/parenleftbigg/Theta12
r−∂/Phi1
∂r/parenrightbigg
d/Theta1dZ/integraldisplay
/Pi1∂f
∂/Pi1d/Pi1=−n
r/angbracketleft/Theta12/angbracketright+n∂/Phi1
∂r
on noting that
/integraldisplay
/Pi1∂f
∂/Pi1d/Pi1=/Pi1f|+∞
−∞−/integraldisplay
fd/Pi1=−/integraldisplay
fd/Pi1.
The next (fourth) term gives
−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/Pi12
rd/Pi1dZ/integraldisplay
/Theta1∂f
∂/Theta1d/Theta1=n/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright
r
in exactly the same way. Combining all these together and noting that the
contribution of the last term in (7.26) would be zero, we obtain
∂
∂r(n/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright)+∂
∂z(n/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright)−n
r/bracketleftBig
/angbracketleft/Theta12/angbracketright−/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright/bracketrightBig
=−n∂/Phi1
∂r. (7.29)
Let us now multiply (7.26) byZand integrate over all velocities. By proceeding
in exactly the same way, we obtain the following equation
∂
∂r(n/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright)+∂
∂z(n/angbracketleftZ2/angbracketright)+n/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright
r=−n∂/Phi1
∂z. (7.30)
As we shall show below, equations (7.29) and (7.30) are of great help in
analysing stellar motions near the solar neighbourhood. These equations are
known as the Jeans equations , after Jeans (1922) who ﬁrst obtained them.
The quantity /angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketrightappears in both the Jeans equations (7.29) and(7.30).
Let us discuss how one can evaluate it. We pointed out in §6.3.3 that velocities of
stars in the solar neighbourhood have an ellipsoidal distribution. Let us considera point Paway from the central plane of the Galaxy, as shown in Figure 7.3 .
We expect the velocity ellipsoid at this point to have its major axis elongated
towards the galactic centre. Then the velocity distribution should be elliptical in
/Pi1
/primeandZ/prime, the components of velocity along the major and minor axes of the
ellipsoid at P,i . e .
f(/Pi1/prime,Z/prime)=Cexp/parenleftBigg
−/Pi1/prime2
σ2
/Pi1/prime−Z/prime2
σ2
Z/prime/parenrightBigg
. (7.31)
If the velocity ellipsoid at Pis inclined to the galactic plane by an angle α,t h e n
/Pi1=/Pi1/primecosα−Z/primesinα
and

<<<PAGE 232>>>

212 Elements of stellar dynamics
Fig. 7.3 A sketch showing the velocity ellipsoid at a point Paway from the mid-plane
of our Galaxy.
Z=Z/primecosα+/Pi1/primesinα
so that
/Pi1Z=(/Pi1/prime2−Z/prime2)sinαcosα+/Pi1/primeZ/prime(cos2α−sin2α). (7.32)
We now have to take the average of this as deﬁned by (7.27). It is trivial to see
that/angbracketleft/Pi1/primeZ/prime/angbracketright=0 if the distribution function is given by (7.31). Keeping in mind
that sin α≈z/rand cos α≈1 for small α,(7.32) gives
/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright≈z
r/bracketleftBig
/angbracketleft/Pi1/prime2/angbracketright−/angbracketleft Z/prime2/angbracketright/bracketrightBig
.
Ifαis small, then /angbracketleft/Pi1/prime2/angbracketright≈/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketrightand/angbracketleftZ/prime2/angbracketright≈/angbracketleft Z2/angbracketrightso that
/angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketright≈z
r/bracketleftBig
/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright−/angbracketleft Z2/angbracketright/bracketrightBig
. (7.33)
We now consider some applications of the Jeans equations to make sense of
the observational data of stellar motions in the solar neighbourhood.
7.6.1 Oort limit
The distance of the solar neighbourhood from the galactic centre is much
larger than the thickness of the Galaxy, so that a vertical gradient in the solar
neighbourhood should be much stronger than a radial gradient. It should be easyto see that the vertical gradient term on the left-hand side of (7.30) should be
the dominant term so that (7.30) would reduce to
d
dz/parenleftBig
n/angbracketleftZ2/angbracketright/parenrightBig
=ngz, (7.34)
where gz=−∂/Phi1/∂ zis the vertical gravitational ﬁeld.
Oort (1932) used (7.34) to ﬁnd the average matter density near the solar
neighbourhood of our Galaxy. Even if there is some matter in the solar neigh-bourhood which does not emit light and is not detected in direct observations, it
will produce a gravitational ﬁeld and hence will affect the motions of visible
stars. Therefore, by analysing the motions of visible stars, it is possible toestimate the total amount of matter in the solar neighbourhood. If the number

<<<PAGE 233>>>

7.6 Jeans equations and their applications 213
density nand vertical velocity dispersion /angbracketleftZ2/angbracketrightfor a particular type of stars
are known at different distances from the galactic plane, then it is possible to
calculate gzwith the help of (7.34). K giants are very bright stars which can be
observed to sufﬁciently large distances from the galactic plane and for whichsufﬁciently good data existed in Oort’s time about their number density andline-of-sight velocity at different heights from the galactic plane. Oort (1932)
used the statistics of K giant stars to obtain the gravitational ﬁeld at different
heights from the galactic plane. Once g
zis obtained as a function of z, one can
calculate the matter density producing this gravitational ﬁeld from the Poisson
equation for gravity, ∇.g=− 4πGρmatter , which here becomes
dgz
dz=− 4πGρmatter. (7.35)
When the total matter density in the solar neighbourhood is estimated in thisfashion, it turns out to be around
ρ
matter≈10×10−21kg m−3. (7.36)
On the other hand, if we calculate the density by estimating the amount of matter
in the visible stars, then we ﬁnd
ρstar≈4×10−21kg m−3. (7.37)
Thus there must be unseen matter present in the solar neighbourhood in addition
to the visible stars. This was a very important conclusion in 1932 when notmuch was known about the interstellar matter. This analysis also provides an
upper limit for the amount of interstellar matter, since its density cannot exceed
(ρ
matter−ρstar). This is known as the Oort limit.
7.6.2 Asymmetric drift
Let us consider a group of stars in the solar neighbourhood with an averagevalue of /Theta1given by /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright. For an individual star, the value of /Theta1would differ
from this average by an amount ϑ,i . e .
/Theta1=/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright+ ϑ. (7.38)
On squaring and averaging this (keeping in mind /angbracketleftϑ/angbracketright=0), it follows that
/angbracketleft/Theta1
2/angbracketright=/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright2+/angbracketleftϑ2/angbracketright. (7.39)
Using the notation of §6.3, we know that, if all the stars in our group had /Theta1=
/Theta1circ, then they would all move in exactly circular orbits. Our aim now is to ﬁnd
out the physical effects which may make /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright different from /Theta1circ.W eh a v e
/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright2−/Theta12
circ=2/Theta1circ(/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright− /Theta1circ) (7.40)

<<<PAGE 234>>>

214 Elements of stellar dynamics
on writing /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright+/Theta1 circ=2/Theta1circbecause /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright is expected to be close to /Theta1circ.
Since /Theta1circ=(A−B)R0where Aand Bare the Oort constants introduced
through (6.21) and(6.22), we have from (7.39) and(7.40) that
2(A−B)R0(/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright− /Theta1circ)=/angbracketleft/Theta12/angbracketright−/Theta12
circ−/angbracketleftϑ2/angbracketright. (7.41)
We now need to adapt (7.29) for our group of stars in the solar neighbour-
hood. Using the fact that
−∂/Phi1
∂r=−/Theta12circ
r
and substituting for /angbracketleft/Pi1Z/angbracketrightfrom (7.33), we can rewrite (7.29) in the form
/angbracketleft/Theta12/angbracketright−/Theta12circ=r
n∂
∂r(n/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright)+r
n∂
∂z/bracketleftBig
nz
r(/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright−/angbracketleft Z2/angbracketright)/bracketrightBig
+/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright. (7.42)
In the term involving differentiation with respect to z, the main contribution
would come from the variation in zso that we can write that term as
r
n∂
∂z/bracketleftBig
nz
r(/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright−/angbracketleft Z2/angbracketright)/bracketrightBig
≈/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright−/angbracketleft Z2/angbracketright.
From (7.41) and(7.42),w et h e nh a v e
/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright− /Theta1circ=/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright
2R0(A−B)/bracketleftbigg∂lnn
∂lnr+∂ln/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright
∂lnr
+/parenleftbigg
1−/angbracketleftϑ2/angbracketright
/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg
1−/angbracketleftZ2/angbracketright
/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
. (7.43)
This is an extremely important equation which tells us what would make /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright
for a group of stars to be different from /Theta1circ.
Let us try to understand the physical signiﬁcance of (7.43). First of all, if
there were no random motions in the radial direction, i.e. if /angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright=0, then the
right-hand side of (7.43) has to be zero and /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright has to equal /Theta1circ.I no t h e r
words, in the absence of random motions, stars have to move in circular orbits
with speed /Theta1circin order to be in a steady state. Only when some amount of
random motion is present in a group of stars, is it possible for the group to goaround the galactic centre with an average speed /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketrightdifferent from /Theta1
circ.N o w ,
amongst the terms within the square bracket in the right-hand side of (7.43),
the term ∂lnn/∂lnrtypically turns out to be the dominant term. Since stellar
density ndecreases with radius, this term is negative. This implies that /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright has
to be less than /Theta1circ, i.e. a typical group of stars in the solar neighbourhood
would lag behind the LSR (deﬁned in §6.3). If the other terms on the right-hand
side of (7.43) are unimportant compared to ∂lnn/∂lnr, it should be evident
from (7.43) that whether a group of stars would lag behind the LSR or not will

<<<PAGE 235>>>

7.6 Jeans equations and their applications 215
be determined by whether ndecreases with radius or not. Why should this be
the case? We have seen in §6.3.1 that stars moving with respect to the LSR
do not actually move ‘randomly’. Rather they follow epicycles. In the solar
neighbourhood, there would be stars with their centres of epicycle lying both
slightly inward (i.e. at r<R0) and slightly outward (i.e. at r>R0). It follows
from conservation of angular momentum that stars having centres of epicycleinward would have /Theta1less than /Theta1
circwhen they are at R0, whereas stars having
centres of epicycle outward would have /Theta1more than /Theta1circ.S i n c en decreases
with r, the number of stars coming from the inward side is larger. Since these
stars lag behind the LSR when they are at R0, it is expected that /angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright averaged
over all stars would be less than /Theta1circ.
On the basis of (7.43), we expect an approximate relation
(/Theta1circ−/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright)=α/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright, (7.44)
where αis a constant of proportionality. To determine whether such a relation
actually exists, we need to study the kinematics of stars in the solar neighbour-hood belonging to different spectral classes. It is found that stars with larger
B−V(i.e. stars which are more reddish in colour) have larger dispersions
/angbracketleft/Pi1
2/angbracketright. Their average velocities /angbracketleftv/angbracketrightin the negative θdirection with respect to
the Sun (i.e. /Theta1⊙−/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright) are also observationally found to increase with B−V.
We expect from (7.44) that
/angbracketleftv/angbracketright=/Theta1⊙−/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright= /Theta1⊙−/Theta1circ+α/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright. (7.45)
This relation was ﬁrst found empirically by Str¨omberg (1924). Figure 7.4
is a modern plot of /angbracketleftv/angbracketrightagainst /angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketrightfor stars of different spectral types,
B−Vincreasing towards the right side of the ﬁgure. It is clearly seen that
a linear relation between /angbracketleftv/angbracketrightand/angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright, as expressed by (7.45),i sar e a -
sonable ﬁt to the observational data. From the point where the straight linecuts the vertical axis, we conclude that /Theta1
⊙−/Theta1circhas to be close to about
5.2k ms−1. This result was quoted in §6.3.2 without explaining there how it was
obtained.
Stars with higher B−V, which are more reddish and are found to have
larger velocity dispersions, have longer lifetimes (as pointed out in Chapter 3 )
and would statistically be older than lower B−Vstars. Why do older stars have
larger velocity dispersions? A theoretical explanation was provided by Spitzer
and Schwarzschild (1951). As we have seen, our Galaxy is a collisionless
system and close interactions between stars can be neglected. However, thegravitational attraction of interstellar gas clouds tends to perturb stellar orbits.
As a star grows older, it is expected to have more interactions with gas clouds, of
which the effects accumulate. This explains why older stars have more velocitydispersions, as can be seen in Figure 6.7 .

<<<PAGE 236>>>

216 Elements of stellar dynamics
Fig. 7.4 Ap l o to f /angbracketleftv/angbracketright(i.e. the average velocity in the negative θdirection with respect
to the Sun) against the velocity dispersion /angbracketleft/Pi12/angbracketright, for stars of different spectral types
in the solar neighbourhood. From Dehnen and Binney (1998). ( c/circlecopyrtRoyal Astronomical
Society. Reproduced with permission from Monthly Notices of Royal Astronomical
Society.)
7.7 Stars in the solar neighbourhood belonging
to two subsystems
As we pointed out in §6.2 and§6.4, our Galaxy has two subsystems. Objects in
the ﬁrst subsystem revolve around the galactic centre in nearly circular orbits,
whereas objects in the second subsystem have very low general rotation and
are principally balanced against gravity by random motions. Most of the stars
in the solar neighbourhood belong to the ﬁrst subsystem. However, we expecta few stars belonging to the second subsystem also to be present in the solarneighbourhood. Oort (1928) carried out a beautiful analysis to establish this
from stellar kinematics. Figure 7.5 is a famous ﬁgure taken from Oort (1928),
plotting /Pi1and/Theta1for stars found in the solar neighbourhood. The dashed
large circle corresponds to√
/Pi12+/Theta12=365 km s−1, which is presumably the
escape velocity from the Galaxy so that stars with larger velocities are not
found. The Sun is represented by the dot at the centre of a small circle of
which the radius corresponds to 20 km s−1. Stars within this small circle are
not plotted because of uncertainties in selection effects. One clearly sees thatmany stars make up an ellipsoidal distribution near the Sun, with the major axis
of the ellipse in the direction of /Pi1. This is the Schwarzschild velocity ellipsoid
introduced in §6.3.3. The stars making up this ellipsoid certainly belong to the
ﬁrst subsystem of the Galaxy. These stars move in nearly circular orbits, with the
small departures from circular orbits giving rise to epicyclic motions responsible
for the ellipsoidal velocity dispersion (see §6.3.3). The majority of these stars lie
within a circle shown in Figure 7.5 of which the radius corresponds to a velocity
of 65 km s
−1with respect to the LSR. Some of the stars having velocities much

<<<PAGE 237>>>

Exercises 217
Fig. 7.5 A plot showing the values of /Pi1and/Theta1for stars in the solar neighbourhood.
From Oort (1928).
larger than 65 km s−1clearly do not belong to the ellipsoid and should be
members of the second subsystem of our Galaxy, which does not have much
systematic rotation.
Exercises
7.1 Suppose K(x,v)is a constant of motion as a star moves around within a
stellar system (it can be energy or angular momentum). Show that a distribu-
tion function of the form f(K(x,v))will give a time-independent solution
of the collisionless Boltzmann equation. This result is known as the Jeans
theorem.
7.2 Write down the collisionless Boltzmann equation in the cylindrical coordi-
nates. Without any assumptions (i.e. without assuming axisymmetry or steady
state), integrate over the velocity space and show that
∂n
∂t+∂
∂r(n/angbracketleft/Pi1/angbracketright)+1
r∂
∂θ(n/angbracketleft/Theta1/angbracketright)+∂
∂z(n/angbracketleftZ/angbracketright)+n/angbracketleft/Pi1/angbracketright
r=0.

<<<PAGE 238>>>

218 Elements of stellar dynamics
7.3 Consider the collisionless Boltzmann equation in the Cartesian co-
ordinates
∂f
∂t+vi∂f
∂xi+Fi
m∂f
∂vi=0,( 1)
where Fiis the force acting on a particle of mass mat the point xi. (Note that
we are using the summation convention that an index like irepeated twice in a
term implies summation over i.) Integrating over the velocity space, show that
∂
∂t(nm)+∂
∂xi(nm/angbracketleftvi/angbracketright)=0,( 2)
where nis the number density. Now multiply (1) by mvjand integrate over the
velocity space to obtain
∂
∂t(nm/angbracketleftvj/angbracketright)+∂
∂xi(nm/angbracketleftvivj/angbracketright)−nFj=0.( 3)
Deﬁne the pressure tensor
Pij=nm/angbracketleft(vi−/angbracketleftvi/angbracketright)(v j−/angbracketleftvj/angbracketright)/angbracketright (4)
and show that (3) can be put in the form
nm/parenleftbigg∂
∂t/angbracketleftvj/angbracketright+/angbracketleftvi/angbracketright∂
∂xi/angbracketleftvj/angbracketright/parenrightbigg
=−∂Pji
∂xi+nFj.( 5)
Do the equations (2) and (5) resemble the basic ﬂuid equations which we shall
discuss in detail in the next chapter?
7.4 Suppose a collection of self-gravitating particles has a distribution func-
tion somewhat different from (7.16) , given by
f(x,v)=/braceleftBigg
A[e−βE(x,v)−1] ifE(x,v)< 0,
0i f E(x,v)> 0,
where E(x,v)is given by (7.15) , with the gravitational potential /Phi1(x)deﬁned
in such a way that it tends to zero at inﬁnity. Find the expression of the density
ρ(r)(note that the expression will involve the error function). Then write
down the equation you will have in the place of (7.19) . Solve that equation
numerically for the values −β/Phi1 ( r=0)=12,9,6,3. Plot the density ρ(r)to
show that it falls to zero at ﬁnite radius, indicating that the total mass is ﬁnite,unlike what happens for the distribution function (7.16) . This stellar dynamical
model is known as the King model (King, 1966).

<<<PAGE 239>>>

8
Elements of plasma astrophysics
8.1 Introduction
A plasma is a gas in which at least some atoms have been broken into positively
charged ions and negatively charged electrons. Most of the matter in the Uni-verse exists in the plasma state. The gases inside stars are ionized because of
the high temperature, as can be shown easily with the help of the Saha equation
(2.29). We have seen in §6.6.4 that H
IIregions in the interstellar medium are
fully ionized due to energetic photons from very hot stars. Even the H Iregions
are partially ionized, with some free electrons present in them. Our aim in
this chapter is to give an introduction to some dynamical principles as wellas some radiation processes involving plasmas, which are of great relevance toastrophysics.
The reader may wonder why this introductory chapter on plasma astro-
physics is put exactly in this place of the book. We could, of course, introducethe subject much earlier. However, since we shall illustrate the dynamicalprinciples by applications to stars and the interstellar medium, I felt that a
prior acquaintance with these systems will put you in a better position to
appreciate the relevance of plasma processes in astrophysics. There is also somejustiﬁcation for introducing this subject before a discussion of extragalacticastronomy. In Chapter 9 we shall discuss some extragalactic systems such as
active galaxies in which plasma processes are extremely important. So it will behelpful to have some knowledge of plasma astrophysics before we launch intoa study of extragalactic astronomy.
Because of the electrical attraction between opposite charges, the positively
and the negatively charged particles in a plasma remain well mixed. In otherwords, if you consider a small volume element of a plasma which has sufﬁ-ciently large number of charged particles, the positive and negative charges inthat volume would very nearly balance each other. So the volume element would
be nearly charge-neutral. Does it then follow that all the physical properties of
this volume element will be identical with those of a volume element of an
219

<<<PAGE 240>>>

220 Elements of plasma astrophysics
ordinary neutral gas? Certainly not! A neutral gas like the air is generally a
poor conductor of electricity. On the other hand, if you put an electric ﬁeldin a plasma, the positively charged ions would move in the direction of the
ﬁeld and the electrons would move in the opposite direction, giving rise to an
electrical current. In other words, a plasma is an extremely good conductorof electricity. Currents in a plasma naturally give rise to magnetic ﬁelds, andthere are lots of intriguing phenomena connected with magnetic ﬁelds. For
example, we have discussed in §6.7 that our Galaxy is ﬁlled with cosmic ray
particles, which are charged particles accelerated to very high energies. We
shall see in §8.10 that magnetic ﬁelds play the key role in the acceleration
of cosmic ray particles. Such accelerated particles spiralling around magnetic
ﬁeld lines give rise to a kind of radiation called synchrotron radiation. Since
many astrophysical systems have accelerated charged particles in them andemit synchrotron radiation, the emission of such radiation (to be discussed in§8.11) is a very important radiation process in astrophysics. The detection and
analysis of synchrotron radiation is crucial in understanding the nature of many
astrophysical systems.
Although water is made up of molecules, we can study the ﬂow of water at
a macroscopic level by considering water as a continuum governed by a set of
macroscopic equations. In exactly the same way, many (but not all!) phenomena
involving plasmas can be studied by treating the plasma as a continuous ﬂuidwhich is a good conductor of electricity. The branch of plasma physics inwhich the plasma is treated as a continuum is known as magnetohydrodynamics,
abbreviated as MHD. The ﬁrst few sections of this chapter will develop thecontinuum model. Only when electromagnetic phenomena are present, will aplasma behave differently from an ordinary neutral ﬂuid. In the absence of
electromagnetic phenomena, the plasma behaves exactly like a neutral ﬂuid,
which is governed by equations simpler than the equations of MHD. We ﬁrstdevelop ﬂuid mechanics appropriate for neutral ﬂuids in §8.2 and §8.3.T h e n
we discuss MHD in §8.4–8.9. We shall consider several important astrophysical
topics while developing ﬂuid mechanics and plasma physics. Then §8.10 and
§8.11 are devoted to particle acceleration and synchrotron radiation respec-
tively, which require a more microscopic treatment of the plasma. Finally,the last two sections deal with some other radiation processes important in
astrophysics.
8.2 Basic equations of ﬂuid mechanics
Our aim is to develop a dynamical theory of ﬂuids, with which we can studyhow a ﬂuid conﬁguration evolves with time. Any dynamical theory has two
requirements. Firstly, we need some means by which we can mathematicallyprescribe the state of the system at any particular instant of time. Secondly, we

<<<PAGE 241>>>

8.2 Basic equations of ﬂuid mechanics 221
need some equations which will tell us how the state changes with time. Let us
begin with a discussion of how the state of a ﬂuid, treated as a continuum,can be prescribed mathematically at an instant of time. We know that the
thermodynamic state of a gas in a cylinder can be prescribed with the help
of two thermodynamic parameters, such as density and temperature. Inside aﬂuid, the density and temperature would in general vary from point to point.However, if we consider a small volume of the ﬂuid within which we can
neglect the variations of physical parameters, then the thermodynamic state of
that small volume is given by the density ρ(x,t)and temperature T(x,t)within
that volume. Additionally, if there are motions inside the ﬂuid, then we needto know the velocity v(x,t)of the volume with respect to some inertial frame.
The state of a neutral ﬂuid at a particular time tis completely prescribed by the
values of ρ(x,t),T(x,t)andv(x,t)at all points inside the ﬂuid at that time t.
For a plasma which is a good conductor of electricity, we need something moreto prescribe the state, as we shall see in §8.4.
To develop a dynamical theory, we have to derive equations which will
describe how the dynamical variables ρ(x,t),T(x,t)andv(x,t)evolve with
time. Let us begin by drawing attention to the two different kinds of timederivatives: Eulerian andLagrangian .T h e Eulerian derivative denoted by ∂/∂t
implies differentiation with respect to time at a ﬁxed point. On the other hand,one can think of moving with a ﬂuid element with the ﬂuid velocity vand
time-differentiating some quantity associated with this moving ﬂuid element.This type of time derivative is called Lagrangian and is denoted by d/dt.I fx
andx+vδtarethe positions of a ﬂuid element at times tandt+δt,
 then the
Lagrangian time derivative of some quantity Q(x,t)is given by
dQ
dt=lim
δt→0Q(x+vδt,t+δt)−Q(x,t)
δt. (8.1)
Keeping the ﬁrst-order terms in the Taylor expansion, we have
Q(x+vδt,t+δt)=Q(x,t)+δt∂Q
∂t+δtv.∇Q.
Putting this in (8.1), we have the very useful relation between the Lagrangian
and the Eulerian derivatives:
dQ
dt=∂Q
∂t+v.∇Q. (8.2)
We now derive the ﬁrst ﬂuid dynamical equation giving the time derivative
ofρ(x,t). The mass/integraltext
ρdVinside a volume can change only due to the motion
of matter across the surface bounding this volume. Since the mass ﬂux acrossan element of surface dSisρv.dS,w em u s th a v e
∂
∂t/integraldisplay
ρdV=−/contintegraldisplay
ρv.dS,

<<<PAGE 242>>>

222 Elements of plasma astrophysics
where the minus sign implies that a mass ﬂux out of the volume reduces the
mass inside the volume. Transforming the right-hand side of the above equationby Gauss’s theorem, we have
/integraldisplay/bracketleftbigg∂ρ
∂t+∇.(ρv)/bracketrightbigg
dV=0.
Since this equation must be valid for any arbitrary volume dV,w em u s th a v e
∂ρ
∂t+∇.(ρv)=0. (8.3)
This is known as the equation of continuity .
To ﬁnd the equation of motion for the ﬂuid velocity, we consider a ﬂuid ele-
ment of volume δV. The mass of this ﬂuid element is ρδVand its acceleration
is given by the Lagrangian derivative (dv/dt). Hence it follows from Newton’s
second law of motion that
ρδVdv
dt=δFbody+δFsurface, (8.4)
where we have split the force acting on the ﬂuid element into two parts: thebody force δF
body and the surface force δFsurface . A body force is something
which acts at all points within the body of a ﬂuid. Gravity is an example of sucha force. It is customary to denote the body force per unit mass as Fso that
δF
body=ρδVF. (8.5)
The surface force on a ﬂuid element is the force acting on it across the surfacebounding the ﬂuid element. Let dSbe an element of area on the bounding
surface. If the ﬂuid is at rest, then we know that the force across this element ofarea is normal to it and is given by
dF
surface =− PdS, (8.6)
where Pis the pressure and we put the minus sign because we want to consider
the force acting on the ﬂuid element inside the bounding surface. We shallassume that (8.6), which is strictly valid for a ﬂuid at rest, holds even when the
ﬂuid is moving. This is known as the ideal ﬂuid approximation. In reality, how-
ever, when layers of ﬂuid on the two sides of a surface move differently, there is
a tangential stress across the surface. This stress tries to damp out the differential
motion on the two sides of the surface and gives rise to the phenomenon ofviscosity. In our elementary treatment, we shall neglect viscosity and treat theﬂuid as ideal. The total surface force acting across the whole bounding surface
is then given by a surface integral
F
surface =−/contintegraldisplay
PdS.

<<<PAGE 243>>>

8.3 Jeans instability 223
The right-hand side can be transformed into the volume integral −/integraltext
∇Pd V .
For the small volume δV, we can write
δFsurface =− ∇ PδV. (8.7)
Substituting (8.5) and(8.7) into (8.4), we ﬁnally have
ρdv
dt=ρF−∇P. (8.8)
If we use (8.2) to change from the Lagrangian derivative to the Eulerian deriva-
tive, then we get
∂v
∂t+(v.∇)v=−1
ρ∇P+F. (8.9)
This is known as the Euler equation (Euler, 1755, 1759). If viscosity is included,
then, in the place of the Euler equation, we have a more complicated equation
known as the Navier–Stokes equation, which will not be discussed in this book.
To complete our discussion of basic equations, we need an energy equation,
which may tell us how the temperature evolves with time. Instead of getting into
a general discussion, we shall consider here only the case of a perfect gas under
adiabatic conditions, i.e. we shall neglect heat conduction between an element
of the gas and its surroundings. If an element of the gas moves under adiabaticconditions, a well-known perfect gas relation implies that P/ρ
γwill remain
invariant for this element, where γis the adiabatic index. Mathematically this
can be expressed as
d
dt/parenleftbiggP
ργ/parenrightbigg
=0. (8.10)
For a perfect gas, it may be more convenient to treat the pressure as the
primary dynamical variable rather than the temperature. If we know the forceFacting on the system, then the equations (8.3) ,(8.9) and (8.10) together
provide a complete dynamical theory of a perfect gas, describing how the state
of the gas, given by ρ(x,t),P(x,t)andv(x,t), evolves with time. We shall
now consider a very important astrophysical application to illustrate how these
equations are used.
8.3 Jeans instability
We believe that stars form out of the interstellar medium. Star formation is anextremely complex and still ill-understood phenomenon. It is initiated by a ﬂuiddynamical process known as the Jeans instability, which breaks the initially
uniform interstellar medium into clumps.
Suppose we initially have a uniformly distributed gas and some disturbance
has compressed it in a certain region. The excess pressure in this compressed

<<<PAGE 244>>>

224 Elements of plasma astrophysics
region would give rise to acoustic waves which spread out the compression
in surrounding regions so that the gas can again come back to its initial uni-form state. The compressed region, however, has also enhanced gravitational
attraction and this tends to pull more gas into the compressed region. How
the system will evolve depends on whether the acoustic waves or the enhancedgravity will win over. If the region of compression is small, then it can be shownthat the enhanced gravity is not so important and the acoustic waves take over.
On the other hand, if the region of compression is larger than a critical size, then
the enhanced gravity in the region of compression may overpower the acousticwaves, pulling more material into the region and triggering an instability. SinceJeans (1902) was the ﬁrst person to demonstrate the existence of this instability,
it is called the Jeans instability in his honour.
To analyse a ﬂuid dynamical instability mathematically, we have to consider
some perturbations around an equilibrium conﬁguration. If these perturbationsgrow in time, then we expect that disturbances present in the system would make
it move away from the equilibrium. On the other hand, if the perturbations die
out or oscillate with time, then the system is stable . Let us consider the gas to
be in an initial static equilibrium conﬁguration with density ρ
0and pressure P0.
We assume that some perturbations have caused the density and the pressure
to be ρ0+ρ1and P0+P1respectively. The subscript 0 should refer to the
unperturbed equilibrium conﬁguration and 1 to perturbations. Since there can
be motions induced in the perturbed gas, we also have to consider the velocity,which can be written as v
1because it has no unperturbed part. Apart from
these ﬂuid dynamical variables, we also introduce the gravitational potential/Phi1=/Phi1
0+/Phi11broken into unperturbed and perturbed parts. The force Fin(8.9)
should then be given by
F=− ∇ /Phi1. (8.11)
To consider perturbations around an equilibrium conﬁguration, we ﬁrst have
to make sure that the unperturbed variables ρ0,P0and/Phi10satisfy the require-
ments of static equilibrium. Out of the three basic ﬂuid dynamics equations
(8.3), (8.9) and (8.10), it is easily seen that (8.3) and (8.10) trivially have all
terms zero in a static equilibrium situation. The only non-trivial equation (8.9)
gives us
∇P0=−ρ0∇/Phi10 (8.12)
on making use of (8.11). In addition to the ﬂuid dynamical equations, we also
need to satisfy the Poisson equation for gravity, which gives
∇2/Phi10=4πGρ0. (8.13)
It is trivial to show that a uniform inﬁnite gas does not satisfy the two equations
(8.12) and(8.13).F r o m (8.12), a constant P0would imply a constant /Phi10.W h e n
a constant /Phi10is substituted in (8.13), we are driven to the conclusion that

<<<PAGE 245>>>

8.3 Jeans instability 225
the unperturbed density ρ0has to be zero everywhere! For a proper stability
analysis, one should ﬁrst ﬁnd a proper equilibrium solution and then consider
perturbations around that solution. Jeans (1902), however, proceeded to perform
a perturbation analysis on the uniform inﬁnite gas as if the unperturbed conﬁgu-ration satisﬁed the equilibrium equations (8.12) and(8.13)! Hence this approach
is often referred to as the Jeans swindle. We reproduce here the analysis based
on the Jeans swindle because of its historical importance and simplicity. It is
possible to carry out proper stability analyses for realistic density distributions
without recourse to the Jeans swindle. For example, if we consider a slab of gasin static equilibrium under its own gravity, then we can carry out a proper stabil-ity analysis. See Spitzer (1978, pp. 283–285) for a discussion of this problem.
As it happens, the correct (and much more complicated!) analysis yields resultswhich are qualitatively similar to those we get from the perturbation analysis ofthe uniform inﬁnite gas with the help of the Jeans swindle.
We shall now use the ﬂuid dynamical equations along with the Poisson
equation for gravity to ﬁnd out how the perturbations ρ
1(x,t),P1(x,t),v1(x,t)
and/Phi11(x,t)will evolve with time. We shall assume that the perturbed quantities
are small (i.e. ρ1/lessmuchρ0,P1/lessmuchP0,|/Phi11|/lessmuch|/Phi10|) and the quadratic terms of these
quantities will be neglected. The technique of keeping only the linear terms in
perturbed quantities and neglecting the higher terms is called the linearization
of the perturbation equations.F r o m (8.10), it follows that
P0+P1
P0=/parenleftbiggρ0+ρ1
ρ0/parenrightbiggγ
.
Neglecting terms higher than linear in ρ1,w eg e t
P1=c2
sρ1, (8.14)
where
cs=/radicalBigg
γP0
ρ0. (8.15)
The perturbed quantities substituted in the equation of continuity (8.3) give
∂ρ1
∂t+∇.[(ρ 0+ρ1)v1]=0.
To linearize this perturbation equation, we neglect the term involving ρ1v1
which is quadratic in small quantities, so that we are left with
∂ρ1
∂t+ρ0∇.v1=0. (8.16)
We now have to linearize the Euler equation (8.9) , which becomes
(ρ0+ρ1)/bracketleftbigg∂v1
∂t+(v1.∇)v1/bracketrightbigg
=− ∇ (P0+P1)−(ρ0+ρ1)∇(/Phi10+/Phi11).

<<<PAGE 246>>>

226 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Using (8.12) to cancel two terms on the right-hand side and keeping only the
linear terms in perturbed quantities, we get
ρ0∂v1
∂t=− ∇ P1−ρ0∇/Phi11.
Using (8.14) to substitute for P1,w eh a v e
ρ0∂v1
∂t=−c2
s∇ρ1−ρ0∇/Phi11. (8.17)
Finally, subtracting (8.13) from the full equation ∇2/Phi1=4πGρ,w eg e t
∇2/Phi11=4πGρ1. (8.18)
We now have three equations (8.16)–(8.18) satisﬁed by the three perturbation
variables ρ1,v1and/Phi11. These have to be solved to ﬁnd out how the perturba-
tions will evolve in time.
Before proceeding to solve the full equations, let us consider the special
case in which the enhanced gravity is negligible. For example, in the case of
ordinary sound waves in the atmosphere, the enhanced gravity in the regions ofcompression is utterly insigniﬁcant. In such a situation, the last term in (8.17)
can be omitted. Then we can take the divergence of (8.17) and use (8.16) to
substitute for ∇.v.T h i sg i v e s
/parenleftbigg∂
2
∂t2−c2
s∇2/parenrightbigg
ρ1=0, (8.19)
which is the equation for acoustic waves, and csas given by (8.15) is the sound
speed.
To solve the equations (8.16) –(8.18), we note that any arbitrary perturbation
may be represented as a superposition of Fourier components and that eachFourier component will evolve independently of the others because these equa-tions are linear. For a particular Fourier component, let us take all our variables
to vary as exp[ i(k.x−ωt)].T h e n(8.16)–(8.18) give
−ωρ
1+ρ0k.v1=0,
−ρ0ωv1=−c2
skρ1−ρ0k/Phi1 1,
−k2/Phi11=4πGρ1.
Combining these three equations, we readily ﬁnd that
ω2=c2
s(k2−k2
J), (8.20)
where
k2
J=4πGρ0
c2s. (8.21)

<<<PAGE 247>>>

8.3 Jeans instability 227
When k<kJ, we see from (8.20) thatωhas to be imaginary and can be
written as
ω=±iα, (8.22)
where αis a real positive quantity given by
α=+cs/radicalBig
k2
J−k2.
Since all Fourier components grow as exp(− iωt), it follows from (8.22) that
one mode should grow as exp (+αt). Thus, any perturbation in which such a
mode is present should lead to a runaway situation enhancing the perturbation
and leading to an instability. If k>kJ, it should be easy to check that the
perturbation will be oscillatory and will not grow in a runaway fashion.
We thus come to the conclusion that a perturbation would be unstable if its
wavenumber kis less than kJas given by (8.21). In other words, if the size of
the perturbation is larger than some critical wavelength of order λJ=2π/kJ,
then the enhanced self-gravity can overpower the acoustic waves so that the
perturbation grows. The corresponding critical mass
MJ=4
3πλ3
Jρ0
is often referred to as the Jeans mass. Substituting from (8.21) and using (8.15)
forcswithγtaken as 1 for large-wavelength slowly evolving perturbations
(which can be regarded as isothermal), we get
MJ=4
3π5/2/parenleftbiggκBT
Gm/parenrightbigg3/21
ρ1/2
0, (8.23)
where mis the mass of the gas particles. If a perturbation in a uniform gas
involves a mass larger than the Jeans mass, then we expect the gas in the
perturbed region to keep contracting due to the enhanced gravity. Thus an
initially uniform distribution of gas may eventually fragment into pieces dueto the Jeans instability.
Jeans instability is the basic reason why the matter in the Universe is not
spread uniformly. Stars and galaxies are believed to be the end-products ofperturbations which initially started growing due to the Jeans instability. Wecan estimate the Jeans mass for the interstellar matter by assuming it to have10
6hydrogen atoms per m3at temperature 100 K. Then (8.23) gives a Jeans
mass of about 8 ×1035kg. This is several orders of magnitude larger than the
typical mass of a star (about 1030kg). Presumably the interstellar matter ﬁrst
breaks into large chunks with masses corresponding to clusters of stars ratherthan individual stars. Then somehow these contracting chunks of gas have to
break further to produce stars. The presence of angular momentum or magnetic
ﬁelds can make the process quite complicated. See Spitzer (1978, §13.3) for an
introduction to the complex subject of star formation.

<<<PAGE 248>>>

228 Elements of plasma astrophysics
8.4 Basic equations of MHD
After familiarizing ourselves with the basic equations of ﬂuid mechanics, let
us now consider how these equations have to be generalized to MHD, whichessentially treats ﬂuids which are good conductors of electricity. We pointedout at the beginning of §8.2 that the state of a neutral ﬂuid can be prescribed
by two thermodynamic variables plus the velocity ﬁeld v(x,t). Since a plasma
or an electrically conducting ﬂuid responds to electromagnetic interactions, itmay at ﬁrst seem that we have to additionally specify the electric and magneticﬁelds E(x, t)andB(x, t)to complete the prescription of a state of the system.
However, actually only the magnetic ﬁeld B(x, t)is needed for the prescription
of the state, since the positive and negative charges in the plasma remain wellmixed, as we pointed out in §8.1, and the electric ﬁeld cannot be too large.
We shall soon show that even the weak electric ﬁeld can be found from a
knowledge of v(x,t)andB(x, t). The electric ﬁeld is, therefore, not an addi-
tional dynamical variable. It may be noted that, when dealing with a plasma,
it does not make sense to distinguish between EandDorBandH. These
distinctions are useful only when we can distinguish between charges and cur-
rents in the conductors versus charges and currents induced in the surrounding
medium.
According to Ohm’s law, the current density jin the plasma should be
given by
j=σE,
where σis the electrical conductivity. However, if the plasma moves with
velocity vin a magnetic ﬁeld B, then the forces on charged particles in the
plasma are given by q(E+v×B)rather than qE. Hence, Ohm’s law also
should be modiﬁed to
j=σ(E+v×B). (8.24)
The currents
in the plasma give rise to magnetic ﬁelds. We know that this is
described by one of Maxwell’s equations:
∇×B=μ0j+/epsilon10μ0∂E
∂t,
where the last term is the displacement current discovered by Maxwell (1865)
himself. As we know, this is the crucial term in deriving the equation of
electromagnetic waves. However, when we consider plasma motions at speeds
small compared to c, this term is unimportant for studying the dynamics of the
plasma. Hence we take
∇×B=μ0j. (8.25)

<<<PAGE 249>>>

8.4 Basic equations of MHD 229
By combining (8.24) and(8.25), we can write the electric ﬁeld as
E=∇×B
μ0σ−v×B. (8.26)
It should be clear from this that Eis not an independent dynamical variable in
MHD, since it can be found from vandB.
Since the magnetic ﬁeld Bis the important additional dynamical variable in
MHD, we would need an equation for the time evolution of Bto complete our
dynamical theory. For this, we turn to one of Maxwell’s equations:
∂B
∂t=− ∇× E,
which is the mathematical expression of Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction. On substituting for Efrom (8.26) into this equation, we get
∂B
∂t=∇× (v×B)+η∇2B, (8.27)
where
η=1
μ0σ(8.28)
and we have assumed that σdoes not vary with position. The equation (8.27) is
known as the induction equation .
The induction equation is the central equation of MHD. In order to have
a complete dynamical theory, we also need time derivative equations for theother dynamical variables – two thermodynamic quantities and v. For a neutral
gas, these are given by (8.3), (8.9) and (8.10). We now need to ﬁgure out if
these equations get modiﬁed in MHD. Since the equation of continuity (8.3)
follows simply from mass conservation, it has to remain unchanged. We shallnot discuss here how the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld modiﬁes the energyequation. Let us only consider how the Euler equation (8.9) has to be modiﬁed.
When there is a magnetic ﬁeld in the plasma, there can be a magnetic force inaddition to the other forces. We know that the magnetic force per unit volumeis given by j×B(see, for example, Panofsky and Phillips ,1962, §7–6), and the
magnetic force per unit mass is obtained by dividing this by ρ. We add this extra
term on the right-hand side of (8.9) and use (8.25) to eliminate j, which gives
∂v
∂t+(v.∇)v=F−1
ρ∇P+1
μ0ρ(∇× B)×B. (8.29)
Using the vector identity
(∇× B)×B=(B.∇)B−∇/parenleftbiggB2
2/parenrightbigg
,

<<<PAGE 250>>>

230 Elements of plasma astrophysics
we can write (8.29) as
∂v
∂t+(v.∇)v=F−1
ρ∇/parenleftbigg
P+B2
2μ0/parenrightbigg
+(B.∇)B
μ0ρ. (8.30)
It is clear from this that the magnetic ﬁeld introduces a pressure B2/2μ 0.
The other magnetic term (B.∇)B/μ 0is of the nature of a tension force along
magnetic ﬁeld lines.
We thus see that the MHD equations have two main complications with
respect to the ﬂuid dynamical equations. Firstly, the Euler equation gets
modiﬁed by the addition of magnetic pressure and magnetic tension, as we
see in (8.30). Secondly, we have an additional equation (8.27) to describe the
evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld – the induction equation. We now discuss a very
important consequence of the induction equation.
8.5 Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing
Suppose the magnetic ﬁeld inside the plasma has the typical value Band the
velocity ﬁeld has the typical value V, whereas Lis the typical length scale
over which the magnetic or velocity ﬁelds vary signiﬁcantly. Then the term∇×(v×B)in the induction equation (8.27) should be of order VB/L, while
the other term η∇
2Bin(8.27) should be of order ηB/L2. The ratio of these two
terms is a dimensionless number known as the magnetic Reynolds number and
is given by
RM≈VB/L
ηB/L2≈VL
η. (8.31)
The important point to note here is that RMgoes as L, which is much larger
for an astrophysical system than what it is for a laboratory plasma. In fact,
it turns out that RMis usually much smaller than 1 for laboratory plasmas
and much larger than 1 for astrophysical systems. This means that η∇2Bis
the dominant term on the right-hand side of (8.27) when we are dealing with
laboratory plasmas and ∇×(v×B)is the dominant term when we are dealing
with astrophysical plasmas. For laboratory plasmas, we can often write
Laboratory:∂B
∂t≈η∇2B. (8.32)
This equation is not difﬁcult to interpret. We see from (8.28) thatηis essentially
the inverse of conductivity σ, which means that ηgoes as the resistivity of the
plasma. We know that the resistivity of a system makes currents in the systemdecay and thereby magnetic ﬁelds produced by those currents also decay. The
signiﬁcance of (8.32) is that the magnetic ﬁeld in the plasma diffuses away
with time due to the resistivity, with the resistivity ηappearing as the diffusion

<<<PAGE 251>>>

8.5 Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing 231
coefﬁcient. On the other hand, magnetic ﬁelds in astrophysical plasmas often
evolve primarily due to the other term in (8.27), i.e. we can write
Astrophysics:∂B
∂t≈∇× (v×B).
We now discuss the signiﬁcance of this equation.
If the magnetic Reynolds number RMof an astrophysical system is
extremely large, then it is often justiﬁed to replace the approximation sign inthe last equation by an equality sign, i.e.
∂B
∂t=∇× (v×B). (8.33)
When the magnetic ﬁeld in the plasma evolves according to this equation, wecan prove a very remarkable theorem called Alfv´en’s theorem of ﬂux freez-
ing(Alfv ´en,1942a). A very similar theorem involving vorticity ω=∇× v
was, however, known to ﬂuid dynamicists for a long time (see, for example,
Choudhuri, 1998, §4.6). We ﬁrst state the theorem of ﬂux freezing before
proving it.
Consider a surface S
1inside a plasma at time t1. The ﬂux of magnetic ﬁeld
linked with this surface is/integraltext
S1B.dS. At some future time t2, the parcels of plasma
which made up the surface S1at time t1will move away and will make up a
different surface S2. The magnetic ﬂux linked with this surface S2at time t2
will be/integraltext
S2B.dS. The theorem of ﬂux freezing states that
/integraldisplay
S1B.dS=/integraldisplay
S2B.dS
ifBevolves according to (8.33). We write this more compactly in the form
d
dt/integraldisplay
SB.dS=0, (8.34)
where the Lagrangian derivative d/dt implies that we are considering the
variation of the magnetic ﬂux/integraltext
SB.dSlinked with the surface Sas we follow
the surface Swith the motion of the plasma parcels constituting it.
To proceed with the proof now, we note that the ﬂux/integraltext
SB.dSlinked with
the surface Scan change with time due to two reasons: (i) intrinsic variation in
B, and (ii) motion of the surface S. Mathematically we write
d
dt/integraldisplay
SB.dS=/integraldisplay
S∂B
∂t.dS+/integraldisplay
SB.d
dt(dS). (8.35)
Figure 8.1 shows an element of area which has changed from dSat time ttodS/prime
at time t/prime=t+δt. We see that dSanddS/primemake up the two ends of a cylinder.
The vector area of a side strip of this cylinder is −δtv×δl,w h e r e δli sal e n g t h
element from the curve encircling the surface dSas shown in Figure 8.1 .S i n c e
the vector area/contintegraltext
dSfor a closed surface is zero, the surfaces of this cylinder

<<<PAGE 252>>>

232 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Fig. 8.1 Displacement of a surface ele-
ment due to motions in the plasma.
satisfy the equation
dS/prime−dS−δt/contintegraldisplay
v×δl=0,
where the line integral is taken around the surface element dS.I tt h e n
follows that
d
dt(dS)=lim
δt→0dS/prime−dS
δt=/contintegraldisplay
v×δl.
The last term of (8.35) now becomes
/integraldisplay
SB.d
dt(dS)=/integraldisplay/contintegraldisplay
B.(v×δl)=/integraldisplay/contintegraldisplay
(B×v).δl.
Here the double integral/integraltext/contintegraltext
means that we ﬁrst take a line integral around
surface elements like dSand then sum up such line integrals for the many
surface elements which would make up the surface S. It is easy to see that this
ultimately gives a line integral along the curve Cencircling the whole surface S,
because the contributions from the line integrals in the interior cancel out when
we sum over all surface elements. Hence we have
/integraldisplay
SB.d
dt(dS)=/contintegraldisplay
C(B×v).δl=/integraldisplay
S[∇ ×(B×v)].d S
by Stokes’s theorem. We then have from (8.35) that
d
dt/integraldisplay
SB.dS=/integraldisplay
SdS./bracketleftbigg∂B
∂t−∇×(v ×B)/bracketrightbigg
. (8.36)
We now see that (8.34) follows from (8.33) and (8.36). This completes our
proof.
In astrophysical systems with high RM, we can imagine the magnetic ﬂux
to be frozen in the plasma and to move with the plasma ﬂows. Suppose wehave straight magnetic ﬁeld lines going through a plasma column as shown in

<<<PAGE 253>>>

8.5 Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing 233
Fig. 8.2 Illustration of ﬂux freezing. (a) A straight column of magnetic ﬁeld.
(b) Magnetic conﬁguration after bending the column. (c) Magnetic conﬁguration after
twisting the column.
Figure 8.2 (a). If the plasma column is bent, then, in the high RMlimit, the
magnetic ﬁeld lines are also bent with it as shown in Figure 8.2 (b). On the
other hand, if one end of the plasma column is twisted, then the magnetic ﬁeld
lines are also twisted as in Figure 8.2 (c). As a result of the theorem of ﬂux
freezing, the magnetic ﬁeld in an astrophysical system can almost be regarded asa plastic material which can be bent, twisted or distorted by making the plasmamove appropriately. This view of a magnetic ﬁeld is radically different from thatwhich we encounter in laboratory situations, where the magnetic ﬁeld appears
as something rather passive which we can switch on or off by sending a current
through a coil. In the astrophysical setting, the magnetic ﬁeld appears to acquirea life of its own.
We thus see that magnetic ﬁelds behave very differently in laboratory and
astrophysical settings, due to the fact that the magnetic ﬁeld evolves respec-tively according to the two different equations (8.32) and (8.33) in these two
situations. Alfv ´en coined the name cosmical electrodynamics to distinguish
electrodynamics at cosmic scales from ordinary laboratory electrodynamics,
although we start from the same Maxwell’s equations and Ohm’s law in both
the cases. In the astrophysical setting, if we know the initial conﬁguration of themagnetic ﬁeld and the nature of plasma ﬂows, we can almost guess on the basisof the ﬂux-freezing theorem what the subsequent magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration
is going to be (as we saw in Figure 8.2 ). The human mind is more attuned
to thinking geometrically rather than thinking analytically. We may be able to
solve an equation describing a process, but only when we are able to make amental picture of how the process proceeds, do we feel that we have understood
the process. The beauty of cosmical electrodynamics is that the ﬂux-freezing
theorem allows us to make a mental picture of how the magnetic ﬁeld evolvesin an astrophysical plasma.

<<<PAGE 254>>>

234 Elements of plasma astrophysics
When an astronomical object shrinks due to gravitational attraction, its
magnetic ﬁeld is expected to become stronger. If ais the equatorial cross-section
of the body through which a magnetic ﬁeld of order Bis passing, then the
magnetic ﬂux linked with the equatorial plane is of order Ba2. If the magnetic
ﬁeld is perfectly frozen, then this ﬂux should remain an invariant during the
contraction of the object. Some neutron stars are believed to have magneticﬁ e l d sa sh i g ha s1 0
8T, as pointed out in §5.5.2. Let us see if we can explain
this magnetic ﬁeld by assuming that the neutron star formed due to the collapseof an ordinary star of which the magnetic ﬁeld got compressed. A star like theSun has a radius of order 10
9m, and the magnetic ﬁeld near its pole is about
10−3T. Since the radius of a typical neutron star is about 104m, the equatorial
area would decrease by a factor of 1010if an ordinary star were to collapse
to become the neutron star. If the magnetic ﬂux remained frozen during thiscollapse, then the initial ﬁeld of 10
−3T would ﬁnally become 107T, which is
of the same order of magnitude as the magnetic ﬁelds of neutron stars.
8.6 Sunspots and magnetic buoyancy
We have summarized some properties of sunspots in §4.8. Now we shall discuss
how these properties can be explained with the basic principles of MHD.
First of all, a sunspot is a region of concentrated magnetic ﬁeld (of order
0.3 T) with very little magnetic ﬁeld in the surrounding region. Why doesthe magnetic ﬁeld get bundled up in a limited region which appears darker
compared to its surroundings? We have pointed out in §4.4 that energy is
transported by convection in the layers immediately below the solar surface.
A sunspot is, therefore, a bundle of magnetic ﬂux sitting in a region whereconvection is taking place. To understand the formation of sunspots, we need
to know how convection is affected by the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. This
subject is known as magnetoconvection , of which the foundations were laid
down by Chandrasekhar (1952). We have seen in (8.30) that a magnetic ﬁeld has
a tension force associated with it, which would oppose gas motions connected
with convection. If magnetic ﬁelds are present in a region of convection, they
tend to get swept in conﬁned regions within which convection is inhibited bymagnetic tension, but the remaining regions are free from magnetic ﬁelds whereconvection can take place freely. This is clearly seen in numerical simulations
of magnetoconvection (Weiss ,1981). Sunspots are then merely regions within
which magnetic ﬁelds are kept bundled up by convection. Since magnetic ten-
sion inhibits convection within a sunspot, heat transport is less efﬁcient withina sunspot, leading to a cooler surface temperature there. That is why a sunspot
appears darker than the surroundings.
We also pointed out in §4.8 that often two sunspots appear side by side at
nearly the same latitude with opposite polarities. The most obvious explanation

<<<PAGE 255>>>

8.6 Sunspots and magnetic buoyancy 235
Fig. 8.3 Magnetic buoyancy of a ﬂux tube. (a) A nearly horizontal ﬂux tube under the
solar surface. (b) The ﬂux tube after its upper part has risen through the solar surface.
for this is that there must have been a strand of magnetic ﬁeld underneath the
solar surface aligned in the toroidal direction, of which a part has come outthrough the solar surface as shown in Figure 8.3 (b). If the two sunspots are
merely the two locations where this strand of magnetic ﬁeld intersects the solarsurface, then we readily see that one sunspot must have magnetic ﬁeld linescoming out and the other must have ﬁeld lines going in. We now address thequestion how such a magnetic conﬁguration may come about. As we already
discussed, magnetic ﬁelds in a region of convection may be expected to remain
concentrated within localized regions. Let us consider a nearly horizontal cylin-drical region within which some magnetic ﬁeld is concentrated, as sketchedinFigure 8.3 (a). Such a region of concentrated magnetic ﬁeld with very little
magnetic ﬁeld outside is often called a magnetic ﬂux tube. Parker (1955a)
pointed out that a horizontal ﬂux tube may become buoyant. The argument isquite straightforward. Let P
ibe the gas pressure inside the magnetic ﬂux tube
andPebe the external pressure. We have seen in (8.30) that a magnetic ﬁeld
causes a pressure B2/2μ 0wherever it exists. In order to have a pressure balance
across the bounding surface of the ﬂux tube, we must have
Pe=Pi+B2
2μ0. (8.37)
It readily follows that
Pi<Pe. (8.38)
This usually, though not always, implies that the internal density ρiis also less
than the external density ρe. In the particular case when the temperature inside

<<<PAGE 256>>>

236 Elements of plasma astrophysics
and outside are both T,(8.37) leads to
RρeT=RρiT+B2
2μ0,
from which we obtain
ρe−ρi
ρe=B2
2μ0Pe. (8.39)
We thus see that the ﬂuid in the interior of the ﬂux tube is lighter and must be
buoyant. In the limit of high RM, the magnetic ﬁeld is frozen in this lighter
ﬂuid. As a result, the ﬂux tube as an entity becomes buoyant and rises against
the gravitational ﬁeld. This very important effect, discovered by Parker (1955a),
is known as magnetic buoyancy .S i n c e (8.38) does not always imply that the
interior of a ﬂux tube is lighter, it is possible that one part of a ﬂux tube becomesbuoyant and not the other parts. Here we shall not get into a discussion asto how this may come about. Suppose only the middle part of the ﬂux tubeshown in Figure 8.3 (a) has become buoyant. Then this middle part is expected
to rise, eventually piercing through the surface and creating the conﬁgurationofFigure 8.3 (b). With the help of this idea of magnetic buoyancy, one can
thus explain how a bipolar magnetic region arises. We have the photographof a freshly emerged bipolar magnetic region in Figure 4.16 . The granules of
convection lying between the two large sunspots seem somewhat distorted andelongated. Looking at the photograph carefully, one almost gets the feeling thatsomething has recently come up through the solar surface between the two largesunspots.
We have pointed out in §4.8 that the Sun does not rotate like a solid body.
The regions near the equator rotate with a higher angular velocity compared toregions near the poles. Let us consider a magnetic ﬁeld line passing throughthe solar interior as shown in Figure 8.4 (a). Since the magnetic ﬁeld line must
be nearly frozen in the plasma due to the high
RM, we expect that the varying
angular velocity, which is called differential rotation, should stretch out this ﬁeld
line as shown in Figure 8.4 (b). Thus the differential rotation has a tendency to
produce strong magnetic ﬁelds in the toroidal direction (i.e. in the φ-direction
in spherical coordinates), and the magnetic ﬁelds in the interior of the Sun arebelieved to be predominantly toroidal. Parts of the toroidal ﬁeld, concentratedinto ﬂux tubes by interaction with convection, may then become buoyant andproduce bipolar sunspots by piercing through the solar surface. It is straightfor-
ward to see from Figure 8.4 (b) that the bipolar sunspots in the two hemispheres
would have opposite polarity alignments, as we saw in Figure 4.17. Choudhuri
(1989) was the ﬁrst person to carry out a three-dimensional simulation to study
the formation of bipolar sunspots by magnetic buoyancy.

<<<PAGE 257>>>

8.7 A qualitative introduction to dynamo theory 237
Fig. 8.4 The production of a strong toroidal magnetic ﬁeld underneath the solar
surface. (a) An initial poloidal ﬁeld line. (b) A sketch of the ﬁeld line after it has been
stretched by the faster rotation near the equatorial region.
8.7 A qualitative introduction to dynamo theory
If there is any magnetic ﬁeld in the solar interior, we saw in §8.6 that one can
combine the ideas of ﬂux freezing, magnetoconvection and magnetic buoyancy
to explain the bipolar sunspots. But why should there be any magnetic ﬁeld
to begin with? Most stars are believed to have magnetic ﬁelds. We pointed
out in §6.7 that our Galaxy has a magnetic ﬁeld roughly running along the
spiral arms. Magnetic ﬁelds are almost ubiquitous in the astrophysical Universe.Dynamo theory is the basic theory based on MHD which tries to explain how
magnetic ﬁelds are generated in astrophysical systems. Magnetic ﬁelds of many
astrophysical objects have complicated spatio-temporal variations, an exampleof which is the butterﬂy diagram for the Sun shown in Figure 4.18 .A na i mo f
solar dynamo models is to explain the butterﬂy diagram. Dynamo theory is a
somewhat complicated subject and it is beyond the scope of this book to treat it
fully. We merely present below some qualitative ideas of dynamo theory.
The component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the toroidal direction with respect
to the rotation axis of the astrophysical object (i.e. the φ-direction in spherical
coordinates) is called the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld. On the other hand, the part
of the magnetic ﬁeld lying in the poloidal plane (i.e. B
rˆer+Bθˆeθin spherical
coordinates) is called the poloidal magnetic ﬁeld. We have already shown in
Figure 8.4 that it is possible to generate the toroidal ﬁeld by the stretching
of poloidal ﬁeld lines due to differential rotation, in a body like the Sun ofwhich the equator is rotating faster than the poles. However, if the poloidal ﬁeldcannot be sustained, then it will eventually decay away and consequently theproduction of the toroidal ﬁeld will also stop.
In a famous paper, Parker (1955b) gave the crucial idea of how the poloidal
ﬁeld can be generated. If there are turbulent convective motions inside theastronomical body, then the upward (or downward) moving plasma blobs stretchout the toroidal ﬁeld in the upward (or downward) direction due to ﬂux freezing.

<<<PAGE 258>>>

238 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Fig. 8.5 Different stages
of the dynamo process.
See the text for explana-tions.
If the convection takes place in a rotating frame of reference, then the upward (or
downward) moving plasma blobs rotate like corkscrews as they rise (or fall). We
see the evidence of such helical motions in cyclones in the Earth’s atmosphere.
Figure 8.5 (b) shows that a toroidal ﬁeld line has been twisted by such helical
turbulent motions in such a way that its projections in the meridional plane aremagnetic loops. Several such magnetic loops produced by the helical turbulent
motions are shown projected in the meridional plane in Figure 8.5 (c). One can
show that the helical motions in the two hemispheres have opposite sense,
just as the cyclones in the Earth’s two hemispheres rotate in opposite senses.If we keep this in mind and also note that B
φhas opposite directions in the
two hemispheres, it then follows that the magnetic loops produced in the twohemispheres have the same sense. This is indicated in Figure 8.5 (b). Although
magnetic ﬁelds are partially frozen in the plasma, turbulence associated withconvection makes the magnetic ﬁelds mix and diffuse to some extent. As a
result, we eventually expect the magnetic ﬁelds of the loops in Figure 8.5 (c)
to get smoothened out and give rise to a large-scale magnetic ﬁeld. Since all
the loops in Figure 8.5 (c) have the same sense, their diffusion gives rise to a
global ﬁeld with the same sense as indicated by the broken ﬁeld line. Thus we
ultimately end up with a poloidal ﬁeld in the meridional plane starting from a
toroidal ﬁeld.
Figure 8.6 summarizes the main points of the argument. The poloidal and
toroidal ﬁelds can sustain each other through a cyclic feedback process. The
poloidal ﬁeld can be stretched by the differential rotation to generate the toroidal
ﬁeld. The toroidal ﬁeld, in its turn, can be twisted by the helical turbulence(associated with convection in a rotating frame) to give back a ﬁeld in the

<<<PAGE 259>>>

8.8 Parker instability 239
Fig. 8.6 Schematic representation of Parker’s idea of the turbulent dynamo.
poloidal plane. Readers desirous of knowing how this central idea of dynamo
theory is given a mathematical expression should consult Choudhuri (1998,
Chapter 16). The magnetic ﬁelds of most astrophysical systems are believedto be produced by the process encapsulated in Figure 8.6 .
8.8 Parker instability
The interstellar medium inside a galaxy is usually found to be distributed rathernon-uniformly. Figure 8.7 shows how the interstellar medium is distributed in
the galaxy M81. In parts of the spiral arms, the interstellar medium seemsto form a succession of clumps like beads on a string. It was Parker (1966)
who ﬁrst pointed out that a uniform distribution of the interstellar mediumwould be unstable. This instability, known as the Parker instability , is related to
magnetic buoyancy and is presumably the cause behind the interstellar mediumfragmenting into clumps.
The magnetic ﬁeld of the galaxy can be assumed to be frozen in the
interstellar medium. Let us consider an initial conﬁguration with the interstellarmedium distributed uniformly in a layer having straight magnetic ﬁeld linespassing through it. Now suppose the system has some small perturbations with
parts of the magnetic ﬁeld lines bulging upward, as sketched in Figure 8.8 (a).
From symmetry, the gravitational ﬁeld is directed towards the central plane
of the layer. So the gravitational ﬁeld in the bulging region of magnetic ﬁeldlines must be downward. If the magnetic ﬁeld is frozen in the plasma, then
the plasma can come down vertically in the bulge region only if the magnetic
ﬁeld lines are also brought down. It is, however, possible for the plasma to ﬂowdown along the magnetic ﬁeld lines as indicated by the arrows in Figure 8.8 (a).
Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing allows such ﬂows without bringing down the
ﬁeld lines in the bulge, and hence we expect that the downward gravitationalﬁeld in the bulge region would make the plasma ﬂow in this fashion. As aresult of the plasma draining down from the top region of the bulge, this region

<<<PAGE 260>>>

240 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Fig. 8.7 The distribution of interstellar matter in the galaxy M81, as measured by
radio emission from neutral hydrogen atoms. From Rots (1975). ( c/circlecopyrtEuropean Southern
Observatory. Reproduced with permission from Astronomy and Astrophysics.)
becomes lighter and more buoyant. We therefore expect this region to rise up
further. In other words, the initial bulge keeps on getting enhanced, leading toan instability (Parker ,1966). As the magnetic ﬁeld lines become more bent, the
magnetic tension gets stronger. Eventually the magnetic tension halts the riseof the upper part of the bulge. This was clearly seen in the detailed numericalsimulations of Parker instability by Mouschovias (1974). Figure 8.8 (b) sketches
what the ﬁnal conﬁguration may look like. The magnetic ﬁeld lines bulge out of
the galactic plane, whereas the interstellar plasma collects in the valleys of the
magnetic ﬁeld lines. This is presumably the reason why the interstellar mediumis intermittent and clumpy.

<<<PAGE 261>>>

8.9 Magnetic reconnection 241
Fig. 8.8 Sketch of Parker instability. (a) Perturbed magnetic ﬁeld lines bulging out of
the galactic plane. (b) The ﬁnal conﬁguration.
8.9 Magnetic reconnection
We have pointed out in §8.5 that the magnetic Reynolds number is very high
in most astrophysical systems and the diffusion term η∇2Bin(8.27) can be
neglected, leading to the ﬂux freezing condition. It would appear that the
diffusion of magnetic ﬁelds would be a very unimportant and slow process in anastrophysical system. However, under certain circumstances, it is often found
that a large amount of magnetic energy gets dissipated rather quickly. Within
our solar system, solar ﬂares provide an example of this. These are explosionstaking place in the solar atmosphere above sunspots, where as much energy as10
26J may get released in a few minutes. We have seen in §8.6 that magnetic
ﬁelds in the Sun rise due to magnetic buoyancy and there would be magneticloops in the solar atmosphere above sunspots. A solar ﬂare is basically an eventin which a large amount of magnetic energy in the solar atmosphere quicklygets converted into heat and other forms. If the magnetic Reynolds number is
high, how is it possible to have such a quick dissipation of magnetic energy?
We now turn to this question.
Even if the magnetic diffusion coefﬁcient ηis small, it is possible for
the gradient of the magnetic ﬁeld to be very large in a region so that the
termη∇
2Bcannot be neglected within that region. Figure 8.9 shows a region
with oppositely directed magnetic ﬁelds above and below the line OP.S u c h
a magnetic conﬁguration implies that there must be a concentrated sheet of
electric current between the oppositely directed magnetic ﬁelds. This is called a
current sheet. Since the gradient of magnetic ﬁeld would be large in the central
region of Figure 8.9 , the diffusion term η∇2Bmay become signiﬁcant there
and hence the magnetic ﬁeld would decay away in this central region. Since

<<<PAGE 262>>>

242 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Fig. 8.9 Magnetic reconnection in a current sheet. See the text for explanations.
magnetic ﬁelds have the pressure B2/2μ 0associated with them, a decrease in
the magnetic ﬁeld would cause a pressure decrease in the central region. In
many astrophysical situations, the magnetic pressure may be comparable to or
even greater than the gas pressure. If that is the situation, then the decay of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the central region of Figure 8.9 would cause an appreciable
depletion of the total pressure there, and we expect that the plasma from aboveand below with fresh magnetic ﬁelds would be sucked into the central region.
This fresh magnetic ﬁeld would then decay and more plasma from above and
below would be sucked in to compensate for the pressure decrease due to thisdecay. This process, known as magnetic reconnection , may go on as long as
fresh magnetic ﬁelds are brought to the central region.
Let us look at Figure 8.9 more carefully to understand the physics of
magnetic reconnection. The ﬁeld lines ABCD and A
/primeB/primeC/primeD/primeare moving with
inward velocity vitowards the central region. Eventually the central parts BC
andB/primeC/primeof these ﬁeld lines decay away. The part ABis moved to EOand the
part A/primeB/primetoE/primeO. These parts originally belonging to different ﬁeld lines now
make up one ﬁeld line EOE/prime. Similarly the parts CDandC/primeD/primeeventually make
up the ﬁeld line FPF/prime. We thus see that the cutting and pasting of ﬁeld lines
take place in the central region. Since plasmas from the top and the bottom in
Figure 8.9 push against the central region, the plasma in the central region is
eventually squeezed out sideways through the points Oand P. The resultant
outward velocity vocarries the reconnected ﬁeld lines EOE/primeand FPF/primeaway
from the reconnection region. Carrying out a full mathematical analysis ofmagnetic reconnection is extremely difﬁcult. Several scientists ( Parker ,1957;
Sweet ,1958; Petschek ,1964) attempted to calculate theoretically the rate at
which magnetic reconnection may be expected to proceed. Since we cannot

<<<PAGE 263>>>

8.10 Particle acceleration in astrophysics 243
get into this complex subject here, let us end our discussion of magnetic
reconnection with one comment. Even when the magnetic Reynolds numberof an astrophysical system based on its overall length scale is large, it may be
possible for magnetic reconnection to take place in localized regions, thereby
converting magnetic energy into other forms much more rapidly than what onemight expect.
As a result of magnetic reconnection, magnetic energy gets converted into
other forms like heat. If the plasma has a low density and hence low heatcapacity, then the heat produced by magnetic reconnection in the plasma canraise the temperature of the plasma signiﬁcantly. One example is the coronaof the Sun. We have pointed out in §4.6 that regions of corona can have
temperatures of order of millions of degrees, although the solar surface hasa temperature of only about 6000 K. Figure 8.10 is an X-ray image of the
Sun obtained with the spacecraft Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).Since the solar surface at 6000 K does not emit much X-rays, the surface appears
dark. The X-rays mainly seem to come from loop-like regions of the corona.
These loops are essentially magnetic loops above sunspots – like the loop showninFigure 8.3 (b). It is believed that magnetic reconnections taking place within
these loops raise their temperatures to values of the order of a million degrees,
leading to copious emission of X-rays. What causes magnetic reconnections to
take place in these coronal loops is a complex question which is beyond thescope of this book.
8.10 Particle acceleration in astrophysics
In the previous few sections, we have considered several important astrophysicalapplications of MHD, treating the plasma as a continuum. There are some
astrophysical plasma problems which require a more microscopic point of view
and we have to go beyond MHD. One such problem is to understand why manyastrophysical systems have a small number of charged particles accelerated tovery high energies.
It was established by the balloon ﬂight experiments of Hess (1912)t h a t
the Earth is exposed to some ionizing rays coming from above the Earth’satmosphere. It was later ascertained that these cosmic rays are actually not
rays, but highly energetic charged particles – mostly electrons and light nuclei.
A question of fundamental importance was to determine if cosmic rays are
something local existing in the neighbourhood of the Earth and the solar system,or if they ﬁll up the whole Galaxy or even the whole Universe. We pointed outin§6.7 the present astrophysical opinion that the cosmic rays are a galactic
phenomenon. These charged particles are accelerated within our Galaxy andremain conﬁned within it by the galactic magnetic ﬁeld. There is evidence forparticles with energies as high as 10
20eV. For comparison, remember that the

<<<PAGE 264>>>

244 Elements of plasma astrophysics
Fig. 8.10 An X-ray image of the Sun obtained by the spacecraft SOHO. This image
was taken in 2000, around the time of sunspot maximum. Courtesy: SOHO (ESA and
NASA).
rest mass energy of a nucleon is of the order of 109eV, implying that most
of these particles must be highly relativistic. We should mention that such
energetic charged particles are believed to exist in other galaxies as well. Weshall show in the next section that relativistic charged particles gyrating around
magnetic ﬁelds emit a special kind of radiation known as synchrotron radiation ,
which is often (but not always) found in the radio band of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Radio telescopes have discovered synchrotron radiation from many
extragalactic systems, implying that the acceleration of charged particles to very
high energies must be a fairly ubiquitous process in the astrophysical Universe.
Figure 8.11 shows the spectrum of cosmic ray electrons at the top of the
Earth’s atmosphere. From energies of the order of about 10
3MeV to energies of
the order of 106MeV, the spectrum can be ﬁtted quite well with a power law
N(E)dE∝E−2.6dE. (8.40)
From the study of the synchrotron radiation coming from extragalactic sources,it can be inferred that the electrons in many other sources also have power-lawdistributions in energy with an index close to 2.5, in fair agreement with what

<<<PAGE 265>>>

8.10 Particle acceleration in astrophysics 245
Fig. 8.11 The spectrum of cosmic ray electrons at the top of the Earth’s atmosphere.
From Meyer (1969). ( c/circlecopyrtAnnual Reviews Inc. Reproduced with permission from Annual
Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics .)
is observed in cosmic ray measurements. The aim of any particle acceleration
theory is to explain the origin of this power-law spectrum with the observedindex. A very inﬂuential theory was proposed in a pioneering paper by Fermi
(1949).
By studying orbits of charged particles in a non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld,
it can be shown that the particles are reﬂected from regions of concentratedmagnetic ﬁeld. We shall not derive this result here, but refer the reader to the
standard literature (see, for example, Jackson, 2001, §12.5; Choudhuri, 1998,
§10.3). Since interstellar clouds are known to carry magnetic ﬁelds, the surfaces
of the clouds should act as magnetic mirrors and reﬂect charged particles. Just

<<<PAGE 266>>>

246 Elements of plasma astrophysics
as a ball picks up energy on being hit by a bat, Fermi (1949) visualized that
charged particles can be accelerated by being hit repeatedly by the moving
magnetic clouds. Although a particle gains energy in a ‘head-on’ collision with
a moving cloud, there can also be ‘trailing’ collisions in which energy is lost.
Hence we have to show that the particle on average gains energy in collisions.To understand the basic physics, let us consider a simple model of only one-dimensional motions of clouds and charged particles, so all the collisions can
neatly be divided into head-on and trailing collisions. We present a Newtonian
treatment of the problem here. Since the energetic particles are relativistic, oneshould actually use a relativistic treatment. We refer the reader to Longair (1994,
§21.3) for the relativistic treatment along with a clear discussion of several other
aspects of the problem.
Let us consider the clouds to move with velocity Uin one dimension, i.e.
half of the clouds are moving in one direction and the other half moving in the
opposite direction. Let a particle of initial velocity uundergo a head-on collision
with a cloud. The initial velocity seen from the rest frame of the cloud is u+U.
If the collision is elastic, it would appear from this frame that the particle alsobounces back in the opposite direction with the same magnitude of velocityu+U. In the observer’s frame, this reﬂected velocity appears to be u+2U.
Hence the energy gain according to the observer is
/Delta1E
+=1
2m(u+2U)2−1
2mu2=2mU(u+U). (8.41)
The energy loss in a trailing collision can similarly be shown to be
/Delta1E−=− 2mU(u−U). (8.42)
The probability of head-on collisions is proportional to the relative velocityu+U, whereas the probability of trailing collisions is proportional to the
relative velocity u−U. The average energy gain in a collision is therefore
equal to
/Delta1E
ave=/Delta1E+u+U
2u+/Delta1E−u−U
2u=4mU2(8.43)
on using (8.41) and(8.42). We now write down the corresponding expression
for the average energy gain in a relativistic treatment derived in Longair (1994,
§21.3). It is
/Delta1Eave=4/parenleftbiggU
c/parenrightbigg2
E. (8.44)
It is easy to see that (8.44) reduces to (8.43) in the non-relativistic limit on
putting E=mc2. Readers good at special relativity may try to derive (8.44)
themselves.
The main point to note in (8.44) is that the average energy gain is propor-
tional to the energy. Hence the energy of a particle suffering repeated collisions

<<<PAGE 267>>>

8.10 Particle acceleration in astrophysics 247
is expected to increase, obeying an equation of the form
dE
dt=αE, (8.45)
where αis a constant. The solution of (8.45) is
E(t)=E0exp(αt), (8.46)
where E0is the initial energy. If all particles started with the same initial
energy E0, then a particle acquires energy Eafter remaining conﬁned in the
acceleration region for time
t=1
αln/parenleftbiggE
E0/parenrightbigg
. (8.47)
We expect particles to be continuously lost from the acceleration region. If τis
the mean conﬁnement time, then the probability that the conﬁnement time of a
particle is between tandt+dtis
N(t)dt=exp(−t/τ)
τdt. (8.48)
This is exactly like the kinetic theory result of ﬁnding the probability thatthe time between two collisions for a particle is in the range ttot+dtand
is discussed in any elementary textbook presenting kinetic theory (see, forexample, Reif, 1965, §12.1; Saha and Srivastava ,1965, §3.30). Now a particle
with conﬁnement time between t,t+dtwould acquire the energy between E,
E+dE. Substituting for tfrom (8.47) and for dtfrom (8.45), we are led from
(8.48) to
N(E)dE=exp/bracketleftBig
−
1
ατln/parenleftBig
E
E0/parenrightBig/bracketrightBig
τ.dE
αE,
from which
N(E)∝E−/parenleftBig
1+1
ατ/parenrightBig
. (8.49)
We thus end up with a power-law spectrum.
This theory of Fermi (1949), although somewhat heuristic in nature and
based on several ad hoc assumptions, gives us a clue as to how a power-law
spectrum may arise. There are, however, very big gaps in the theory. Since
it is not so straightforward to estimate αandτ, the index of the power law
cannot be calculated easily. Furthermore, there is no indication in the theorywhy this index should be close to some universal value in different astrophysical
systems. We also see from (8.44) that the average energy gain is proportional
to(U/c)
2. Since the clouds are moving at non-relativistic speeds, this is a very
small number and the acceleration process is quite inefﬁcient. Because of this

<<<PAGE 268>>>

248 Elements of plasma astrophysics
quadratic dependence on U, this process is referred to as the second-order Fermi
acceleration.
If we could somehow arrange that only head-on collisions take place, then
the acceleration process would be much more efﬁcient. For u/greatermuchU, it follows
from (8.41) that the energy gain will depend linearly on Urather than quadrat-
ically. The acceleration resulting from such a situation is called the ﬁrst-order
Fermi acceleration. But is it possible for this to happen in Nature? It was pointed
out by several authors in the late 1970s ( Axford, Leer and Skadron, 1977;
Krymsky, 1977; Bell, 1978; Blandford and Ostriker ,1978) that shock waves
produced in supernova explosions may provide sites for the ﬁrst-order Fermi
acceleration. Magnetic irregularities are expected on both sides of the advancing
shock wave. It is possible that a charged particle is trapped at the shock front
and is reﬂected repeatedly from magnetic irregularities on both sides. Suchcollisions are always head-on and lead to much more efﬁcient acceleration com-pared to Fermi’s original proposal of acceleration by moving interstellar clouds.
We again refer the reader to Longair (1994, §21.4) for a detailed discussion
of this theory. Although many questions are still unanswered, acceleration in
supernova shocks seems at present to be the most promising mechanism forproducing cosmic rays.
8.11 Relativistic beaming and synchrotron radiation
A very famous result of classical electrodynamics is that accelerated chargedparticles emit electromagnetic radiation. Whenever the velocity of a chargedparticle in a plasma changes, we, therefore, expect radiation to come out. Inthis section and the next, we shall discuss two astrophysically important plasma
radiation processes. When relativistic charged particles gyrate around magnetic
ﬁelds, we get synchrotron radiation , which is discussed in this section. When
charged particles undergo Coulomb collisions amongst each other, we get a typeof radiation called bremsstrahlung, which will be discussed in §8.12.
To understand synchrotron radiation, we ﬁrst have to derive a special
relativistic effect known as relativistic beaming , which is important in many
astrophysical problems. We consider an object moving in the xdirection with
velocity v.L e t SandS
/primebe the frames of reference attached with us and with
the moving object respectively (both assumed inertial). Now the moving objectejects a projectile with velocity u
/primein its own frame S/primemaking an angle θ/primewith
thexdirection. From our frame, it will appear that the projectile is moving with
umaking an angle θ. We want to relate θandθ/prime.
Suppose it is seen from the moving frame S/primethat the projectile is at (x/prime,y/prime)
and(x/prime+dx/prime,y/prime+dy/prime)at times t/primeandt/prime+dt/primerespectively. From our frame
S, we would record these events at tandt+dtwith the projectile at (x,y)

<<<PAGE 269>>>

8.11 Relativistic beaming and synchrotron radiation 249
and(x+dx,y+dy)respectively. From the standard Lorentz transformation
formulae,
dx=γ(dx/prime+vdt/prime), (8.50)
dt=γ(dt/prime+v
c2dx/prime), (8.51)
dy=dy/prime, (8.52)
where γis the usual Lorentz factor 1//radicalbig
1−v2/c2. Keeping in mind that ux=
dx/dt,uy=dy/dt,u/prime
x=dx/prime/dt/primeandu/prime
y=dy/prime/dt/prime, we can divide (8.50) by
(8.51) to obtain
ux=u/prime
x+v
1+vu/primex/c2, (8.53)
whereas the division of (8.52) by(8.51) gives
uy=u/prime
y
γ(1+vu/primex/c2). (8.54)
The angle θwhich the projectile motion makes with respect to the xdirection
in our frame Sis obviously given by
tanθ=uy
ux=u/prime
y
γ(u/primex+v)(8.55)
from (8.53) and(8.54).S i n c e u/prime
x=u/primecosθ/primeandu/prime
y=u/primesinθ/prime, we ﬁnally have
tanθ=u/primesinθ/prime
γ(u/primecosθ/prime+v)(8.56)
relating θandθ/prime.
Let us consider the special case in which the projectile is a beam of light
emitted by the moving object so that u/prime=c. Substituting this in (8.56),w e
obtain
tanθ=sinθ/prime
γ(cosθ/prime+v/c). (8.57)
It is not difﬁcult to verify that θwill in general be smaller than θ/prime. We can
consider the special case in which the moving object emits a light signal
perpendicular to its direction of motion, i.e. θ/prime=π/2.Then (8.57) gives
tanθ=c
γv. (8.58)
Suppose the object is moving highly relativistically. Then v∼candγ/greatermuch1. It
follows from (8.58) thatθwill be a small angle of order 1 /γ. In other words,
even if a relativistically moving object emits radiation in different directionsin its own rest frame, it will appear to us that all the radiation is emitted in the

<<<PAGE 270>>>

250 Elements of plasma astrophysics
forward direction of its motion within a cone of angle 1 /γ. This is the relativistic
beaming effect, which is very important in many astrophysical situations.
We now have to ﬁnd out what kind of radiation an observer will receive
from a relativistic charged particle spiralling around a magnetic ﬁeld. A rigor-
ous treatment of synchrotron radiation is somewhat complicated. So we shallpresent a heuristic discussion which captures much of the essential physics.Since a charged particle moving in a spiral path must be having an acceleration
directed towards the axis of the spiral, such a particle should obviously emit
radiation. The rate of energy loss by a particle moving non-relativistically isgiven by an expression derived in any standard electrodynamics textbook (see,for example, Panofsky and Phillips ,1962, §20-2). For a relativistic particle
spiralling in a magnetic ﬁeld, we have to consider a relativistic generalizationof this and have to average over charged particles moving at different angleswith respect to the magnetic ﬁeld. It can be shown that the average energy lossrate due to radiation for a highly relativistic charged particle of Lorentz factor
γmoving in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld is
P=4
3σTcγ2UB, (8.59)
where UB=B2/2μ 0is the magnetic energy density and σTis the Thomson
cross-section given by (2.81).S e eRybicki and Lightman (1979, §6.1) or
Longair (1994, §18.1) for a derivation of (8.59). It is clear from (2.81) and
(8.59) thatPis inversely proportional to m2. Hence electrons emit much more
efﬁciently than heavier nuclei. Even if different accelerated charged particles
are present in a system, it is the electrons which emit the synchrotron radiation.
If the electron is relativistic, then we do not have to bother about the
direction in which the radiation will be emitted, because the relativistic beamingeffect will make sure that we see the radiation coming out in the direction ofmotion within a cone of angle 1 /γ, no matter in which direction the radiation
is emitted in the rest frame of the electron. Only if the observer lies within
this cone of angle 1/γ , will the observer see the radiation from the electron.
Figure 8.12 shows an electron moving in a circular orbit. When the electron is at
position A, the observer comes within the cone of radiation and starts receiving
the radiation. When the electron reaches B, the observer goes out of the cone
and ceases to receive any more radiation. We now need to ﬁnd out the duration
of time during which the observer receives the radiation.
LetLbe the distance between AandB, which is also the arc length between
them if θis small. The electron moving with speed vtakes time L/vto travel
from AtoB. This is the interval of time between the emissions of the earliest
and latest radiations which are seen by the observer. Keeping in mind that theradiation from Btakes time L/cless to travel to the observer compared to the

<<<PAGE 271>>>

8.11 Relativistic beaming and synchrotron radiation 251
Fig. 8.12 A sketch illustrating how synchrotron radiation arises. The observer receives
the radiation emitted by the charged particle only during its transit from AtoB.
radiation from A, it should be clear that the time during which the observer
receives the radiation is
/Delta1t=L
v−L
c=L
v/parenleftBig
1−v
c/parenrightBig
. (8.60)
The frequency of gyration of an electron of charge eand rest mass megyrating
in a magnetic ﬁeld BisBe/γme(see, for example, Jackson, 2001, §12.2),
which can be written as ωg,nr/γ,w h e r e
ωg,nr=Be
me(8.61)
is the non-relativistic gyration frequency. Since θ≈2/γ, we can write
L
v=θ
v/r≈2/γ
ωg,nr/γ≈2
ωg,nr. (8.62)
Also
1−v
c=1−v2/c2
1+v/c≈1
2γ2(8.63)
ifv≈c. On making use of (8.62) and(8.63), we get from (8.60) that
/Delta1t≈1
γ2ωg,nr. (8.64)
Hence, as the electron gyrates around the magnetic ﬁeld, the observer receives a
radiation pulse of this duration once every gyration period. If we take a Fourier
transform of this signal, the spectrum should peak at a frequency of aboutγ
2ωg,nr.
Instead of considering a single electron, we now consider a collection of
electrons having the energy distribution
N(E)dE∝E−pdE (8.65)

<<<PAGE 272>>>

252 Elements of plasma astrophysics
all spiralling around a magnetic ﬁeld. Since ωg,nr=Be/mewill be the same
for all these electrons, the frequency at which an electron of energy Ewill
predominantly emit should be proportional to γ2orE2(because of the special
relativistic relation E=meγc2). We can write
ν=CE2, (8.66)
where νis the frequency at which electrons of energy Eemit radiation. From
this, we get
dE=dν
2√
Cν. (8.67)
In other words, electrons having energy in the range EtoE+dEwill emit
radiation with frequencies in the range νtoν+dν, with dEanddνrelated by
(8.67). Since the number of such electrons is E−pdEaccording to (8.65) and the
rate of emission is proportional to E2according to (8.59), the rate of radiation
emitted by these electrons should be proportional to
E2E−pdE.
On substituting√ν/CforEand using (8.67), we conclude that the spectrum
of emitted radiation should be of the form
f(ν)dν∝ν−sdν, (8.68)
where
s=p−1
2. (8.69)
We thus arrive at an extremely important conclusion: if an astrophysical system
has relativistic electrons obeying a power-law distribution with index p,t h e n
the emitted synchrotron spectrum also should obey a power-law with index s
given by (8.69).
We pointed out in §8.10 that accelerated particles typically tend to have
power-law indices around p=2.6. According to (8.69), such electrons should
emit synchrotron radiation with index s=0.8. Many astrophysical systems
indeed emit synchrotron radiation with power-law indices not very differentfrom this. It can be shown that synchrotron radiation is polarized. Hence
a power-law spectrum with some degree of polarization is a signature ofsynchrotron radiation. Whenever we detect synchrotron radiation from an astro-physical source, we can immediately conclude that the source must have mag-
netic ﬁelds and relativistic electrons.

<<<PAGE 273>>>

8.12 Bremsstrahlung 253
8.12 Bremsstrahlung
Synchrotron radiation discussed in the previous section is an example of non-
thermal radiation, i.e. a type of radiation arising from a cause other than temper-
ature. The radiation emitted by a body just because of its heat is called thermal
radiation.I n§2.2 we have discussed the emission of radiation by matter in local
thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE). We saw that an optically thick source emitslike a blackbody. On the other hand, the spectrum of radiation coming out ofan optically thin source is essentially given by the emission coefﬁcient j
ν.A n
optically thin, moderately hot gas primarily emits at spectral lines. However, if
the gas is a plasma with temperature of the order of millions of degrees, then
all the atoms are broken up and the radiation is produced only when chargedparticles in the plasma are accelerated or decelerated due to mutual Coulombinteractions amongst themselves. Such radiation, called bremsstrahlung,i s
observed from many astrophysical systems such as the coronae of stars likethe Sun or hot gas in clusters of galaxies (to be discussed in §9.5). The radi-
ation from such extremely hot plasmas is often seen in the X-ray part of thespectrum.
Here we shall only quote the main results without the full derivation,
which can be found in Rybicki and Lightman (1979, Ch. 5) or Longair (1992,
§3.4). Since electrons are much lighter than ions, they are accelerated muchmore during Coulomb collisions with ions, and it is these electrons which
are primarily responsible for bremsstrahlung. An approximate mathematical
derivation is not difﬁcult. For a Coulomb collision with impact parameter b,
an approximate expression for acceleration can be written down by argumentssimilar to the arguments given in §7.3 for gravitational collisions. By taking a
Fourier transform of the acceleration, one can ﬁnd the acceleration associatedwith a frequency ω. Then standard results of electrodynamics give the rate of
radiation emitted at that frequency. Finally, we have to allow for different valuesof the impact parameter band average over different possible velocities of the
electrons (assuming the Maxwellian distribution). The emissivity /epsilon1
ν(in W m−3
Hz−1) is found to be given by
/epsilon1ν=6.8×10−51neniZ2
√
Te−hν/κ BTg(ν,T), (8.70)
where Tis the temperature, neis the number density of electrons (in m−3),
niis the number density of ions with charge Ze(in m−3)a n d g(ν,T)is a
dimensionless factor of order unity known as the Gaunt factor which dependsonνandTrather weakly. It should be easy to check that the emission coef-
ﬁcient j
νintroduced in §2.2.2 is simply obtained by dividing /epsilon1νby 4π .T o
get the total emissivity /epsilon1, we simply have to integrate /epsilon1νover all frequencies.
This gives

<<<PAGE 274>>>

254 Elements of plasma astrophysics
/epsilon1=1.4×10−40√
TneniZ2g (8.71)
(in W m−3), where gis the averaged Gaunt factor. The formulae (8.70) and
(8.71) are regularly used in the astrophysical literature to calculate radiation
from very hot plasmas.
8.13 Electromagnetic oscillations in cold plasmas
We end this chapter by pointing out how electromagnetic waves are affected by
the presence of plasma. The electric ﬁeld of the wave accelerates the electrons
in the plasma, which then has an effect on the propagation. Because of theinertia of the electrons, very high frequency waves cannot move the electronsmuch. So we expect the plasma effects to be more important on low-frequency
electromagnetic waves like radio waves, which get affected while propagating
through the interstellar medium or the solar wind. We pointed out in §6.7 how
important inferences can be made about the interstellar medium by analysing
radio signals from pulsars.
We pointed out in §8.4 that the MHD model of the plasma neglects the
displacement current, which is crucial for studying electromagnetic waves.
Hence we have to go beyond MHD and assume the plasma to be a collection
of electrons and ions. Since the ions are much heavier, we can neglect their
motion. They merely provide a background of positive charge to keep theplasma neutral. We further assume the plasma to be cold – which means that
the electrons have no thermal motions and move only under the inﬂuence of the
electric ﬁeld of the wave. The readers may look at §12.3 and§12.4 ofChoudhuri
(1998) to learn about the effects of thermal motions, which make the analysis
more complicated.
Letv,EandBrespectively denote the velocity of the electron ﬂuid, the
electric ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld. The equation of motion of an electron isgiven by
m
e∂v
∂t=−eE. (8.72)
It is easy to show that the magnetic force v×Bis much smaller if |v|is small
compared to c. We need to combine (8.72) with the following two Maxwell’s
equations:
∇×B=−μ0neev+/epsilon10μ0∂E
∂t, (8.73)
∇×E=−∂B
∂t, (8.74)
where we have written −neevfor the current j.H e r en eis the number density
of electrons.

<<<PAGE 275>>>

8.13 Electromagnetic oscillations in cold plasmas 255
Since we want to consider an electromagnetic wave, let us assume that the
time dependence of all the quantities is of the form exp (−iωt)so that we can
everywhere replace ∂/∂tby−iω. We then get from (8.72)
v=e
iωmeE. (8.75)
On substituting this for vin(8.73),w eh a v e
∇×B=−iω
c2/parenleftBigg
1−ω2
p
ω2/parenrightBigg
E, (8.76)
where we have written 1 /c2for/epsilon10μ0and
ωp=/radicalBigg
nee2
/epsilon10me(8.77)
is known as the plasma frequency . On taking a time derivative of (8.76) and
using (8.74), we end up with
ω2
c2/parenleftBigg
1−ω2
p
ω2/parenrightBigg
E=∇× (∇× E). (8.78)
Since the background plasma is homogeneous, we may look for solutions
of the perturbed quantities which are sinusoidal in space. In other words, we
assume all perturbations to be of the form exp (ik.x−iωt). On substituting in
(8.78),w eg e t
k×(k×E)=−ω2
c2/parenleftBigg
1−ω2
p
ω2/parenrightBigg
E. (8.79)
Without any loss of generality, we can choose our zaxis in the direction of the
propagation vector k, i.e. we write k=kez. On substituting this in (8.79),w e
obtain the following matrix equation
⎛
⎝ω2−ω2
p−k2c200
0 ω2−ω2
p−k2c20
00 ω2−ω2
p⎞⎠⎛⎝E
x
Ey
Ez⎞⎠=⎛⎝0
00⎞
⎠.(8.80)
It is clear from (8.80) that the xandydirections are symmetrical, as we expect.
The zdirection, being the direction along k, is distinguishable. This indicates
that we may have two physically distinct types of oscillatory modes. They are
discussed below. The existence of these two modes in the plasma was ﬁrstrecognized by Tonks and Langmuir (1929).

<<<PAGE 276>>>

256 Elements of plasma astrophysics
8.13.1 Plasma oscillations
One solution of the matrix equation (8.80) is
Ex=Ey=0,ω2=ω2
p. (8.81)
Here the electric ﬁeld is completely in the direction of the propagation
vector k, and it follows from (8.72) that all the displacements are also
in the same direction. We also note that the group velocity (∂ω/∂ k)is
zero. We therefore have a non-propagating longitudinal oscillation with
its frequency equal to the plasma frequency ωp. Such oscillations are
known as plasma oscillations . They are often called Langmuir oscillations ,
after Langmuir who was the pioneer in the study of these oscillations
(Langmuir, 1928; Tonks and Langmuir ,1929).
It is not difﬁcult to understand the physical nature of these oscillations.
Against a background of nearly immobile and hence uniformly distributed ions,there will be alternate layers of compression and rarefaction of the electron gas(unless k=0 so that the wavelength is inﬁnite). The electrostatic forces arising
out of such a charge imbalance drive these oscillations.
8.13.2 Electromagnetic waves
The only other possible solution of the matrix equation (8.80) is
Ez=0,ω2=ω2
p+k2c2. (8.82)
This clearly corresponds to a transverse wave. It is actually nothing but theordinary electromagnetic wave modiﬁed by the presence of the plasma. Ifω/greatermuchω
p, then we are led to limiting relation ω2=k2c2, which is the usual
dispersion relation for electromagnetic waves in the vacuum. In other words,if the frequency of the wave is too high, even the electrons, which are muchmore mobile than the ions, are unable to respond sufﬁciently fast so that theplasma effects are negligible.
It is also to be noted from (8.82) that if ω<ω
p,t h e n kbecomes imaginary
so that the wave is evanescent. If an electromagnetic wave of frequency ωis
sent towards a volume of plasma with a plasma frequency ωpgreater than ω(if
ω<ω p), then the electromagnetic wave is not able to pass through this plasma
and the only possibility is that it is reﬂected back.
The plasma frequency of the Earth’s ionosphere is about 30 MHz. Radio
waves from cosmic sources can penetrate through the ionosphere only if thefrequency is higher than 30 MHz (or the wavelength is less than 10 m). Hence
radio telescopes have to be operated at higher frequencies if we are to receive
radio signals from cosmic sources, as pointed out in §1.7. On the other hand, if
we want to communicate with faraway regions of the Earth’s surface, then we

<<<PAGE 277>>>

Exercises 257
may want to use radio waves of frequency less than 30 MHz which would be
reﬂected back from the ionosphere.
Exercises
8.1 Consider a ﬂuid ﬂow pattern independent of time. Starting from the Euler
equation, show that
1
2v2+/integraldisplaydp
ρ+/Phi1=constant
along a line of ﬂow ( /Phi1is the gravitational potential). This is known as
Bernoulli’s principle (Bernoulli, 1738).
8.2 Consider a constant initial magnetic ﬁeld B=B0eyin a plasma of zero
resistivity. Suppose a velocity ﬁeld
v=v0e−y2ex
is switched on at time t=0. Find out how the magnetic ﬁeld evolves in time.
Make a sketch of the magnetic ﬁeld lines at some time after switching on the
velocity ﬁeld.
8.3 Consider a cylindrical column of plasma with a current of uniform density
jezﬂowing through it (the zdirection being parallel to the axis of the cylinder).
Find the magnetic ﬁeld Bθ(r)resulting from this current ( r,θ,zbeing the
cylindrical coordinates). Show from (8.29) that the static equilibrium condition
is given by
d
dr/parenleftBigg
P+B2
θ
2μ0/parenrightBigg
+B2
θ
μ0r=0
and determine how the gas pressure P(r)varies inside the plasma column. It
may be noted that this static equilibrium conﬁguration is violently unstable,
but we shall not get into a discussion of it here.
8.4 Suppose a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B0in a plasma with zero resistivity
is perturbed. Assuming that the pressure and gravity forces are negligible
compared to the magnetic force, i.e. writing the equation of motion as
ρdv
dt=(∇× B)×B
μ0,
show that the perturbations give rise to wave motions moving along B0with
velocity given by
vA=B0√μ0ρ.

<<<PAGE 278>>>

258 Elements of plasma astrophysics
These waves are called Alfv´en waves (Alfv ´en,1942b) and vAis called the
Alfv´en speed.
8.5 Consider a horizontal magnetic ﬂux tube with magnetic ﬁeld Band
radius of cross-section aembedded in an isothermal atmosphere of perfect
gas with constant gravity g.L e t/Lambda1=P/ρg, which is a constant throughout
an isothermal atmosphere. The ﬂux tube rising due to magnetic buoyancy at
speed vexperiences a drag force per unit length given by
1
2CDρv2a,
where CDis a constant. Show that the ﬂux tube eventually rises with an
asymptotic speed
vA/parenleftbiggπa
CD/Lambda1/parenrightbigg1/2
,
where vA=B/√μ0ρ.
8.6 (For those who are good in special relativity.) Consider the one-
dimensional problem of a relativistic particle being reﬂected from a set ofreﬂectors moving with speeds either Uor−U. Using special relativity, show
that the average energy gained per collision is given by (8.44) .
8.7 In the treatment of plasma oscillations given in §8.13, the motions of
ions were neglected. Suppose ions with charge Zeand mass m
ialso move
in response to the electric ﬁeld. Assuming the plasma to be a mixture of an
electron ﬂuid with velocity veand an ion ﬂuid with velocity vi, show that the
frequency of plasma oscillations will be
ω=ωp/radicalBigg
1+Zm e
mi,
where ωpis given by (8.77) .
8.8 From the dispersion relation (8.82) of electromagnetic waves propagating
through a plasma, show that the group velocity is
vgr=c/radicalBigg
1−ω2p
ω2.
A radio signal starting from a pulsar and passing through the interstellar
medium will reach an observer at a distance Lin time

<<<PAGE 279>>>

Exercises 259
Ta=/integraldisplayL
0ds
vgr.
Substitute the expression of vgrin this and make a binomial expansion by
assuming ωp/lessmuchω. If signals with different frequencies started at the same
time, show that they will be dispersed on reaching the observer, with the
dispersion given by (6.68) .

<<<PAGE 280>>>



<<<PAGE 281>>>

9
Extragalactic astronomy
9.1 Introduction
We have pointed out in §6.1 that astronomers in the early twentieth century
thought that our Milky Way Galaxy is the entire Universe! Even a small
telescope shows many nebulous objects in the sky. The great German philoso-
pher Kant already conjectured in the eighteenth century that some of these
nebulae could be island universes outside our Galaxy (Kant ,1755). However,
astronomers at that time knew no way of either establishing or refuting this con-
jecture. In 1920 the National Academy of Sciences of USA arranged a debate
on this subject – Shapley arguing that these nebulae are within our Galaxyand Curtis arguing that they are extragalactic objects ( Shapley ,1921; Curtis ,
1921). We discussed in §6.1.2 how the distances of Cepheid variable stars
can be determined. Using the newly commissioned Mount Wilson telescope,which was much more powerful than any previous telescope, Hubble (1922)
resolved some Cepheid variables in the Andromeda Galaxy M31 and estimatedits distance, clearly showing that it must be lying far outside our Milky Way
Galaxy. Our current best estimate of the distance of M31 is about 740 kpc.
It soon became clear that many of the spiral nebulae are galaxies outside ourGalaxy, heralding the subject of extragalactic astronomy and establishing thatgalaxies are the building blocks of the Universe.
9.2 Normal galaxies
Light coming from a typical simple galaxy seems like a composite of lightemitted by a large number of stars. A galaxy of this kind is called a normal
galaxy . We shall discuss the characteristics of such galaxies in this section.
Galaxies with more complex properties will be taken up in §9.4.
261

<<<PAGE 282>>>

262 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.1 The spiral galaxy M51, photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Courtesy: NASA, ESA and Space Telescope Science Institute.
9.2.1 Morphological classiﬁcation
Galaxies were ﬁrst classiﬁed in the 1920s depending on their appearances
through optical telescopes. Some galaxies appear to have beautiful spiral struc-
tures. They are called spiral galaxies .Figure 9.1 shows the Whirlpool Galaxy
M51, which is a spiral galaxy. On the other hand, many galaxies seem to have
featureless elliptical shapes. They are known as elliptical galaxies .Figure 9.2
is a photograph of such a galaxy. Apart from spiral and elliptical galaxies, there
are some galaxies with irregular shapes which do not ﬁt into either of these
categories. They are simply called irregular galaxies.
Since all spiral galaxies are believed to be intrinsically shaped like circular
disks, the apparent shape of a spiral galaxy in the sky gives an indication of its
inclination with respect to the line of sight. On the other hand, different elliptical
galaxies have different ellipticities, and their intrinsic ellipticities cannot bededuced easily from apparent shapes. For example, a highly ﬂattened ellipticalgalaxy may appear fairly round in the sky if its short axis is turned towards
us. Although the apparent shapes of elliptical galaxies may not be indicative
of their real shapes, still elliptical galaxies are customarily classiﬁed accordingto their apparent shapes. The circular-looking elliptical galaxies are classiﬁedas E0. Then we go through a sequence of E1, E2, E3 ...i n o r d e r o f i n c r eas-
ing ellipticity, ultimately ending with E7 which are fairly ﬂattened ellipticalgalaxies. Hubble (1936) developed a famous scheme of classifying galaxies, in
which E7 elliptical galaxies are taken to be similar to spiral galaxies with very

<<<PAGE 283>>>

9.2 Normal galaxies 263
Fig. 9.2 The elliptical galaxy NGC 1132, photographed with the Hubble Space
Telescope. Courtesy: NASA and Space Telescope Science Institute.
closely wound spirals. There are some spiral galaxies with bars in the central
regions, such as the galaxy shown in Figure 9.3 .Hubble (1936) divided the
spiral galaxies into ordinary spirals and barred spirals. Ordinary and barred
spirals with very closely wound spirals are classiﬁed as S0 and SB0. Spiralgalaxies with increasingly looser spiral structures are classiﬁed in the sequence
Sa, Sb, Sc. Barred spirals are similarly classiﬁed in the sequence SBa, SBb,
SBc. Figure 9.4 gives the famous tuning fork diagram,i nw h i c h Hubble (1936)
sequentially arranged all these galaxies.
Elliptical galaxies vary widely in luminosity – from very luminous giant
galaxies to dwarf galaxies. The number density of elliptical galaxies withluminosity in the range LtoL+dLis approximately given by Schechter’s law
(Schechter, 1976)
φ(L)dL≈N
0/parenleftbiggL
L∗/parenrightbiggα
exp(−L/L∗)dL
L∗, (9.1)
where N0=1.2×10−2h3Mpc−3,α=− 1.25 and L∗=1.0×1010h−2L⊙.
Here happearing in the expressions of N0andL∗is obviously not Planck’s

<<<PAGE 284>>>

264 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.3 The barred spiral galaxy NGC 1300, photographed with the Hubble Space
Telescope. Courtesy: NASA and Space Telescope Science Institute.
Fig. 9.4 Hubble’s tuning fork diagram of galaxy classiﬁcation.
constant but a very important dimensionless parameter in extragalactic astron-
omy, which will be introduced in §9.3. It is easy to see from (9.1) that dwarf
elliptical galaxies greatly outnumber the giants. In contrast to elliptical galaxies,
the spirals do not vary that much in size or luminosity. The typical fractions of
spirals and ellipticals in a population of galaxies depend on the environment(Dressler ,1980). In the central regions of rich clusters of galaxies, only about
10% of the galaxies may be spirals. In contrast, the spirals may constitute nearly
80% of the bright galaxies in the low-density regions of the Universe.
The surface brightness of a galaxy is naturally the maximum at the centre
and falls off as we go towards the outer edge. In the case of elliptical galaxies,

<<<PAGE 285>>>

9.2 Normal galaxies 265
the fall of surface brightness with distance from the centre can be ﬁtted fairly
well by the de Vaucouleurs law (de Vaucouleurs, 1948)
I(r)=Ieexp/braceleftBigg
−7.67/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggr
re/parenrightbigg0.25
−1/bracketrightBigg/bracerightBigg
, (9.2)
where reis called the effective radius within which half of the luminosity is
contained (if the image of the galaxy happens to be circular), whereas Ie=
I(re). For the disk of a spiral galaxy, an exponential law gives a reasonably
good ﬁt for the fall in surface brightness:
I(r)=I0exp/parenleftbigg
−r
rd/parenrightbigg
. (9.3)
Here rdis the distance at which the intensity falls to 0 .37I0and gives a measure
of the size of the disk.
9.2.2 Physical characteristics and kinematics
Apart from the overall appearances, the physical characteristics of elliptical andspiral galaxies are also very different. We have introduced the concept of stellarpopulations in §6.4. A typical elliptical galaxy is very much like a Population II
object. There is very little interstellar matter in an elliptical galaxy and star
formation no longer takes place. So most of the stars are fairly old, giving a
yellowish colour to the galaxy, in the absence of young bluish stars. Anotherproperty of Population II objects in our Galaxy, as we saw in §6.4,i st h a t
they have very little rotational velocity and are supported against gravity by
random motions. Exactly similar considerations hold for elliptical galaxies as
well. There is usually very little systematic rotation in an elliptical galaxy. Thestars do not all collapse to the centre because of the random motions. The largeror the more luminous the elliptical galaxy is, the stronger is its gravity and the
stars need to have more random motions in order to maintain a steady state. The
velocity dispersion σof an elliptical galaxy is related to its intrinsic luminosity
by the Faber–Jackson relation (Faber and Jackson, 1976)
σ≈220/parenleftbiggL
L∗/parenrightbigg0.25
km s−1, (9.4)
where L∗is the same luminosity as what appears in (9.1). It is clear from (9.4)
thatσis larger for elliptical galaxies with higher luminosity L.Figure 9.5 shows
velocity dispersions of several elliptical galaxies plotted against their luminosi-ties. The observational data show a reasonably tight correlation corresponding
to the Faber–Jackson relation, without too much scatter.
In addition to the differences in appearance and morphology, spiral galaxies
differ from elliptical galaxies in the following basic characteristics: (i) spiral

<<<PAGE 286>>>

266 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.5 The velocity dispersion σof elliptical galaxies plotted against their absolute
magnitudes. Remembering that the absolute magnitude is 2.5 times the logarithm of
luminosity, one obtains the Faber–Jackson relation from this plot. From Oegerle and
Hoessel (1991). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from
Astrophysical Journal .)
galaxies contain considerable amounts of interstellar matter (ISM); and (ii) both
stars and the ISM move in roughly circular orbits around the centre of a spiralgalaxy such that the gravitational attraction towards the centre is balanced by
the centrifugal force. Because of the presence of ISM, star formation goes on
inside the disks of spiral galaxies, making them appear bluer than ellipticalgalaxies. We also receive synchrotron radiation (see §8.11) from the disks of
spiral galaxies, which shows that spiral galaxies have magnetic ﬁelds as well as
cosmic ray particles spiralling around them as in our Galaxy.
We discussed in §6.5 that the emission at the 21-cm line helped in mapping
the distribution and kinematics of the ISM in our Galaxy. The ISMs of external
spiral galaxies can also be studied by analysing the emission at the 21-cm line.
If the galaxy is moving with respect to us, then we will of course ﬁnd this line
Doppler shifted. Additionally, in the case of a rotating disk, we expect the ISMto be moving towards us on one side of the galaxy and moving away from us onthe other side (unless the line of sight is exactly perpendicular to the disk). The
Doppler shifts of the 21-cm line should accordingly be different on the opposite
sides of the spiral galaxy. This is indeed seen and one can use this variationof Doppler shift to determine how the circular speed v
cof the ISM varies with

<<<PAGE 287>>>

9.2 Normal galaxies 267
Fig. 9.6 The contours of constant Doppler shift (given in km s−1) in the 21-cm line
emission superposed on the negative optical image (i.e. the galaxy is shown in black
against a light background) of the galaxy NGC 5033. From Bosma (1978). Courtesy:
A. Bosma.
distance from the centre of the galaxy. Figure 9.6 shows the contours of constant
Doppler shift in a spiral galaxy superposed on the optical image of the galaxy.
The contour lines go well beyond the optical image, since the 21-cm emissionof a typical spiral galaxy usually comes from a region much larger than theoptical image. This implies that a spiral galaxy does not end at the edge of its
optical image (primarily due to stars) and the disk of non-luminous ISM must
be extending well beyond where stars are found.
From a ﬁgure like Figure 9.6 , one can determine how the rotation speed
v
cvaries with the distance from the centre inside a galaxy. A plot of the
circular speed vcas a function of the radius of a galaxy is known as a rotation
curve. Before presenting observationally determined rotation curves, let us ﬁrstdiscuss what we expect on theoretical grounds. If v
cis the circular speed at a

<<<PAGE 288>>>

268 Extragalactic astronomy
radial distance rfrom the centre, then equating the centrifugal force with the
gravitational force gives
v2
c
r=GM(r)
r2, (9.5)
where M(r)is the mass within the radius r. We should point out that (9.5)
is strictly valid only for a spherically symmetric distribution of matter. In the
case of a spiral galaxy, we expect (9.5) to give only an approximate qualitative
idea of how vcvaries with r.I fw et a k e M(r)∝r3in the central region of the
galaxy, as we would expect in the case of a uniform spherical distribution, then
it follows from (9.5) that
vc∝r (9.6)
in the central region of the galaxy. If most of the mass is conﬁned within a
certain region, then the circular speed beyond that region, on the other hand,
must be given by
vc=/radicalbigg
GM total
r, (9.7)
where Mtotalis the total mass. In other words, we expect vcto fall as r−1/2
in the outer regions of the galaxy. Now we show in Figure 9.7 the rotation
Fig. 9.7 The rotation curves of several galaxies showing how vcvaries with radius.
From Rubin, Ford and Thonnard (1978). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Repro-
duced with permission from Astrophysical Journal Letters .)

<<<PAGE 289>>>

9.2 Normal galaxies 269
curves of several spiral galaxies determined from the Doppler shift of the
21-cm line. It seems that vcrises in the central regions of galaxies roughly as
we expect from (9.6). However, the rotation curves become asymptotically ﬂat
and the values of vcthereafter remain nearly constant with increasing radial
distance. We do not see a fall in vcas suggested by (9.7).T h i sc a m ea sa
very big surprise to astronomers when rotation curves of a few spiral galaxieswere determined for the ﬁrst time ( Rubin and Ford ,1970; Huchtmeier, 1975;
Roberts and Whitehurst ,1975; Rubin, Ford and Thonnard, 1978). Since the
21-cm emission is detected from regions of galaxies beyond the visible disk, itcould be ascertained that the ISM keeps on going in circular orbits with constantv
cwell beyond the regions emitting visible light in the galaxies.
What stops vcfrom falling as r−1/2as suggested in (9.7)? The most plaus-
ible suggestion is that mass distribution continues beyond the visible stellardisk of the galaxy and even beyond the regions from where we receive 21-cmemission. That is why (9.7) based on the assumption that we are at the outer
periphery of mass distribution is not applicable. It follows from (9.5) that
M(r)∝rin a region where v
cis constant. So it is difﬁcult to estimate the total
mass of a galaxy if we are not able to detect the fall-off of vcat larger distances.
It appears that the total mass of a typical spiral galaxy is at least a few times the
total mass of stars emitting light. In other words, most of the matter in a spiral
galaxy does not emit light and is usually referred to as dark matter. Determining
the nature of dark matter is one of the major challenges of modern astronomy.One important component of dark matter is obviously the ISM which exists in
the form of a disk extending beyond the disk of stars. Since we do not see a
fall-off of v
ctill the edge of the region where atomic hydrogen (emitting the
21-cm line) is found, it is obvious that there must be matter even beyond this
region and this matter is not atomic hydrogen. We have no information about
the nature of this matter or its distribution. Does this dark matter lie in the diskbeyond the disk of neutral hydrogen or does it form a halo around the galaxy?We do not know the full answer (see the discussion of gravitational lensing in
§13.3.2).
The asymptotic circular speed v
cin the ﬂat portion of the rotation curve
would certainly depend on the mass of the spiral galaxy. We expect a higher vc
for a more massive galaxy. Since a more massive galaxy is expected to be moreluminous as well, we anticipate a correlation between the asymptotic v
cand the
intrinsic brightness of a spiral galaxy. Tully and Fisher (1977) discovered such
a correlation. In the infrared 2.2 micron K band, the Tully–Fisher relation can
be written as
vc≈220/parenleftbiggL
L∗/parenrightbigg0.22
km s−1(9.8)
(Aaronson et al., 1986), where L∗is the characteristic galaxy luminosity. This
is reminiscent of the Faber–Jackson relation (9.4) of elliptical galaxies.

<<<PAGE 290>>>

270 Extragalactic astronomy
9.2.3 Open questions
We have seen in Chapters 3 and4that we have a reasonably complete theoretical
understanding of various observed properties of stars. A similar theoretical
understanding of galaxies has so far eluded astrophysicists. In Chapter 7 we
have given an introduction to the theoretical methods for studying the dynamicsof a collection of self-gravitating stars. Whereas an elliptical galaxy may seem
like a collection of self-gravitating stars, a spiral galaxy is a more complex
system due to the presence of the ISM. But why do these collections of stars takeup only the morphologies which the galaxies seem to have? What rules out otherpossible morphologies which an imaginative person should be able to think
of? We have no satisfactory theoretical answer to this question. For example,
we still have no full theory to explain Hubble’s tuning fork diagram. Whatdetermines whether a galaxy will turn out to be a spiral galaxy or an ellipticalgalaxy? Do the initial conditions during galaxy formation determine this, or
does it depend on the environment? Our understanding of galaxy formation still
being rather primitive, we do not know much about the initial conditions whichmay determine the nature of the galaxy. Since spiral galaxies have more angularmomentum, the amount of angular momentum in the proto-galactic cloud may
have some importance in determining the nature of the galaxy formed. The fact
that the fraction of spiral galaxies is considerably less within dense clustersof galaxies gives an indication that the environment also must play a role, but
we are not quite sure yet about the exact nature of this role. One possible
explanation for the scarcity of spiral galaxies in rich clusters is that some ofthem had been converted into elliptical galaxies. We shall discuss in §9.5 that
there are mechanisms by which a galaxy in a rich cluster may lose its ISM.
However, if a spiral galaxy loses its ISM, is that sufﬁcient to convert it into an
elliptical galaxy? The current evidence points to a tentative answer ‘yes’, but wecertainly do not understand the details of how this happens. We shall also pointout in §9.5 that there are some indications that two colliding spiral galaxies may
result in a large elliptical galaxy.
There are many other properties of galaxies which we understand only at
a very rough qualitative level. For example, we expect the surface brightnessof any galaxy to decrease as we move away from its centre. However, nobody
has succeeded in giving detailed theoretical derivations from ﬁrst principles to
explain (9.2) or(9.3) quantitatively. Again, we certainly expect larger elliptical
galaxies to have more velocity dispersion and larger spiral galaxies to havehigher asymptotic v
c. So relations like the Faber–Jackson relation (9.4) and
the Tully–Fisher relation (9.8) are certainly expected on the basis of broad
qualitative arguments. But we do not have quantitative theoretical explanationswhy these relations have the precise mathematical forms which they seem tohave. Since galaxies are often regarded as the building blocks of the Universe, it
is certainly a very unsatisfactory situation that we understand galaxies so little.

<<<PAGE 291>>>

9.3 Expansion of the Universe 271
9.3 Expansion of the Universe
Suppose a source emitting sound is moving away from you at speed vand the
speed of sound through air is cs. It is easy to show that the frequency νobsof
the sound wave measured by you as an observer will be related to the frequency
νemat which the sound is emitted by
νobs
νem=cs
cs+v(9.9)
(see, for example, Halliday, Resnick and Walker ,2001, §18-8). This is the well-
known Doppler effect. For the case of light, it is a little bit more subtle, since thespeed of light cis the same for all observers and the relative speed vbetween
a light-emitting source and an observer cannot exceed c.H o w e v e r ,i fv is small
compared to c,t h e n(9.9) holds approximately for the Doppler effect of light
as well, with creplacing c
s(Halliday, Resnick and Walker ,2001, §38-10).
The wavelengths of light in the frames of the emitter and observer are thenrelated by
λ
obs
λem=νem
νobs=1+v
c. (9.10)
Since λobs>λ emfor a source moving away from us, a spectral line in the
spectrum of the moving source will appear shifted towards the red side of the
spectrum. Astronomers usually denote the redshift by the symbol zdeﬁned as
λobs
λem=1+z. (9.11)
It follows from (9.10) and(9.11) that
v=zc. (9.12)
Thus, measuring the redshifts of spectral lines in the spectrum of a receding
source, one can ﬁnd the speed of recession v.
From the spectrum of a galaxy, it is easy to measure the redshift (or the
blueshift) of spectral lines which gives the speed at which the galaxy is movingaway from us (or moving towards us). Slipher (1914) noted that the spectra of
most galaxies showed redshift, indicating that they are moving away from us.
After estimating distances of several galaxies by studying the Cepheid variables
in them, Hubble (1929) discovered that more faraway galaxies are receding
from us at higher speeds. Hubble (1929) proposed a linear relationship
v=H
0l (9.13)
between the recession velocity vand the distance l. This is now known as Hub-
ble’s law andH0is known as the Hubble constant, perhaps the most important
quantity in cosmology. As we shall see in the next chapter, it is possible for thisconstant of proportionality between vandlto evolve with time. In other words,

<<<PAGE 292>>>

272 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.8 An expanding plane with an observer O.
the Hubble constant is not a constant in time. It relates vandlat a particular
epoch in the evolution of the Universe and is a constant for that epoch. In the
next chapter, we shall use the symbol Hto denote the Hubble constant at any
arbitrary epoch, whereas H0denotes the Hubble constant at the present time.
On hearing about Hubble’s law for the ﬁrst time, the natural question which
comes to one’s mind is whether our Galaxy is situated in some special centrallocation of the Universe from which the other galaxies are ﬂying away. Alittle reﬂection shows that this linear law merely implies that the Universe is
undergoing a uniform expansion and a law like Hubble’s law will appear to be
true at any point in the Universe. For simplicity, let us consider a plane surfacewhich is expanding uniformly with some marks on it (Figure 9.8). Suppose O
is an observer who is watching the two marks at AandB. The distances to A
andBfrom Oare respectively l
AandlBsuch that
lB=αlA. (9.14)
After the plane has expanded uniformly for time dt, the changed distances of A
andBwill also satisfy a similar relation
lB+dlB=α(lA+dlA)
by virtue of the uniformity of expansion. Hence
dlB
dt=αdlA
dt.
Since the time derivative of distance is nothing but the recession velocity from
O, we can write this as
vB=αvA. (9.15)
It follows from (9.14) and(9.15) that
vB
vA=lB
lA.
Thus various points in the plane will appear to move away from Oobeying
Hubble’s law that the recession velocity is proportional to the distance. Since O
is an arbitrary point in the plane, we expect a similar recession law to hold with

<<<PAGE 293>>>

9.3 Expansion of the Universe 273
respect to any point in the plane, provided the plane is expanding uniformly.
Hubble’s law, therefore, suggests a uniformly expanding Universe in which allpoints are equivalent.
In the example of the uniformly expanding plane, let us now assume that A
andBare not static marks, but represent ants which are moving on the plane
while the plane is expanding. Then the recession velocities of Aand Bwill
consist of two parts: (i) a part due to the expansion of the plane which will satisfy
Hubble’s law; and (ii) a part due to the motions of the ants with respect to the
expanding plane. Exactly the same considerations apply to receding galaxies aswell. If galaxies are moving away from us strictly as a part of the general ﬂowof the expanding Universe, then Hubble’s law would be exact. On the other
hand, if galaxies also move around with a random velocity with respect to this
general ﬂow of expansion, then their relative velocities with respect to us canhave another part which is random. So we expect the velocity of a galaxy to begiven by
v=H
0l+δv, (9.16)
where δvis the random part which can be of order 1000 km s−1, since this is the
typical velocity of a galaxy with respect to the background ﬂow of expansion.
The ﬁrst term H0lincreases with distance, whereas the second term δvis of the
same order for galaxies at different distances. Hence we expect H0lto be the
dominant term for galaxies at large distances for which (9.16) will approach
Hubble’s law (9.13). For nearby galaxies, however, one expects large departures
from Hubble’s law. In fact, the Andromeda Galaxy M31, which is one of our
nearby large galaxies, shows blueshift implying that it is moving towards us. Weshall see in §9.5 that both our Galaxy and the Andromeda Galaxy are part of a
cluster of galaxies known as the Local Group. Typically a cluster of galaxies is
a gravitationally bound system and does not expand with the expansion of theUniverse. One typically has to look at galaxies at distances larger than the sizeof a galaxy cluster (a few Mpc) for Hubble’s law to hold.
Determination of the Hubble constant
Determining the Hubble constant accurately is one of the major challenges incosmology. The recession velocity vcan be found easily from a measurement
of the redshift z. So it is the measurement of the distance lwhich is the
main source of uncertainty. The distance of a galaxy can be found if, withinthat galaxy, we can identify any object of known intrinsic luminosity. Suchobjects are often referred to as standard candles in astronomy. As we already
pointed out, Hubble (1922) determined the distances of some nearby galaxies
by studying Cepheid variables in them, which were taken as standard candles.For galaxies still further away for which Cepheid variables are not discernable,one can take the brightest stars as standard candles, assuming that the brightest

<<<PAGE 294>>>

274 Extragalactic astronomy
stars in all galaxies are of approximately the same luminosity. We pointed out
in§4.7 that Type Ia supernovae always have the same peak intensity. So, if a
Type Ia supernova, which can be much brighter than the brightest stars and can
be observed in very faraway galaxies in which even the brightest stars are not
distinguishable, is observed in a galaxy, that can be used as a standard candle.Since one cannot always detect a supernova in a galaxy, one can use the Faber–Jackson relation (9.4) of elliptical galaxies or the Tully–Fisher relation (9.8) for
spiral galaxies to determine the intrinsic luminosity of a galaxy, from whicha measurement of the apparent luminosity gives the distance. All the distancemeasurement methods, however, become more and more uncertain as we goto larger and larger distances. Since an accurate determination of the Hubble
constant requires measurements of both distance and cosmological recession
velocity, we have a problematic situation. For nearby galaxies, the distancescan be measured accurately, but the possible presence of a random componentmakes the measurement of cosmological recession velocities uncertain. On the
other hand, recession velocities of distant galaxies may be primarily due to the
cosmological expansion, but their distances are difﬁcult to measure accurately.For several decades, the Hubble constant remained a quantity which had anunacceptably high error bar. One of the major aims of the Hubble Space
Telescope was to narrow down this error bar by determining the distances of
galaxies accurately. The project undertaken for this purpose was named theHubble Key Project, which ﬁnally succeeded in pinning down the value of theHubble constant to a great extent.
Before quoting the value of the Hubble constant, let us point out the unit
used for it. Since velocities of galaxies are usually given in km s
−1and distances
given in Mpc, it has become customary to give the value of the Hubble constant
in the unit km s−1Mpc−1, although it has the dimension of inverse time. Hubble
(1929) had found a rather large value of about 500 in this unit. During much
of the second half of the twentieth century, different groups claimed values inthe range 50 to 100. It became customary to write the Hubble constant in the
following way:
H
0=100hkm s−1Mpc−1, (9.17)
where hwas supposed to be a constant of which the value would be ﬁxed by
future measurements. Since many important quantities in cosmology depend on
the Hubble constant, there were obvious advantages of substituting (9.17) for
calculating the values of these quantities. Then one could clearly see how these
quantities were affected by the uncertainties in the determination of H0.F o r
example, let us consider how we can ﬁnd the distance lof a galaxy from its
redshift z.F r o m(9.12), (9.13) and(9.17), it follows that
l=3000 zh−1Mpc. (9.18)

<<<PAGE 295>>>

9.3 Expansion of the Universe 275
Once we know the exact value of h,(9.18) would give us the exact distance l.A s
another example, let us try to estimate the age of the Universe. If we assume that
a galaxy moving away from us at speed valways moved at this speed vfrom
the beginning of the Universe (which is not a correct assumption as we shallsee in the next chapter), then the time taken by it to move through a distance
lisl/v=H
−1
0. All the galaxies must have been on top of each other at the
approximate time H−1
0before the current epoch. This is called the Hubble time
and gives an order of magnitude estimate of the age of the Universe. On using(9.17) and converting Mpc to km, we ﬁnd the Hubble time to be
H
−1
0=9.78×109h−1yr. (9.19)
Ifhis assumed to lie in the range 0.5 to 1.0 (which was the case a few years ago),
then one can ﬁnd the uncertainty of the Hubble time from the above expression.
After analysing the various techniques of distance measurement carefully,
the Hubble Key Project team ﬁnally announced a value of the Hubble constant
(Freedman et al. ,2001):
H0=72±8k ms−1Mpc−1. (9.20)
This can be taken as the most reliable value of the Hubble constant that we have
at the present time. Figure 9.9 plots recession velocities of some nearby galaxies
against their Cepheid distances, to give an idea how good Hubble’s law is withindistances for which the distance measurement can be regarded as accurate.
Astronomers are aware of objects having redshift zof order or larger
than 1, where zis calculated from (9.11) by using the observed wavelength
Fig. 9.9 Recession velocities of galaxies plotted against their distances measured from
Cepheid variables. The Cepheid distance can be measured only if the galaxy is not
too far away. The values of the Hubble constant corresponding to the three straight
lines are indicated. From Freedman et al. (2001). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society.
Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)

<<<PAGE 296>>>

276 Extragalactic astronomy
of some known spectral line. Certainly (9.10) and(9.12), which hold only in the
approximation |v|/lessmuchc , cannot be true in such a situation, since (9.12) would
imply a speed larger than cwhen z>1. The full special relativistic expression
for the Doppler shift allows for zto be larger than 1 when vapproaches c.
However, even this special relativistic interpretation is not very helpful in under-
standing the physics of what is happening when zis larger than 1. We need to
apply general relativity for a proper study of the Universe at large redshift. We
shall discuss the general relativistic interpretation of redshift in §10.3 and shall
derive it in §14.3. This chapter is restricted to a discussion of only that part
of the extragalactic Universe for which z<1. The later chapters will discuss
objects having z>1.
9.4 Active galaxies
A normal galaxy is made up of stars and interstellar matter. Sometimes, how-
ever, it is found that a galaxy may additionally have a compact nucleus at itscentre giving out copious amounts of radiation in several bands of electromag-
netic spectrum from the radio to X-rays. Such a galaxy is called an active galaxy
and its nucleus is called an active galactic nucleus, abbreviated as AGN .
9.4.1 The zoo of galactic activity
The study of active galaxies followed a rather chequered path. Objects which
we now recognize to be very similar were often not realized to have anything incommon when they were ﬁrst discovered. As a result, the nomenclature in thisﬁeld is heavily loaded with historical baggage. The names of different types of
active galaxies give no clue as to how these different types of active galaxies
may be related to each other.
This subject began when Seyfert (1943) noted that some spiral galaxies had
unusually bright nuclei. The spectra of these nuclei were found to be totally
different from the spectra of stars and had strong emission lines. So a typical
galactic nucleus of this kind could not simply be a dense collection of stars.Depending on whether the emission lines were broad or narrow, these galaxiesare now put in two classes. Galaxies with nuclei emitting very broad lines are
called Seyfert 1 galaxies. On the other hand, if the emission lines are narrow,
then the galaxies are called Seyfert 2 galaxies.
The next impetus to this ﬁeld came from radio astronomy. It was found that
some galaxies emitted radio waves. As resolutions of radio telescopes improvedwith the development of interferometric techniques, it became possible to study
the detailed natures of these so-called radio galaxies .Jennison and Das Gupta
(1953) discovered that the radio emission of the galaxy Cygnus A comes from

<<<PAGE 297>>>

9.4 Active galaxies 277
two lobes located on two sides of the galaxy lying quite a bit outside the
optical image of the galaxy. It was soon found that this was quite a commonoccurrence amongst radio galaxies rather than an oddity. Many radio galaxies
consist of radio-emitting lobes lying outside the galaxy on two sides. The
obvious question which bothered astronomers was: what could be the sourceof energy for powering radio emission from these lobes lying so far outside thegalaxies?
At ﬁrst sight, radio galaxies seemed to have nothing in common with Seyfert
galaxies. Seyfert galaxies are spiral galaxies with bright nuclei. On the otherhand, the radio galaxies, which were mostly found to be elliptical galaxies, havethe radio emissions coming from lobes lying outside the galaxies. The fact that
they could have something in common became apparent only when astronomers
started probing the source of energy in radio galaxies. With improved radiotelescopes, it was found that often oppositely directed radio-emitting jets weresquirted out of the central regions of radio galaxies. These jets, which are
presumably made of plasma ﬂowing out at very high speed, made their ways
by pushing away the intergalactic medium surrounding the galaxies. The lobesare located where the jets are ﬁnally stopped by the intergalactic medium.Figure 9.10 shows the radio image of Hercules A, which has almost symmetrical
radio jets ending in radio-emitting lobes. It appears that the ultimate sourceof energy of a radio galaxy lies in its nucleus that produces the jets. Thejets basically act as conduits for carrying the energy from the nucleus to thelobes (Blandford and Rees, 1974). Like Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies are also
galaxies which have active nuclei. The radio emissions from the jets and lobesof radio galaxies seem to be of the nature of synchrotron radiation, since theyhave the power-law spectra characteristic of synchrotron radiation. As discussed
Fig. 9.10 The radio image of the radio galaxy Hercules A produced with the radio
telescope VLA (Very Large Array). The radio-emitting jets and lobes are clearly seen.
From Dreher and Feigelson (1984). ( c/circlecopyrtNature Publishing Group. Reproduced with
permission from Nature.)

<<<PAGE 298>>>

278 Extragalactic astronomy
in§8.11, the emission of synchrotron radiation implies that the jets and lobes
must have magnetic ﬁelds around which relativistic electrons are gyrating.
Quasars, which are the most extreme examples of active galaxies, came
to the attention of astronomers in a dramatic fashion. These are radio sources
of very compact size, some of which could be identiﬁed with optical sourceslooking very much like stars. However, these optical sources were found tohave broad emission lines in the spectra, which seemed mysterious and non-
identiﬁable at ﬁrst. Finally Schmidt (1963) identiﬁed the spectral lines of the
quasar 3C 273 to be nothing other than the ordinary spectral lines of hydrogen
redshifted by an amount z=0.158, which was considered an unbelievably large
redshift at that time. Spectral lines of many other quasars were soon identiﬁed to
be ordinary lines which had undergone even larger redshifts. If these redshifts
are caused by recession velocities due to the expansion of the Universe, then(9.18) implied that these quasars must be lying at enormous distances – beyond
the distances of most ordinary galaxies known at that time. If the quasars were
really at such distances and still appeared so bright, then the typical luminosity
of a quasar should be of order 10
39W, making it more than 100 times brighter
than an ordinary galaxy. What bafﬂed astronomers further is that the emissionsfrom some quasars were found to be variable in time, the time scale of variation
being sometimes of the order of days. If tis the typical time scale of variation,
then the size of the emitting region cannot be larger than ct. It was inferred that
some quasars were emitting their huge energies from very small nuclear regions,
which could not be much larger than the solar system. This seemed so incredible
at the ﬁrst sight that many astronomers wondered if quasars were actually
not located so far away and hence not intrinsically so luminous. If that werethe case, then the redshifts of quasars should not be due to the cosmological
expansion and one has to give an alternative explanation for the redshifts. One
suggestion was that the quasars may be objects which were ejected at highvelocities from the centre of our Galaxy due to some violent explosion there.Only gradually, over several years, astronomers came to accept the fact that
quasars are really far-away objects and must be awesome energy-producing
machines. In the case of at least a few nearby quasars, it became possible toshow that they reside inside galaxies and must be nuclei of galaxies. Suchobservations are not easy to do, since the nuclei are many times brighter than the
host galaxies and the remaining parts of the galaxies get obscured by the glare of
the nuclei.
Figure 9.11 shows the typical spectrum of a quasar shifted to rest wave-
lengths (i.e. after dividing the observed wavelengths by 1 +z). It may be noted
that the spectra of central regions of Seyfert 1 galaxies look very similar,whereas the emission lines in the spectra of Seyfert 2 galaxies are narrower.The similarity in spectra suggests that Seyfert galaxies and quasars may besimilar kinds of active galaxies, the Seyfert galaxies being the milder form of
such active galaxies, whereas the quasars are the more extreme and rarer form

<<<PAGE 299>>>

Fig. 9.11 The typical quasar spectrum in the rest wavelength. This is a composite spectrum obtained by averaging the spectra of many quasars. From
Francis et al. (1991). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal.)

<<<PAGE 300>>>

280 Extragalactic astronomy
which can be detected at very large distances where Seyfert galaxies would not
be observable. It is seen from Figure 9.11 that quasars emit very strongly in
UV . One efﬁcient method of searching for quasars is to look for stellar-looking
objects for which the UV brightness compared to the optical brightness is much
higher than what we expect in the case of a star. As a result of such searches,a large number of sources could be found having all the other properties ofquasars, except that they did not emit in the radio wavelengths. These radio-
quiet quasars are often called quasi-stellar objects , abbreviated as QSOs. Since
some authors use the terms ‘quasar’ and ‘QSO’ almost interchangeably, we shall
use the terms radio-loud and radio-quiet quasars to denote quasars which do anddo not emit in the radio. Radio-quiet quasars seem much more numerous than
radio-loud quasars. Only a few percent of all quasars seem to be radio-emitters.
9.4.2 Superluminal motion in quasars
The only things in common between a radio galaxy and a radio-loud quasar
may seem that they are both emitters of radio waves. Otherwise, they may atﬁrst sight appear to be very different kinds of objects, with quasars being very
compact in appearance and radio galaxies being extended sources with huge jets
and lobes. The fact that they may actually be the same objects became clear onlywhen VLBI (see §1.7.2) was used to produce high-resolution maps of quasars
showing moving parts inside them. Figure 9.12 shows images of 3C 273 taken
in different years. It is clear that a radio-emitting blob is moving away from thecentral region. On multiplying the angular velocity of separation by the distanceof the quasar, one ﬁnds a linear velocity larger than c. This phenomenon is
referred to as superluminal motion. Does this mean that things can move faster
than cin the world of very distant galaxies? Even before such superluminal
motions were observationally discovered, Rees (1966) realized the possibility
of apparent superluminal motions if something is moving towards the observerat a speed vcomparable to cmaking a very small angle θwith respect to the line
of sight. This is illustrated in Figure 9.13, where a source of radiation has moved
from AtoBin time δtsuch that AB=vδt. If the source emitted a signal when
it was at A(setting t=0 when the source was at A), then that signal would
reach the observer Oat a distance Daway at time
t
AO=D
c.
If another signal is emitted after time δtwhen the source is at B, it is easy to
see that this signal will reach the observer at time
tBO=δt+D−vδtcosθ
c.

<<<PAGE 301>>>

9.4 Active galaxies 281
Fig. 9.12 High-resolution radio maps of the quasar 3C 273 obtained by VLBI (Very
Large Baseline Interferometry) at different epochs. From Pearson et al. (1981).
(c/circlecopyrtNature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from Nature.)
Fig. 9.13 A sketch illustrating how superluminal motion arises.

<<<PAGE 302>>>

282 Extragalactic astronomy
So the observer will receive the two signals at times differing by
tBO−tAO=δt/parenleftBig
1−v
ccosθ/parenrightBig
.
Since the observer will ﬁnd that the source has moved by an amount vsinθδt
in the sky, it will appear to the observer that the transverse speed of the source
perpendicular to the line of sight is
v⊥=vsinθδt
tBO−tAO=vsinθ
1−(v/c)cosθ. (9.21)
It is easy to see that v⊥can be larger than cifvis close to candθis small.
The existence of superluminal motion makes it clear that quasars often have
parts moving towards the observer with relativistic speeds. The most plausible
hypothesis is that the moving part is a jet ejected from the nucleus. If this is
correct, one would regard a radio galaxy and a radio-loud quasar to be the samekind of object viewed from different angles. The radio galaxy has jets at largeinclinations to the line of sight so that the jets are seen as extended objects in
the sky. On the other hand, if the jet is directed towards the observer at a small
angle to the line of sight, then the source is seen as a quasar. We have pointedout in §8.11 that radiation from a relativistically moving source appears to an
observer to be beamed in the forward direction. The radio emission from the
jet of a quasar (presumably by the synchrotron process) would be beamed in
the direction of the jet and an observer lying in that direction would receive thebeamed radiation, whereas an observer lying at a large angle with respect to thedirection of the jet would get much less radiation. It is because of this relativistic
beaming that the radio emission from a quasar appears ampliﬁed and quasars
can be observed at very large distances where radio galaxies would be too faintto be detected. It may be pointed out that many radio galaxies have jets only onone direction. Since jets seem to be made up of relativistically moving plasma,
relativistic beaming provides a natural explanation for this one-sidedness. If a jet
has a component of velocity towards the observer, relativistic beaming makesit brighter than the jet in the opposite direction. We have seen in Figure 9.10
that radio galaxies also have radio-emitting lobes where the radio jets end.
Presumably the lobes are not moving relativistically and radiation from the
lobes is not relativistically beamed. That is why lobes of very distant quasars arenot detectable and we receive relativistically beamed radiation coming primarily
from the jet moving towards the observer.
9.4.3 Black hole as central engine
We now come to the central question: what powers an active galactic nucleus,making it able to produce huge amounts of energy in a very small volume? We
saw in §5.6 that binary X-ray sources are powered by material falling in the
deep potential wells of neutron stars or black holes through accretion disks and

<<<PAGE 303>>>

9.4 Active galaxies 283
by the conversion of a part of the lost gravitational potential energy to other
forms. Zeldovich and Novikov (1964)a n d Salpeter (1964) suggested that active
galaxies must have black holes at their centres and matter losing gravitational
potential energy in accretion disks around them should be providing the energy.
It is easy to estimate the mass of the central black hole from (5.38) if we
assume that the energy output from the active nucleus is close to the Eddingtonluminosity. In order to produce a luminosity of 10
39W,(5.38) tells us that we
need a black hole of mass ≈108M⊙.I n§13.3 we shall introduce the concept of
the Schwarzschild radius. Once matter falls within the Schwarzschild radius, itcannot send a signal to the outside world any more. So most of the radiationproduced in an accretion disk around a black hole should be coming from
regions a little bit beyond the Schwarzschild radius. We shall show in §13.3
that the Schwarzschild radius is given by
r
S=2GM
c2=3.0×1011M8m, (9.22)
where M8is the mass of the black hole in units of 108M⊙. This is of the order of
the Sun–Earth distance if M8≈1. So a black hole of mass 108M⊙can produce
huge amounts of energy within a region of size comparable to the solar system.
We can estimate the temperature of the energy-producing region by equat-
ing the Eddington luminosity to 4π r2
SσT4.U s i n g(5.38) and(9.22),w eg e t
cG Mm H
σT=/parenleftbigg2GM
c2/parenrightbigg2
σT4,
from which
T≈3.7×105M−1/4
8. (9.23)
It thus follows that more massive black holes are associated with smallertemperatures, which may seem counter-intuitive at ﬁrst sight. In the case of
larger black holes, however, the gravitational potential energy is lost over alarger radial distance, leading to a reduction in temperature. For a black holeof mass 10
8M⊙,(9.23) suggests that the temperature would be appropriate for
producing radiation in the extreme UV . We now estimate the mass infall raterequired to produce the typical luminosity 10
39W of an AGN. We have seen
in§5.6 that accretion is an efﬁcient energy conversion mechanism in which a
large fraction ηof the rest mass energy can be converted into heat and radiation.
Under favourable circumstances ηcan be as large as 0.1. If ˙Mis the mass
accretion rate, then we must have
η˙Mc2≈1039W,
from which
˙M≈1.5M⊙yr−1(9.24)

<<<PAGE 304>>>

284 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.14 A disk of gas and dust at the centre of NGC 4261 which presumably is feeding
a black hole located inside the disk. Photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
From Jaffe et al. (1993). ( c/circlecopyrtNature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission
from Nature.)
on taking η=0.1. We see that many of the observed characteristics of active
galaxies are explained by assuming that there is a black hole of mass 108M⊙
in the galactic nucleus and that matter is falling into it through an accretion
disk, the infall rate being given by (9.24). More direct evidence that black holes
may power active galaxies came when Jaffe et al. (1993) succeeded in using
the Hubble Space Telescope to photograph a disk of gas and dust at the centreof the active galaxy NGC 4261. This disk, shown in Figure 9.14 , is presumably
the colder outer region of the accretion disk which is feeding the black holelocated inside.
One of the important characteristics of many active galaxies is the radio-
emitting jets. A tiny fraction of the material falling into the black hole has tobe ejected in the form of jets, which presumably come out perpendicular to theaccretion disk. We still have a very incomplete theoretical understanding of how
this happens. This is a very complex subject outside the scope of this elementary
book. It may be mentioned that the active galaxy NGC 4261 has radio-emittingjets and the disk shown in Figure 9.14 is approximately perpendicular to the axis

<<<PAGE 305>>>

9.4 Active galaxies 285
of the jets ( Jaffe et al. ,1993). Many of the jets appear highly collimated, like
the inner regions in the jets shown in Figure 9.10. It is believed that magnetic
ﬁelds play an important role in the collimation of the jets. The emission of
synchrotron radiation from the jets shows that these relativistic plasma jets must
have magnetic ﬁelds and accelerated electrons. If the electrons were acceleratedin the galactic nucleus and then carried with the magnetized plasma ﬂowinginto the jets, simple estimates show that the electrons may cool by the time
they reach the extremities of the jets (see Exercise 9.4 ). Hence in situ particle
acceleration has to take place inside jets.
9.4.4 Uniﬁcation scheme
If all active galaxies derive their power from a central black hole, is it possible
that all active galaxies are essentially the same kinds of objects? We nowrecognize many similarities between different kinds of active galaxies, whichwere thought to have nothing in common when they were ﬁrst discovered.
Seyfert galaxies and quasars now appear to be similar kinds of objects, the only
difference being that quasars have much more powerful central engines. Pre-sumably Seyfert galaxies have less massive black holes in their central nuclei.Radio galaxies and radio-loud quasars also seem to be the same objects viewed
from different viewing angles. Is it possible that all active galaxies simply form
a simple sequence according to the strength of their central engines, but appearas different kinds of objects to observers due to the different viewing angles?
Osterbrock (1978) proposed that a Seyfert galaxy appears as Seyfert 1 with
broad spectral lines if we are located roughly perpendicular to the accretiontorus so that we can get a view of the central region, whereas it appearsas Seyfert 2 with narrow spectral lines if we are viewing it from an angleso that the accretion torus obscures the central region. The typical widths of
Seyfert 1 spectral lines correspond to velocities larger than even 10
3km s−1
(i.e.δλ > 10˚A). If this is due to thermal broadening, then the emitting gas
has to be at the unrealistically high temperature of more than 108K. A more
reasonable assumption is that there are fast-moving gas blobs called broad-
line regions (abbreviated as BLRs) near the central engine. Only in the case
of Seyfert 1, radiation emitted by these reaches the observer and the emission
lines appear broadened due to the Doppler-broadening of these fast-moving gasblobs. In the case of Seyfert 2, we receive radiation only from gas blobs much
further away from the central engine which are moving more slowly and are
known as narrow-line regions (abbreviated as NLRs), giving rise to narrower
emission lines.
One of the important differences amongst active galaxies to keep in mind
is that Seyfert galaxies are spiral and radio galaxies are elliptical. Because ofthe great distances of quasars, it is usually not easy to ascertain the nature ofthe host galaxies of quasars. It appears, however, that most radio-loud quasars

<<<PAGE 306>>>

286 Extragalactic astronomy
are associated with elliptical galaxies, whereas most radio-quiet quasars are
associated with spiral galaxies. This suggests that an active nucleus lodged in aspiral galaxy is not likely to become a radio source (as in the case of a Seyfert
galaxy or a radio-quiet quasar), whereas an active nucleus lodged in an elliptical
galaxy is likely to produce jets and lobes which emit radio waves (as in the caseof a radio galaxy or a radio-loud quasar). We at present have no good theoreticalexplanation of why active nuclei in elliptical galaxies are more likely to produce
radio jets.
To sum up, the current ideas about uniﬁcation of various kinds of active
galaxies are the following. A central engine lodged in a spiral galaxy produces
a Seyfert or a radio-quiet quasar depending on whether the central engine is
weak or strong. The two types of Seyferts are merely the same objects seen
from different angles. A central engine lodged in an elliptical galaxy is seen asa radio-loud quasar if the viewing angle is close to the radio jet and is seenas a radio galaxy if the viewing angle is larger. Although this appears like an
attractive scheme, we must stress that at present this scheme cannot be taken as
completely established. The best way of establishing a uniﬁcation scheme likethis is to carry out various statistical tests. We expect the active galaxies to beoriented randomly at all possible angles with respect to the line of sight. It is
found that about a quarter of all Seyfert galaxies are Seyfert 1. If the opening
solid angle of the accretion torus on each side is about π/2 (i.e. one-eighth of
the total solid angle 4π around a point in space), then the uniﬁcation idea based
on the viewing angle provides a natural explanation of why Seyfert 1 galaxies
make up about a quarter in the total population of Seyferts. If the radio jet of an
active galaxy has to be within a certain angle with respect to the line of sightin order for the galaxy to appear as a radio-loud quasar and if it appears as a
radio galaxy otherwise, then one can think of carrying out similar statistical
tests on the populations of radio-loud quasars and radio galaxies. Unfortunatelythe relativistic beaming effect makes this statistical test very complicated andwe do not have deﬁnitive results yet. Similarly, we expect a distribution law
for the strengths of the central engines and, if radio-quiet quasars are merely
extreme forms of Seyfert galaxies, then one would think that the populationsof Seyfert galaxies and radio-quiet quasars may form different regimes of thesame distribution law. Even this is not easy to show, since most of the quasars
are found at large distances where Seyfert galaxies would not be visible. We
expect that more research in the coming years will put the uniﬁcation schemeof active galaxies on a ﬁrmer footing.
9.5 Clusters of galaxies
Like gregarious animals, galaxies also seem to like living in herds. Our Galaxyis a member of a cluster of about 35 galaxies called the Local Group.T h e

<<<PAGE 307>>>

9.5 Clusters of galaxies 287
Andromeda Galaxy M31 is the most prominent member of the Local Group and
our Galaxy is the second most prominent member. The members of the LocalGroup are spatially distributed in an irregular fashion without any symmetry. Rich
clusters with many galaxies, however, tend to have more symmetric and regular
appearance. A typical rich cluster can have more than 100 galaxies distributedwithin a range of order 1 Mpc. Abell (1958) catalogued a few thousand clusters
of galaxies, all lying within several hundred Mpc from us. A cluster of galaxies is
usually a gravitationally bound system and does not expand with the expansion
of the Universe. So it is the clusters of galaxies rather than galaxies themselveswhich are moving away from each other with the expansion of the Universe.In fact, there are indications that the Local Group may have an infall velocity
of a few hundred km s
−1towards the Virgo cluster, the nearest large cluster,
superposed on the Hubble expansion ( Aaronson et al. ,1982). Different standard
candles suggest slightly different distances for the Virgo cluster, the average
being slightly lower than 20 Mpc. It appears that there can be departures from
the Hubble ﬂow over such distance scales. Although the Virgo cluster is a rich
cluster, its appearance is not very regular. The nearest fairly regular cluster is theComa cluster, of which the redshift z=0.023 suggests a distance of 69 h
−1Mpc.
Figure 9.15 shows the Virgo cluster. It is seen that a large elliptical galaxy
M87 is at the centre of the Virgo cluster. It is quite common to ﬁnd a largeelliptical galaxy at the centre of a rich cluster of galaxies. Such an ellipticalgalaxy belongs to a special class of galaxies known as cD galaxies. It isbelieved that such galaxies form due to the merger of several galaxies ( Ostriker
and Tremaine, 1975). Since stars occupy only a tiny fraction of volume inside
a galaxy, physical collisions between stars inside a galaxy is an extremelyunlikely event. On the other hand, individual galaxies occupy a much larger
fraction of volume inside galaxy clusters and astronomers have succeeding in
catching several galaxies in the act of collision. Figure 9.16 shows a pair of
colliding galaxies, which interestingly have produced long tail-like structures.Toomre and Toomre (1972) were able to model such features theoretically
through simulations of galaxy-galaxy collision. Such colliding galaxies oftenmerge together. Presumably a cD galaxy at the centre of a cluster is the result ofa merger of a few large galaxies. We have pointed out in §7.4 that a star moving
inside a star cluster can be slowed down by dynamical friction. A galaxy
moving in a galaxy cluster also can be slowed down by dynamical friction in
exactly the same way. Once a cD galaxy forms, other galaxies moving throughnearby regions may lose their energy due to dynamical friction and then fallinto the cD galaxy. This process is called galactic cannibalism .
Galaxies inside a rich cluster typically have velocity dispersions of order
1000 km s
−1. We have seen in §7.2 that the virial theorem can be applied to
estimate the mass of a star cluster. If a galaxy cluster is relaxed, then one canapply (7.9) to estimate the mass of the galaxy cluster as well. On substituting
v≈1000 km s
−1andR≈1 Mpc, the mass of a galaxy cluster typically turns

<<<PAGE 308>>>

288 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.15 The Virgo cluster of galaxies. The large elliptical galaxy at its centre is M87.
Photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope. Courtesy: NASA and Space Telescope
Science Institute.
Fig. 9.16 The colliding galaxies NGC 4038 and NGC 4039 photographed from Antil-
hue Observatory, Chile. Courtesy: Daniel Verschatse.

<<<PAGE 309>>>

9.5 Clusters of galaxies 289
out to be of order Mgc≈1015M⊙. On the other hand, the total luminosity of a
galaxy cluster typically is of order Lgc≈1013L⊙. For a typical galaxy cluster,
we then have
Mgc
Lgc≈100M⊙
L⊙. (9.25)
If the galaxies in a cluster were made up of stars like the Sun and there was no
other matter inside the cluster, then one would have Mgc/Lgcequal to M⊙/L⊙.
If a galaxy has lots of stars less massive than the Sun and much less efﬁcientin producing energy (due to the mass–luminosity relation (3.37)), then it is
possible that M/Lof the stellar component can be of order 10 M
⊙/L⊙.A
factor of 100 in (9.25) implies that it is not possible for the stars inside the
galaxies to account for more than 10% of the mass of a typical galaxy cluster.Most of the matter in a galaxy cluster has to be dark matter, i.e. matter which
does not emit radiation, but makes its presence felt only by the gravitational
ﬁeld it produces (leading to the high random velocities of the galaxies in thecluster). The existence of huge amounts of dark matter in galaxy clusters wasﬁrst realized by Zwicky (1933). We have pointed out in §9.2.2 that ﬂat rotation
curves suggest the presence of dark matter in spiral galaxies. So a part of thedark matter implied by (9.25) may be attached to the galaxies. Careful analyses
indicate that at most 30% of the dark matter in a galaxy cluster may be attachedto galaxies. The rest of the dark matter is somehow distributed within the cluster.
Nobody at present has a good clue about how this dark matter is distributed in
a galaxy cluster or what it is made of. A further discussion of this topic will bepresented in §11.5.
Hot X-ray emitting gas in galaxy clusters
Although we do not know much about most of the material in the galaxy cluster
lying outside galaxies, we know that a small fraction of it exists in the form of
hot thin gas, because this gas emits X-rays. The ﬁrst extragalactic X-ray sourceto be detected was M87 in the Virgo cluster (Byram et al. ,1966). The Uhuru
X-ray satellite established many galaxy clusters as X-ray sources ( Giacconi
et al. ,1972). Figure 9.17 shows contours of X-ray brightness superposed on the
optical image of the Coma cluster. The approximately spherical X-ray imagesuggests that the hot gas emitting X-rays is distributed fairly uniformly andsymmetrically throughout the galaxy cluster. The primary emission mechanism
is believed to be bremsstrahlung discussed in §8.12. Various aspects of the
X-ray emission of galaxy clusters can be explained by assuming that it is
bremsstrahlung emitted by a hot plasma of temperature 10
8K with particle
number density ne≈103m−3(Felten et al. ,1966). On substituting these values
in(8.71) and assuming that the total volume of the gas is of order 1 Mpc3,i ti s
easy to show that the total X-ray luminosity from the cluster would be 1037W.
This is indeed the typical X-ray luminosity of galaxy clusters. The total mass

<<<PAGE 310>>>

290 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.17 An X-ray image (shown as contours of equal intensity) of the Coma cluster,
obtained with the Einstein Observatory (1978–81, a NASA mission of X-ray observa-
tions), superposed on the negative optical image of the cluster in which galaxies are
seen as dark blobs. As given by Sarazin (1986), who obtained the ﬁgure from C. Jones
and W. Forman. Courtesy: W. Forman.
of the hot gas is of order 1013M⊙, indicating that the hot gas contributes only a
small fraction of the mass of the galaxy cluster. Before addressing the question
of where this hot gas came from, let us show that the cooling time of the hot gasis very large. A number density n
e≈103m−3over a volume of 1 Mpc3gives a
total of about N≈5×1070particles, after multiplying the number of electrons
by a factor of 2 to account for the protons (assuming that the gas is primarilyhydrogen). The total thermal energy of the gas is then
Nκ
BT≈7×1055J
on taking T≈108. Dividing this total thermal energy by the typical X-ray lumi-
nosity 1037W, we get a cooling time of order 2 ×1011yr which is larger than
the age of the Universe as estimated in (9.19), though not excessively larger.
Hence, once the hot gas is put in the galaxy cluster, it will remain hot over timescales in which we are interested, even in the absence of any additional heatingmechanism to keep the gas hot. A more careful calculation, however, suggests
that the effects of cooling may not be completely negligible in the core of the
galaxy cluster where the gas density is highest and hence cooling is expectedto be fastest, since the bremsstrahlung emission is proportional to the square of

<<<PAGE 311>>>

9.5 Clusters of galaxies 291
density as seen in (8.71). If the gas in the central core becomes colder and causes
a decrease in pressure there, it is expected that a radially inward ﬂow of the hot
gas known as the cooling ﬂow will be induced ( Cowie and Binney, 1977).
Let us now come to the questions (i) from where the gas in the galaxy cluster
came and (ii) why it is so hot. As we shall point out in §11.9, galaxy formation
is still a rather ill-understood subject. Presumably, when the galaxy clustersformed, some of the primordial gas got trapped within the clusters. The trapped
gas can become heated simply by falling in the gravitational potential well of
the cluster. Suppose a proton of mass m
pfalls in the gravitational potential of
the cluster and a fraction ηof the potential energy lost gets converted to thermal
energy. Then
ηGM gc
Rgcmp≈κBT.
Using Mgc≈1015M⊙andRgc≈1M p c ,w eg e t
T≈5×108ηK.
It thus seems that even a relatively low value η≈0.2 can explain the high
temperature of the gas in galaxy clusters.
Although the X-ray spectra from galaxy clusters can be explained quite
well by assuming the emission to be due to bremsstrahlung, the spectra of someclusters show an emission line at 7 keV , which is identiﬁed as a line due to highlyionized iron ( Mitchell et al. ,1976). Figure 9.18 shows the X-ray spectrum from
the Coma cluster. From the intensity of this line, one concludes that the ratio ofthe number of iron atoms to the number of hydrogen atoms in a typical galaxycluster is of order
Fe
H≈2×10−5,
which is about half the solar value. As far as we know, heavy elements likeiron can be synthesized only in the interiors of massive stars. The ISM of agalaxy gets contaminated with such heavy elements when supernovae spew outmaterials from the interiors of massive stars into the ISM. The presence of iron
in the gas in galaxy clusters indicates that this gas could not be pure primordial
gas, but material from the ISMs of the galaxies in the cluster also must havebeen mixed with the gas. This issue is connected with the issue pointed out in§9.2.1 that the fraction of spiral galaxies in the central regions of rich clusters is
much less than that fraction in the low-density regions of the Universe. The mostplausible explanation would be that some of the spiral galaxies in the clusterhave been converted into elliptical galaxies by losing their ISMs and this gaslost from the spiral galaxies has been mixed with the gas in the cluster, thereby
causing the observed iron abundance in that gas.
How do spiral galaxies in a cluster lose their ISM? When two spiral galaxies
collide, Spitzer and Baade (1951) argued that the stellar components could pass

<<<PAGE 312>>>

292 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.18 The X-ray spectrum of the Coma cluster showing an emission line at energy
7k e V . F r o m Henriksen and Mushotzky (1986). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society.
Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)
through each other, leaving behind the ISM. It is, however, possible for spiral
galaxies to lose ISM in more non-violent fashion. When a spiral galaxy moves
fast through the cluster, the gas in the cluster would seem to blow against it likea strong wind. A simple application of Bernoulli’s principle (see, for example,Choudhuri, 1998, §4.5) shows that this wind blowing against the galaxy would
exert a pressure
1
2ρv2on the surface of the galaxy where the wind is braked.
This is called the ram pressure. Gunn and Gott (1972) suggested that this ram
pressure can force the ISM out of the galaxy, provided it is strong enough toovercome the gravitational force with which the ISM is bound in the galaxy.
If spiral galaxies in rich clusters are continuously being converted into
elliptical galaxies, one would expect that the clusters had more spiral galaxies atearlier times compared to what they have now. When we are looking at galaxyclusters at high redshift, we are basically looking at clusters at earlier times
because light would have taken time to reach us from those clusters. Butcher and
Oemler (1978) claimed to have found that clusters at redshifts of order z≈0.4
have more spiral galaxies than nearby clusters. This suggests that many spiral

<<<PAGE 313>>>

9.6 Large-scale distribution of galaxies 293
galaxies would have been converted into elliptical galaxies during the time light
took to travel from clusters at z≈0.4t ou s ,w h i c hi so fo r d e r4 ×109h−1yr.
9.6 Large-scale distribution of galaxies
Are the galaxy clusters the largest structures in the Universe or are thereeven bigger structures? To answer this question, it is necessary to map the
three-dimensional distribution of many galaxies. We see galaxies distributed
over the two-dimensional celestial sphere. Once we ﬁnd the redshift of a galaxy,we can use (9.18) to ﬁnd its distance and thereby obtain its position in three
dimensions. We therefore need to measure redshifts of many galaxies to con-
struct a three-dimensional map of galaxy distribution. This is a rather telescope-
intensive project, since it takes a few minutes to obtain the spectrum of a faintgalaxy to measure its redshift and redshifts of only a limited number of galaxiescan be determined in one night. The ﬁrst pioneering project of this type was
the CfA Survey undertaken by de Lapparent, Geller and Huchra (1986), which
was later followed by much bigger projects like the Las Campanas Survey
(Shectman et al. ,1996), the Sloan Digital Sky Survey ( York et al. ,2000)a n d
the 2dF Survey ( Colless et al. ,2001). Figure 9.19 shows a famous slice of the
sky from the CfA Survey (de Lapparent, Geller and Huchra ,1986) along with a
similar slice from the Las Campanas Survey ( Shectman et al. ,1996) exactly
a decade later. The radial coordinate is the redshift distance cz. Remember
thatcz=10,000 km s
−1would correspond to a distance of 100 h−1Mpc and
a redshift of z=0.033. Note that the Las Campanas Survey covers galaxies
at much larger distances than the CfA Survey. Even in the CfA Survey, thedistances over the slice are much larger than the sizes of galaxy clusters. Still wedo not ﬁnd a uniform distribution. It seems that the galaxy clusters make up still
larger wall-like structures which are called superclusters of galaxies. Lurking
between the superclusters, we see voids typically of size 30 h
−1Mpc which
are regions free from galaxies. When we have matter distributed intermittently
in space, we can think of two extreme kinds of distribution. One possibility
is that clumps of matter appear distributed in space. The other possibility is
that bubbles of empty space remain surrounded by matter. The large-scaledistribution of galaxies seems to follow the second possibility. Any theory ofgalaxy formation has to take this fact into account.
It may be noted that there are several radially elongated structures in
Figure 9.19, which are particularly prominent in the upper CfA Survey panel.These are artifacts in the redshift distance space which may not correspondto real structures in actual space. To understand how they arise, let us con-
sider a cluster of galaxies which have large random velocities caused by the
gravitational ﬁeld of the cluster. Some galaxies would have random velocitiesaway from us (superposed on the mean recession velocity of the cluster) and

<<<PAGE 314>>>

294 Extragalactic astronomy
Fig. 9.19 The distribution of galaxies in slices of the sky, as obtained by (a) the CfA
Survey ( de Lapparent, Geller and Huchra ,1986): upper panel; and (b) the Las Campanas
Survey ( Shectman et al. ,1996): lower panel. The radial coordinate gives the redshift
distances of galaxies. (Remember that cz=10,000 km s−1corresponds to 100 h−1
Mpc.) We are at the centre of the slices.
would appear in the redshift distance space to be radially further away than
the mean position of the cluster. On the other hand, galaxies with randomvelocities towards us would appear nearer. Thus a cluster of galaxies having
large random velocities appears stretched in the radial direction in the redshift
distance space. Often astronomers refer to such radial elongations as ‘ﬁngers ofGod’ suggesting that one has to be cautious in interpreting redshift distances.
In the next chapter, we shall see that one of the guiding principles of cos-
mology is the cosmological principle, which assumes that matter is distributeduniformly at sufﬁciently large scales, i.e. at scales larger than the sizes of local

<<<PAGE 315>>>

9.7 Gamma ray bursts 295
non-uniformities. While it was not clear from the CfA Survey (the upper panel
ofFigure 9.19) whether this is indeed the case, the much deeper Las Campanas
survey (the lower panel of Figure 9.19 ) involving many more galaxies and
going to much higher redshifts shows that the superclusters may be the largeststructures in the Universe and different patches of the Universe look very similarwhen we go to scales larger than 100 h
−1Mpc. Other big observational support
for the cosmological principle comes from the amazing uniformity of the cos-
mic background radiation to be introduced in §10.5. Since cosmological models
based on the cosmological principle seem to give results in broad agreement
with various kinds of observational data, no serious cosmologist doubts thevalidity of the cosmological principle at a sufﬁciently large scale, which now
seems reasonably well established from galaxy distribution studies.
9.7 Gamma ray bursts
We end our discussion of extragalactic astronomy with a few words about one
of the most intriguing and ill-understood objects in astronomy – gamma ray
bursts , abbreviated as GRBs. These are bursts of γ-rays typically lasting for a
few seconds. As of now, there is not yet a consensus amongst astrophysicistshow these bursts are produced.
The discovery of GRBs occurred in a dramatic way. They were ﬁrst detected
by American Vela satellites designed to detect γ-rays from any secret nuclear
tests carried out by the Soviet Union or other countries. Whether these satellitesactually detected any secret nuclear tests or not is classiﬁed information, but itquickly became clear that some of the signals detected were of extraterrestrial
origin (Klebesadel, Strong and Olson ,1973). Initially it was thought that GRBs
are produced within our Galaxy. After the launch of the Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory in 1991 (see §1.7.4), many GRBs were detected, and it became
apparent that their distribution was isotropic and not conﬁned to the galactic
plane, suggesting an extragalactic origin. It was eventually possible to detect
a fading optical source immediately after the occurrence of a GRB at exactlythe same point in the sky (van Paradijs et al. ,1997). Afterwards such optical
‘afterglows’ have been found to follow many GRBs. The optical counterparts
appear to be faint galaxies for many of which redshifts have been measured,
leading to estimates of the distance. One can try to calculate the energy emittedin a GRB from a knowledge of its distance, although such calculations becomeuncertain if the emitting material is moving relativistically towards the observer
and the relativistic beaming effect is involved (see §8.11). Still it appears that
GRBs may be the most energetic explosions in the Universe after the Big Bang!
Apart from the fact that GRBs most probably involve relativistically moving
materials, astronomers do not agree about the details of the physical mechanismby which they are produced. It is not even clear if all the GRBs are produced
in the same way or if there are two or three different mechanisms, suggesting

<<<PAGE 316>>>

296 Extragalactic astronomy
that all the GRBs may not arise in the same way. One popular theoretical idea
used to be that GRBs are caused by collisions between two neutron stars. Wehave discussed the binary pulsar in §5.5.1. Two neutron stars orbiting each
other would continuously lose energy due to gravitational radiation and wouldcome closer to each other, eventually leading to a collision. One can make somestatistical estimates of how often such collisions are likely to occur in a galaxyand how often we may expect to see a GRB. GRBs are detected too frequently
for this theory to be true as the cause of all GRBs. Are the GRBs then some
kind of extreme supernovae? Or are they connected with AGNs? Probably weshall know the answers to these questions in a few years.
Exercises
9.1 Suppose an elliptical galaxy appears circular in the sky with the fall in
surface brightness given by the de Vaucouleurs law (9.2). Show that the total
light coming from this galaxy given by/integraltext∞
0I(r)2πrd r is equal to 7 .22π r2
eIe.
Show also that the light coming from within reis exactly half this amount.
9.2 On the basis of Figure 9.5 , argue that σ∝Lαand estimate the power-law
indexα.
9.3 Suppose a plasma jet is coming from a quasar at a relativistic speed 0 .98c.
At what angle with respect to the line of sight must it lie to cause the maximum
superluminal motion? What is the value of the maximum apparent transversevelocity?
9.4 Assuming that magnetic ﬁelds inside extragalactic jets are of the order of
magnetic ﬁelds in the ISM (i.e. about 10
−10T), estimate the value of γfor rela-
tivistic electrons which produce synchrotron radiation in the radio frequencies.
Use (8.59) to estimate the cooling time of these electrons due to synchrotron
emission. Compare this with the time taken by some material to start fromthe central galactic nucleus and reach the outer lobes in a jet of size of 1 Mpcmoving with speed 0.1c . Do you think that electrons have to be accelerated
inside the jets, or electrons accelerated in the nucleus of the galaxy would still
be able to produce synchrotron radio emission after reaching the lobes?
9.5 Estimate the typical time a galaxy would take to cross a cluster of galaxies
and the relaxation time. A cluster of galaxies is clearly not a relaxed system,
but it has to be virialized for the virial theorem to be applicable. Do you think
that typical galaxy clusters are virialized?

<<<PAGE 317>>>

10
The spacetime dynamics of
the Universe
10.1 Introduction
How the Universe began is a fundamental question which has occupied the
minds of men from prehistoric times. However, only after Einstein’s formulationof general relativity ( Einstein, 1916), did it become possible to build theoretical
models for the evolution of the Universe. Very simple considerations show that
the Newtonian theory of gravity is inadequate for handling the Universe. Con-
sider an inﬁnite Universe uniformly ﬁlled with matter of density ρ. If we try to
ﬁnd the gravitational ﬁeld gat a point on the basis of the Newtonian theory, we
immediately run into inconsistencies. Since all directions are symmetric in an
inﬁnite uniform Universe, we expect the gravitation ﬁeld to be zero at any point
because there is no preferred direction in which the gravitational ﬁeld vectorcan point. However, Newtonian theory of gravity leads to the Poisson equation
∇.g=− 4πGρ,
which also must be satisﬁed. If gis zero at all points, then the left-hand side of
this equation has to be zero, so that a non-zero ρclearly leads to contradictions.
In all theories of physics before the formulation of general relativity, space-
time was supposed to provide an inert background against which one couldstudy the dynamics of various systems. In other words, spacetime itself was not
supposed to have any dynamics. However, general relativity allowed spacetime
also to have its own dynamics. We have discussed the recessive motions ofgalaxies in §9.3. The common sense interpretation of Hubble’s law (9.13) is
that galaxies are rushing away from each other through the empty space of the
Universe. However, general relativity provides a radically different viewpoint.
We assume that the galaxies stay put in space, but space itself is expanding –thereby moving apart the galaxies which are embedded in space.
297

<<<PAGE 318>>>

298 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
General relativity requires the machinery of tensor analysis for its mathe-
matical formulation. Is it not possible to learn cosmology, the science dealing
with the origin and evolution of the Universe, without acquiring a mastery over
the mathematical machinery of tensors? Yes and no! A deep understanding of
cosmology certainly requires a technical knowledge of general relativity basedon tensor analysis. However, some aspects of cosmology can be studied withoutlearning general relativity ﬁrst. The dynamics of spacetime, of course, can be
handled properly only through general relativity. However, we also need to
analyse various physical phenomena taking place in the expanding space ofthe Universe, in order to understand why the Universe is what it is today. Muchof this can be done without a detailed technical knowledge of general relativity.
Even the dynamics of expanding space can be studied to some extent without
introducing general relativity. If we assume that we are at the centre of theUniverse and the Universe is expanding around us in a spherically symmetricfashion, then the equation of motion derived from Newtonian mechanics turns
out to be essentially the same as the equation that follows from the detailed
general relativistic analysis. This is an amazing coincidence, which allows usto make considerable progress in cosmology without general relativity. Thisapproach is often called Newtonian cosmology (Milne and McCrea, 1934).
Many issues certainly remain unclear at a conceptual level in this approach andsome assumptions have to be taken merely as ad hoc hypotheses without tryingto justify them.
The aim of this chapter is to study the dynamics of expanding space through
the approach of Newtonian cosmology. Then the next chapter will discussvarious physical phenomena taking place in the expanding space. We presenta qualitative introduction to general relativity in §10.2, to give readers an idea
of what is left out by not doing a fully relativistic treatment. Readers not wishingto learn general relativity at a technical level will have some idea of cosmologyfrom this chapter and the next. Then Chapter 12 provides elementary intro-
ductions to tensor analysis and general relativity for those readers who would
like to learn this subject at a technical level. Finally, Chapter 14 is devoted to
relativistic cosmology, where we cover some important topics which are beyond
the scope of Newtonian cosmology and are, therefore, not discussed in thischapter.
10.2 What is general relativity?
General relativity provides a ﬁeld theory of gravity. To explain what is meant
by a ﬁeld theory, let us consider the example of the other great classical ﬁeld
theory with which the reader must be familiar – the theory of electromagneticﬁelds. We consider two charges q
1andq2with r12as the vectorial distance of

<<<PAGE 319>>>

10.2 What is general relativity? 299
q2from q1. According to Coulomb’s law, the electric force on q2due to q1is
given by
F12=1
4π/epsilon1 0q1q2
r3
12r12. (10.1)
In the action-at-a-distance approach, we only concern ourselves with the
charges and the forces acting on them, without bothering about the surroundingspace. On the other hand, the ﬁeld approach suggests that the charge q
1creates
an electric ﬁeld around it which is given at the distance r12by the expression
E=1
4π/epsilon1 0q1
r3
12r12 (10.2)
and that the charge q2experiences the force
F12=q2E (10.3)
by virtue of being present in the electric ﬁeld. It may appear that we are merely
splitting (10.1) into two equations (10.2) and(10.3), and nothing new is gained
in the process. As long as the charges are at rest, it is true that the ﬁeld approach
does not give us anything new compared to the action-at-a-distance approach.However, the situation changes if the charges are in motion.
Suppose the charge q
1suddenly starts moving at an instant of time. What
should we now substitute for r12in the expression (10.1)? You may think that
we have to consider the simultaneous locations of the two charges at an instantof time and obtain r
12from that. However, we know from special relativity that
simultaneity in different regions of space is a subtle concept and depends onthe frame of reference. If we can somehow suitably deﬁne simultaneity in someframe of reference, then there is a more serious problem with (10.1). Since the
separation between q
1andq2changes as soon as q1starts moving, the force
F12onq2also should change immediately according to (10.1). This means that
the information that the charge q1has started moving has to be communicated
to the other charge q2at inﬁnite speed, which contradicts special relativity.
These difﬁculties disappear if the electromagnetic ﬁelds are treated with the
help of Maxwell’s equations. It can be shown from Maxwell’s equations that
the information about the motion of q1propagates at speed cand the charge q2
starts getting affected only when the information reaches its location. We thussee that the action-at-a-distance approach fails to provide a consistent theory of
charges in motion and we need a ﬁeld approach.
Exactly the same considerations exist in the case of the gravitational ﬁeld.
When two masses are at rest, Newton’s law of gravitation gives the force
between them. But, when the masses start moving, we have the same difﬁcul-
ties which we have with moving charges. After developing special relativity,
Einstein realized that Newton’s theory of gravity is not consistent with spe-cial relativity. We need to develop a ﬁeld approach, which will ensure that

<<<PAGE 320>>>

300 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
gravitational information does not propagate at a speed faster than c. In contrast
to two types of electric charges, we have only one type of mass. It might, there-
fore, seem at ﬁrst sight that a ﬁeld theory of gravity would be simpler than the
ﬁeld theory of electromagnetism. In reality, however, the ﬁeld theory of gravity
is much more complicated. Let us point out some reasons for this. A particleof charge qand mass mplaced in an electric ﬁeld Ewill have acceleration
(q/m)E. This acceleration will in general be different for different particles.
In contrast, all particles placed in a small region of gravitational ﬁeld (overwhich the variations of the ﬁeld can be neglected) have the same acceleration.As a result, a gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to an accelerated frame. Einsteinrealized that this equivalence principle would have to be an important part of a
ﬁeld theory of gravity. A second complication for a ﬁeld theory of gravity is thatit has to be a nonlinear theory, in contrast to the theory of the electromagneticﬁeld which is linear. One can give a simple argument for why the ﬁeld theoryof gravity has to be nonlinear. Any ﬁeld such as a gravitational ﬁeld has some
energy associated with it and energy is equivalent to mass according to special
relativity. Hence a gravitational ﬁeld, having some equivalent mass associatedwith it, can itself act as a source of gravitational ﬁeld. This is not the casein electromagnetic theory, where charges and currents are the sources of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld and the ﬁeld itself cannot be its own source. Since a ﬁeld
theory of gravity somehow has to incorporate the equivalence principle as wellas some nonlinear aspects, it necessarily has to be more complex than the theoryof electromagnetic ﬁelds.
Einstein (1916) had the profound insight of viewing gravity as a curvature
of spacetime. In a region without gravitational ﬁelds, the spacetime is ﬂat anda body moves in a straight line. However, in a region where the spacetime
is curved (which implies the presence of gravity), a body is deﬂected from a
rectilinear path. Thus, instead of saying that the gravitational force deﬂects thebody, we say that the curved spacetime makes it move in a curved path. Thisgeometrical interpretation of gravity automatically provides an explanation for
the equivalence principle. The curved path which a body would take in a region
is determined merely by the curvature of spacetime and should be independentof the mass of the body. Hence bodies of different masses should follow thesame curved path.
To develop a ﬁeld theory of gravity, we therefore need a mathematical
machinery to handle the curvature of spacetime. Let us ﬁrst consider the cur-vature of a two-dimensional surface. There are two ways of looking at thecurvature: extrinsic and intrinsic. When we perceive a surface as curved in a
common sense way, we essentially perceive the surface embedded in three-
dimensional space to be curved. This extrinsic way of looking at curvature isnot so useful when we consider the curvature of four-dimensional spacetime.Do we have to think of it as being embedded in a ﬁve-dimensional something
within which it is curved? To explain the alternative intrinsic way of viewing

<<<PAGE 321>>>

10.2 What is general relativity? 301
Fig. 10.1 Sketch of a triangle ABC on a sphere, made with two circles of longitude and
the equator.
curvature, let us again consider the example of the two-dimensional surface. Let
there be some intelligent ants or other creatures living on this two-dimensionalsurface who have no conception of three-dimensional space. Can they makesome measurements within this two-dimensional surface to ﬁnd out if it is
curved or not? If a surface is plane, we know that any arbitrary triangle will
have the sum of three angles equal to 180
◦. But this is not necessarily true for a
curved surface. In the case of a curved surface, a straight line has to be replacedby a geodesic, which is the shortest path between two points of the surface
lying wholly on the surface. Great circles on a sphere are geodesics. We can
think of a triangle on the Earth’s surface made with two circles of longitudeand the equator, as shown in Figure 10.1. Clearly this triangle made up of three
geodesics has the sum of its angles larger than 180
◦. So the intelligent ants living
on the two-dimensional surface can determine whether the surface is curved byconsidering some arbitrary triangles and measuring the sums of their angles.This intrinsic view of curvature does not require any consideration whether thecurved surface is embedded in a higher-dimensional space. When we consider
the curvature of four-dimensional spacetime, we naturally have to look at the
curvature from an intrinsic point of view.
The intrinsic view of curvature usually conforms to our everyday notion
of curvature – but not always! For example, we normally think of the surface
of a cylinder as a curved surface. But this surface can be unrolled to a plane
and has the same geometric properties as a plane surface. All triangles drawnon a cylindrical surface have the sum of their angles equal to 180
◦. Therefore,
when we are taking an intrinsic point of view, there is nothing to distinguish a
cylindrical surface from a plane and we have to consider the surface of a cylinder
as a plane or ﬂat surface – a point of view which appears puzzling at ﬁrst.Now we come to the crucial question: what determines if a two-dimensionalsurface is ﬂat? If the surface can be spread on a plane without stretching or
shrinking anywhere, then it should be regarded as ﬂat. This cannot be done
with a spherical surface and that is why a spherical surface is not ﬂat. Whengeographers have to represent the map of the whole Earth on a ﬂat sheet of

<<<PAGE 322>>>

302 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
paper, they have to apply some projections which do drastic things like making
Greenland appear as large as Africa or making some continents highly distorted.
When we stretch or shrink some portions of a surface, we change distances
between various pairs of points on the surface. On the other hand, when we try tospread the surface on a plane without any stretching or shrinking, we essentiallyapply transformations which keep distances between all possible pairs of pointsinvariant. Whether such transformations would enable us to spread the surface
on a plane or not depends on how the distances between various pairs of points
are related to each other. If we introduce the standard (θ, φ) coordinates on a
spherical surface of radius a, the distance dsbetween two nearby points (θ, φ)
and(θ+dθ,φ+dφ)is given by
ds
2=a2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2). (10.4)
In general, the distance between two neighbouring points on a surface is givenby an expression of the form
ds
2=/summationdisplay
α,βgαβdxαdxβ, (10.5)
where gαβis called the metric tensor. It is this tensor which determines how
distances between various possible pairs of points are related. Hence, it is thistensor g
αβwhich decides whether it would be possible to spread the surface on
the plane, i.e. whether the surface is ﬂat or not. These considerations carry over
to spaces of higher dimensions as well. The distances between nearby points in
a higher dimensional space also can be written in the form (10.5). It is again the
metric tensor gαβfor the space which determines whether the space is ﬂat or
curved. In §12.2 we shall develop the appropriate mathematical tools of tensor
analysis which can be applied to a metric tensor gαβto calculate the curvature
of the space.
On using polar coordinates, the metric tensor of a plane surface is given by
ds2=dr2+r2dθ2. (10.6)
Using the same coordinates ( x1,x2), the two metrics (10.6) and(10.4) can be
written as
ds2=a2(dx2
1+x2
1dx2
2), (10.7)
ds2=a2(dx2
1+sin2x1dx2
2). (10.8)
Another possible metric for a two-dimensional surface is
ds2=a2(dx2
1+sinh2x1dx2
2). (10.9)
When we apply the technique of curvature calculation to be developed in§12.2.4, we ﬁnd that the metric (10.7) has zero curvature (i.e. it corresponds
to a ﬂat surface), whereas the metrics (10.8) and(10.9) correspond to uniform

<<<PAGE 323>>>

10.2 What is general relativity? 303
Fig. 10.2 Sketch of a saddle-like
surface.
surfaces of constant curvature 2 /a2and−2/a2respectively. Certainly a sphere,
of which (10.8) is the metric, has a surface of uniform curvature. But what kind
of surface does (10.9) correspond to? Figure 10.2 shows a saddle-like surface.
It can be shown that the saddle point Phas negative curvature. However, the
saddle surface is not a uniform surface, but has its geometric properties chang-
ing from point to point. The metric (10.9) corresponds to a uniform surface of
which every point is a saddle point. Certainly there is no real two-dimensional
surface embedded in three-dimensional space which has this property. However,one can mathematically postulate such a surface and study its properties by
analysing (10.9).
In order to learn general relativity at a technical level, one ﬁrst has to learn
the mathematical machinery of calculating curvature. That is presented in §12.2.
Here we merely point out that the theoretical structure of general relativity hascertain analogies with the theory of electromagnetic ﬁelds. The basic idea of
electromagnetic theory is that charges and currents produce electromagneticﬁelds. We have Maxwell’s equations which tell us how the electromagnetic
ﬁeld can be obtained if we know the distribution of charges and currents. In an
analogous way, general relativity suggests that mass and energy can give rise tothe curvature of spacetime, and the central equation, known as Einstein’s equa-tion (to be introduced in §12.4.2), describes how the curvature of spacetime is
related to mass-energy. Hence, given the distribution of mass-energy, one can inprinciple ﬁnd out the metric of spacetime from Einstein’s equation and therebydetermine the structure of spacetime. To complete electromagnetic theory, weneed another equation describing how a charge moves in an electromagnetic
ﬁeld, which is the Lorentz equation
mdv
dt=q(E+v×B). (10.10)
We require an analogous equation in general relativity, which will tell us how a
mass will move in the curved spacetime. The basic idea of general relativity is
that a mass moves along a geodesic of spacetime if non-gravitational forces are
absent. Hence, in the place of (10.10) , we have the equation of the geodesic (to
be discussed in §12.2.5) in general relativity. Table 10.1 presents a comparison
between electrodynamics and general relativity. In general relativity, we basi-
cally have to replace the Newtonian theory of gravity by the idea that mass and
energy create curvatures in spacetime and a particle moves along geodesics inthis curved spacetime.

<<<PAGE 324>>>

304 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
Table 10.1 Analogy between electrodynamics and general relativity.
ELECTRODYNAMICS GENERAL RELATIVITY
Basic ﬁeld equations Maxwell’s equations: Einstein’s equation:
{Charge, current }⇒ { Mass, energy }⇒
{Electromagnetic ﬁeld}{ Curvature of spacetime}
Equation of motion The Lorentz equation (10.10) Motion along geodesicsin the ﬁeld
10.3 The metric of the Universe
After the brief qualitative introduction to general relativity in the previous
section, we now discuss the possible structure of spacetime in the Universe.
In§9.6, we have introduced the cosmological principle , which states that space
is homogeneous and isotropic. Now, it is possible for space to be homogeneous
and isotropic only if it has uniform curvature everywhere. We have seen that
(10.7), (10.8) and (10.9) are the only possible metrics for a two-dimensional
surface which is uniform (i.e. which has a constant curvature everywhere). Wenow have to write down similar metrics for a uniform three-dimensional space.
Using spherical coordinates (r,θ,φ) , the distance between two nearby points in
a ﬂat space is given by
ds
2=dr2+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2). (10.11)
One can explicitly calculate the curvature of this metric (by methods to be
introduced in §12.2.4) and show that it is zero. Writing r=aχ, this metric
takes the form
ds2=a2(dχ2+χ2d/Omega12), (10.12)
where
d/Omega12=dθ2+sin2θdφ2. (10.13)
It may be noted that the three-dimensional metric (10.12) looks very similar to
the two-dimensional metric (10.7). In analogy with (10.8) and (10.9), we can
consider the following three-dimensional metrics
ds2=a2(dχ2+sin2χd/Omega12), (10.14)
ds2=a2(dχ2+sinh2χd/Omega12), (10.15)
where d/Omega12is always given by (10.13) . If we apply the techniques of curvature
calculation to be discussed in §12.2.4, we indeed ﬁnd that the two metrics
(10.14) and(10.15) have uniform curvatures 6/ a2and−6/a2respectively. Just
as all points of a sphere are equivalent, all points in the space described by

<<<PAGE 325>>>

10.3 The metric of the Universe 305
metrics (10.14) and(10.15) must be equivalent, since the curvature has the same
value at all points in either of these metrics. In fact, (10.12) ,(10.14) and(10.15)
are the only possible forms of three-dimensional metrics for which all points
are equivalent. Hence, if the cosmological principle has to be satisﬁed, then
the spatial part of the metric of the Universe has to have one of these threeforms.
It is not difﬁcult to show that the space described by the metric (10.14) must
have ﬁnite volume. Let us consider an element of volume with its sides alongthe three coordinate directions. Keeping in mind that d/Omega1
2is given by (10.13) ,
it follows from (10.14) that the sides of the volume element have lengths adχ,
asinχdθandasinχsinθdφ. Hence the volume of this volume element is
dV=a3sin2χdχsinθdθdφ.
To get the total volume of the space, we have to integrate this over all possiblevalues of χ,θ(0 toπ)a n d φ(0 to 2 π). What is the range of values of χ?
The factor sin
2χappearing in the metric takes the same values for χ=0a n d
χ=π, beyond which there is a repetition of the same range. Hence the total
volume of the space is given by
V=a3/integraldisplayχ=π
χ=0dχsin2χ/integraldisplayθ=π
θ=0dθsinθ/integraldisplayφ=2π
φ=0dφ=2π2a3. (10.16)
Just as a sphere has a surface of ﬁnite area without any edges, this space alsosimilarly has a ﬁnite volume without any bounding surface. It is easy to showthat the spaces given by the metrics (10.12) or(10.15) have inﬁnite volumes.
Let us now introduce a slightly different notation. We substitute χ=rin
(10.12) ,s i nχ=rin(10.14) and sinh χ=rin(10.15) . It is straightforward to
show that (10.12) ,(10.14) and(10.15) now become
ds
2=a2(dr2+r2d/Omega12),
ds2=a2/parenleftbiggdr2
1−r2+r2d/Omega12/parenrightbigg
,
ds2=a2/parenleftbiggdr2
1+r2+r2d/Omega12/parenrightbigg
.
These three equations can be written together in the combined compact form
ds2=a2/parenleftbiggdr2
1−kr2+r2d/Omega12/parenrightbigg
, (10.17)
where kcan have values 0, +1a n d−1, respectively corresponding to uniform
space with zero, positive and negative curvature.
So far we have considered the metric of three-dimensional space. To
describe the spacetime of the Universe, we need the metric of four-dimensionalspacetime. We expect (10.17) to provide the spatial part of this metric. We now

<<<PAGE 326>>>

306 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
have to add the time part. Special relativity can guide us how to do this. We
know that the metric of special relativity is given by
ds2=− c2dt2+dx2+dy2+dz2.
Since dx2+dy2+dz2is the spatial part of the metric, it is clear that we get the
full spacetime metric by adding −c2dt2to it. In exactly the same fashion, we
expect to get the four-dimensional spacetime metric of the Universe by adding−c
2dt2to(10.17) .T h i sg i v e s
ds2=− c2dt2+a(t)2/parenleftbiggdr2
1−kr2+r2d/Omega12/parenrightbigg
. (10.18)
Substituting for d/Omega12from (10.13) , the full four-dimensional form of the metric
is given by
ds2=− c2dt2+a(t)2/bracketleftbiggdr2
1−kr2+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2)/bracketrightbigg
. (10.19)
This is known as the Robertson–Walker metric (Robertson, 1935; Walker ,1936)
and is the only possible form of the metric for a Universe satisfying the cosmo-logical principle (i.e. having the spatial part uniform). The three values 0, +1
and−1o fk give the three possible kinds of Universe with ﬂat, positively curved
and negatively curved space. Sometimes it is useful to write the Robertson–
Walker metric in terms of the variable χused in (10.12) ,(10.14) and(10.15)
rather than r. This is easily seen to be
ds
2=− c2dt2+a(t)2/bracketleftBig
dχ2+S2(χ)(dθ2+sin2θdφ2)/bracketrightBig
, (10.20)
where the function S(χ)has to be χ,s i nχor sinh χcorresponding to the values
0,+1o r −1o fk .
One very important point to note is that we have written ain(10.19) and
(10.20) in the form a(t)to make it explicit that a(t)can in general be a function
of time. To understand the physical signiﬁcance of this, let us look at the metric
(10.4) for the surface of a sphere. There the parameter awas the radius of the
sphere and would increase with time if the sphere expanded. In exactly the same
spirit, we can regard a(t)appearing in (10.19) as a measure of the size of the
Universe. It is called the scale factor of the Universe. A time evolution equation
ofa(t)will tell us how the Universe evolves with time. Such an equation can be
obtained by substituting (10.19) into Einstein’s equation, the basic equation of
general relativity. We shall carry out this exercise in §14.1.H o w e v e r ,w eh a v e
already pointed out in §10.1 that, by a miraculous coincidence, exactly the same
equation for the evolution of the Universe can be obtained from Newtonian
mechanics with some suitable assumptions. We shall discuss this in the next
section.
Let us now point out another useful analogy with the metric (10.4) for the
spherical surface. Suppose we consider some marks on the spherical surface.

<<<PAGE 327>>>

10.3 The metric of the Universe 307
The coordinates (θ, φ) for any particular mark will not change with time if
the sphere expands. But the marks will move away from each other because the
radius of the sphere is increasing and the distance between any two marks (along
the great circle connecting them) is proportional to the radius. In relativistic
cosmology, we take a similar point of view that galaxies are moving from eachother because the scale factor of the Universe is increasing, but the spatialcoordinates (r,θ,φ) of a galaxy would not change (provided we neglect any
motion of the galaxy with respect to the Hubble expansion). In other words,a galaxy stays put at a point in space while space is expanding. A coordinatesystem in which galaxies do not change their coordinates with the expansion ofthe Universe is called a co-moving coordinate system . The Robertson–Walker
metric is usually assumed to be a metric corresponding to a co-moving coor-dinate system. Suppose we take our Galaxy to be the origin of our coordinatesystem and we want to ﬁnd the distance of a galaxy located at (r,θ,φ) .O n e
way of obtaining a measure of this distance is to integrate the spatial part of ds
between us and that galaxy. If we are at the origin, this integration will clearlybe in the radial direction and we easily conclude from (10.19) that this measure
of distance to the galaxy is given by
l=a(t)/integraldisplay
r
0dr/prime
√
1−kr/prime2. (10.21)
We should point out that the concept of distance in general relativity involvessome subtleties. We shall present an analysis of length measurement in §13.1.
How different kinds of galaxy distances can be inferred from observational datawill be discussed in §14.4. However, these different distances as well as the
distance measure given by (10.21) converge if the redshift zof the galaxy is
small compared to 1 such that the curvature of the Universe is not important
within the distance to the galaxy. Taking lgiven by (10.21) as the distance to the
galaxy, the recession velocity of the galaxy with the expansion of the Universe
is obviously
v=˙a(t)/integraldisplay
r
0dr/prime
√
1−kr/prime2, (10.22)
where a dot represents differentiation with tthroughout this chapter. It follows
from (9.13) that the Hubble constant is given by
H=v
l=˙a
a. (10.23)
We have introduced some elementary concepts of relativistic cosmology.
Now we shall use only Newtonian mechanics in the rest of this chapter and see
how far we can go with it. We shall ﬁnd that it is possible to study the mathemat-
ical equations for the evolution of the Universe without getting into the details ofgeneral relativity. However, our treatment will lack self-consistency and will not

<<<PAGE 328>>>

308 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
Table 10.2 Conceptual differences between relativistic cosmology
and Newtonian cosmology.
RELATIVISTIC COSMOLOGY NEWTONIAN COSMOLOGY
1 All points in space are equivalent We are at the centre of the Universe
2 Space is expanding with galaxies Galaxies are moving away in space
3 Redshift caused by stretching of Redshift caused by Doppler effect
light wavelength due to expansion due to recession of galaxies
be satisfactory at a deep conceptual level if we shy away from general relativity.
Table 10.2 lists the main differences between relativistic cosmology and the
so-called Newtonian cosmology. Just as all points on a spherical surface areequivalent, all points in a uniform three-dimensional space described by themetric (10.19) are equivalent. In Newtonian cosmology, however, we shall take
the point of view that we are at the centre and the Universe is expanding radially
outwards with us at the centre. In the co-moving coordinate system introduced
in relativistic cosmology, space is expanding and carrying the galaxies withit. On the other hand, we shall have to assume in Newtonian cosmology thatgalaxies are moving away in space, which is regarded as the inert background
without any dynamics. Another problematic aspect of Newtonian cosmology is
the interpretation of the redshift of spectral lines, which is regarded as a simpleDoppler shift due to the recession of the galaxies. When the redshift zdeﬁned
in(9.11) is of the order of 1 or larger (which is the case for many objects found
through the most powerful telescopes), this interpretation does not make verygood sense, as pointed out at the end of §9.3. When we discuss the relativistic
theory of light propagation in an expanding Universe in §14.3, we shall see
that the wavelength of light gets stretched with the expansion of the Universe.
Thus, if awere the scale factor of the Universe when light started from a distant
galaxy and if a
0is the present scale factor (which must be larger than afor an
expanding Universe), it follows from relativistic considerations that
1+z=λobs
λem=a0
a. (10.24)
We shall see that the expressions of most of the observable quantities in cos-mology will involve the ratio of scale factors rather than the scale factor itself,
as in (10.24) .
10.4 Friedmann equation for the scale factor
We now want to derive an equation describing how the scale factor a(t)appear-
ing in (10.19) evolves with time. We shall use some simple considerations

<<<PAGE 329>>>

10.4 Friedmann equation for the scale factor 309
Fig. 10.3 Sketch of a spherical shell in a region of
spherical expansion.
of Newtonian mechanics. As we already pointed out, we have to assume the
Universe to be spherically symmetric around us located at the centre of auniform expansion, as sketched in Figure 10.3 , and the equation we shall
get miraculously turns out to be the same as what one gets by putting the
Robertson–Walker metric in Einstein’s equation.
Let us consider a spherical shell of radius aindicated in Figure 10.3 .T h e
kinetic energy per unit mass of the shell is
1
2˙a2and the potential energy per unit
mass is −GM/a,w h e r e Mis the mass enclosed within this shell. Assuming a
uniform density ρ, the potential energy turns out to be
−4
3πGρa3
a=−4
3πGρa2
so that the total mechanical energy E, which is a constant of motion, is given by
E=1
2˙a2−4
3πGρa2. (10.25)
If we know how ρdepends on a, then this equation can be solved to ﬁnd how a
will evolve with time. As we shall see in §14.1, on substituting the Robertson–
Walker metric into Einstein’s equation, we get essentially the same equation as(10.25) with Egiven by
E=−kc
2
2, (10.26)
where kis the same kthat appears in the Robertson–Walker metric (10.19) and
can have values +1,−1 or 0. On substituting (10.26) in(10.25) ,w eg e t
˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=8πG
3ρ, (10.27)
which is known as the Friedmann equation (Friedmann, 1924).
It may be pointed out that Einstein’s equation allows the possibility
of an extra term (called the cosmological constant ), which causes an extra
acceleration of the Universe ( Einstein, 1917). As we shall discuss in §14.5,
the recent redshift data of distant supernovae indicate that the Universe

<<<PAGE 330>>>

310 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
may be accelerating, which suggests that the Friedmann equation (10.27) may
not be the complete equation and an additional cosmological constant term may
be present. Even if that is true, for purely pedagogical purposes, it is useful to
study the consequences of (10.27) before getting into a discussion of the effects
of the cosmological constant. All the discussions in this chapter will assume
a zero cosmological constant and will be based on (10.27) .I nChapter 14 we
shall discuss the modiﬁcations of the theory necessitated by the cosmological
constant. Since the cosmological constant was believed to be zero until a few
years ago, most of the standard textbooks of cosmology written till about2000 assumed (10.27) to be the complete equation and discussed its solutions.
We shall see in §14.2 that the cosmological constant becomes more domi-
nant as the Universe becomes older. It appears that the Universe is right nowpassing through the phase when the cosmological constant term has become aslarge as the other terms in the equation. For a study of the Universe when it wasyoung, (10.27) is more than adequate.
For a projectile moving against gravity, we know that a positive total energy
Ewould imply that it will move forever and escape to inﬁnity, whereas a
negative energy implies that it will eventually fall back due to the attractionof gravity. We expect similar considerations to hold here also. Noting from
(10.26) thatkhas a sign opposite of E, we can at once draw a very important
conclusion. If k=− 1, then the Universe will expand forever. On the other hand,
ifk=+ 1, then the expansion of the Universe will eventually be halted, making
the Universe fall back and collapse (provided the cosmological constant is zero).Such a Universe will last for a ﬁnite time before it ends in a big crunch. We have
already seen in §10.3 that a Universe with positive curvature (i.e. k=+ 1) has
a ﬁnite volume, whereas a Universe with negative curvature (i.e. k=− 1) is
inﬁnite. This leads to an interesting statement. A Universe ﬁnite in space (withk=+ 1) should last for a ﬁnite time. On the other hand, a Universe inﬁnite in
space (with k=− 1) will last for inﬁnite time.
Whether the Universe will expand forever or not must depend on the density
of the Universe, which determines the strength of the gravitational attraction.The value of density for which the Universe will lie exactly on the borderlinebetween these two possibilities (with k=0) is called the critical density and
is denoted by ρ
c. On putting k=0i n (10.27) and using (10.23) , the critical
density is given by
ρc=3H2
8πG. (10.28)
On substituting the present-day value of the Hubble constant as given by (9.17),the present-day value of the critical density turns out to be
ρ
c,0=1.88×10−26h2kg m−3. (10.29)

<<<PAGE 331>>>

10.4 Friedmann equation for the scale factor 311
If the average density of our present Universe is less than this, then it should
expand forever. On the other hand, a higher average density is expected to makethe Universe eventually fall back. We shall come to the question of the value
of average density of the Universe in the next section where we discuss the
contents of the Universe. The ratio of the density to the critical density is calledthedensity parameter and is denoted by /Omega1,i . e .
/Omega1=ρ
ρc. (10.30)
On making use of (10.23) ,(10.28) and(10.30) , we can write (10.27) in the form
kc2
a2H2=/Omega1−1. (10.31)
It should be noted that a,Hand/Omega1all evolve with time. Their values at
any particular epoch thave to be related by (10.31) . Their values at the
present epoch are denoted by a0,H0and/Omega10. It should be clear from (10.30)
and (10.31) that k=0,k=+ 1a n d k=− 1 respectively correspond to the
casesρ=ρc,ρ>ρ candρ<ρ c. This is consistent with the conclusion we
have already drawn that a Universe with k=+ 1 should eventually fall back,
whereas a Universe with k=− 1 should expand forever. Only when the density
is more than the critical density ρc, will the gravitational force be strong enough
to pull back the Universe eventually ( k=+ 1 case). On the other hand, a density
less than the critical density ρccorresponds to a weak gravitational pull that
cannot halt the expansion of the Universe ( k=− 1 case).
In the Newtonian expression (10.25) of the spherical shell, it is possible
forEto have any real value. However, it follows from (10.26) that general
relativistic considerations constrain Eto have only three values corresponding
to the three values of k. This may seem surprising at ﬁrst sight. It is to be noted
that the variables like a,˙aandρappearing in (10.27) can have continuous
possible values. The three possible values of kbasically force a,˙aandρ
to satisfy three possible relationships amongst themselves which follow from(10.27) on substituting the values of k. Since it is the mass-energy which creates
the curvature of spacetime in general relativity, we do expect such relationships.On the other hand, when we apply purely Newtonian considerations to thespherical shell of Figure 10.3, its radius adoes not have to be related to the
density ρ. We could consider spherical shells of different radii and write down
equations of the form (10.25) for them. The value of Ecan be different for them.
In relativistic cosmology, on the other hand, ais like the radius of curvature
of the Universe and general relativity certainly imposes some extra constraintswhich would not be present in the Newtonian formulation of the expanding
shell. While Newtonian considerations lead us to the equation (10.25) having
the same form as what we get from general relativity, these subtle differences
should be kept in mind.

<<<PAGE 332>>>

312 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
We shall discuss in the next section how ρvaries with a. Here we merely
point out how we proceed to solve (10.27) when we have ρas a function of a.
It is particularly easy to handle (10.27) when k=0. Since ˙ahas to be positive
for an expanding Universe, we get
˙a=/radicalbigg
8πGρ
3a. (10.32)
This is very easy to integrate when we have ρa saf u n c t i o no f a.W h e n k=± 1,
it is useful to change from tto another time-like variable ηdeﬁned through
cdt=adη. (10.33)
On using this variable η, the Robertson–Walker metric (10.19) would have
the form
ds2=a(η)2/bracketleftbigg
−dη2+dr2
1−kr2+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2)/bracketrightbigg
. (10.34)
Keeping in mind that a dot denotes a differentiation with respect to t,
a differentiation with respect to ηhas to be indicated explicitly. We ﬁnd
from (10.33) that
˙a=c
ada
dη.
Substituting in (10.27) ,w eg e t
c2
a4/parenleftbiggda
dη/parenrightbigg2
+kc2
a2=8πG
3ρ,
from which
da
dη=±/radicalbigg
8πG
3c2ρa4−ka2.
This can be put in the form of a quadrature
η=±/integraldisplayda/radicalBig
8πG
3c2ρa4−ka2. (10.35)
Onceρis given as a function of a, one can work out this quadrature to ﬁnd
how avaries with the time-like variable η. If one is interested in determining
the variation of awith t, then it is further necessary to relate ηtotby solving
(10.33) after obtaining aas a function of η. We shall carry out some calculations
of this type explicitly in §10.6.

<<<PAGE 333>>>

10.5 Contents of the Universe 313
10.5 Contents of the Universe. The cosmic blackbody radiation
As pointed out in §10.4, we need to specify how the density ρof the Universe
varies with the scale factor ain order to solve for aas a function of time. We
have to consider the contents of the Universe for this purpose. Before we get
into the discussion of the speciﬁc contents, let us consider a ﬂuid ﬁlling the
Universe with density ρand equivalent energy density ρc2.S i n c e ρc2has the
dimension of pressure, we can write the pressure due to this ﬂuid as
P=wρc2. (10.36)
We consider a volume a3of the Universe which is increasing with time. The
total internal energy inside this volume is ρc2a3. Assuming the expansion to be
adiabatic, the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics dQ=dU+Pd V leads to
d(ρc2a3)+wρc2d(a3)=0,
from which it follows that
ρ∝1
a3(1+w). (10.37)
If we know the appropriate value of wappearing in (10.36) for a particular
component of the Universe, (10.37) tells us how the density of that component
will vary with a. One standard result of the kinetic theory of gases is that the
pressure of a gas is given by
P=1
3ρv2,
where vis the molecular velocity (see, for example, Saha and Srivastava ,1965,
§3.12). Comparing with (10.36) ,w eﬁ n dt h a t
w=1
3v2
c2. (10.38)
For a non-relativistic gas, we have
w≈0,ρ∝1
a3, (10.39)
whereas for a gas of relativistic particles all moving around with speed c,
w≈1
3,ρ∝1
a4. (10.40)
Although matter in the Universe is distributed in a hierarchy of structures,
we pointed out in §9.6 that the matter distribution starts looking homogeneous
when we go to scales larger than about 100 h−1Mpc, in accordance with the
cosmological principle. If the luminous stars constituted all the matter in the

<<<PAGE 334>>>

314 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
Universe, then a careful analysis of observational data indicates that the density
parameter /Omega1deﬁned in (10.30) would be of order
/Omega1Lum≈0.01. (10.41)
However, we pointed out in §9.2.2 that rotation curves of galaxies suggest a
signiﬁcant amount of dark matter beyond the stellar disks of galaxies. Then wediscussed in §9.5 that the application of the virial theorem to galaxy clusters
suggests even larger amounts of dark matter. The density parameter estimatedfrom the virial masses of galaxy clusters turns out to be independent of theuncertainties in the Hubble constant (see Exercise 10.1 ) and is of order
/Omega1
M,0≈0.3. (10.42)
The subscript 0 implies that this is the present value of the density parameterdue to matter, which can have different values at other epochs. We shall discussother independent arguments in §14.5 that/Omega1
M,0indeed has this value. From
(10.29) and(10.30) , the present matter density should be
ρM,0=1.88×10−26/Omega1M,0h2kg m−3. (10.43)
Using (10.39) , we can now write down the matter density at an arbitrary epoch
in the form
ρM=ρM,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig3
, (10.44)
where a0is the value of the scale factor at the present epoch and aits value at
that arbitrary epoch.
Hubble’s law (9.13) implies that all the galaxies were on top of each other
at a certain epoch, often called the Big Bang. In other words, the physical
parameters of the Universe like its density and its temperature were inﬁniteat that epoch, according to straightforward theoretical considerations, so thatit is not possible to extrapolate our currently understood physical laws totimes earlier than the epoch of the Big Bang. We know that hot matter emits
radiation. Since the early Universe must have been dense and hot, it would
have been ﬁlled with radiation existing in thermodynamic equilibrium withmatter. As we discussed in §2.2.4 and§2.3, radiation in equilibrium with matter
has to be blackbody radiation. As the Universe expanded and its density fell,
at some stage the Universe became transparent to radiation and the radiation
ceased to be in equilibrium with matter. We shall discuss this decoupling ofradiation and matter in greater depth in §11.7. As the Universe kept expand-
ing after this decoupling, the radiation would undergo adiabatic expansion
because it ceases to interact with matter any more. One of the important
results from the thermodynamics of blackbody radiation (see, for example, Saha
and Srivastava ,1965, §15.25) is that blackbody radiation continues to remain

<<<PAGE 335>>>

10.5 Contents of the Universe 315
blackbody radiation under adiabatic expansion, although its temperature keeps
decreasing with expansion. As we shall show in §14.3, the general relativistic
analysis of light propagation in the expanding Universe also leads to the same
conclusion that the radiation continues to remain blackbody radiation even
though it is not interacting with matter any more. We thus expect on theoreticalgrounds that the Universe should still be ﬁlled with a blackbody radiationbackground, which will be cooling with the expansion of the Universe. Alpher
and Herman (1948) were the ﬁrst to point this out and predicted that the present
temperature of this blackbody radiation should be of order 10 K. Without beingaware of this theoretical prediction, Penzias and Wilson (1965) accidentally
discovered this radiation which seemed to have a temperature of 3 K. Since
much of this blackbody radiation at 3 K lies in the microwave range, it is called
thecosmic microwave background radiation , abbreviated as CMBR.
The discovery of CMBR was perhaps the most important milestone in the
development of observational cosmology after the discovery of Hubble’s law.
Lemaitre (1927) was the ﬁrst person to argue that the Universe must have
begun from a hot Big Bang. The CMBR is a remnant of this Big Bang and
its existence provided reasonably compelling proof (at least compelling enoughto most astrophysicists) that there was really a hot Big Bang from which the
Universe was born. Penzias and Wilson (1965) were able to measure only a
small part of the CMBR spectrum. The satellite COBE (Cosmic Background
Explorer) was launched in 1989 to study the CMBR in detail. Figure 10.4
shows the spectrum of CMBR measured by COBE, as reported by Mather et al.
Fig. 10.4 The spectrum of cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) as
obtained by COBE. From Mather et al. (1990). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society.
Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical Journal .)

<<<PAGE 336>>>

316 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
(1990). It is a fantastic ﬁt to the Planck spectrum (2.1) for blackbody radiation
at temperature
T0=2.735±0.06 K. (10.45)
We know that the energy density of blackbody radiation at temperature Tis
given by aBT4
0,w h e r e aBis Stefan’s constant (see Exercise 2.1). Hence the
contribution of CMBR to the density of the Universe is
ργ=aB
c2T4. (10.46)
We shall discuss in §11.4 that the Universe is expected to have a background
of neutrinos in addition to the background of photons in the CMBR. The
detailed properties of the neutrino background will be worked out in §11.4.
For the time being, let us only mention that the total density of relativistic
background particles (photons and neutrinos together) at the present epoch will
be shown to be
ρR,0=1.68ρ γ,0, (10.47)
where ργ,0is the present-day contribution of CMBR to the density of the
Universe. Since the CMBR photons and the neutrinos are both relativistic gases,we expect (10.40) to hold for both so that we can write
ρ
R=ρR,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig4
. (10.48)
Since the CMBR density ργseparately would also fall as a−4, it easily follows
from (10.46) that
T∝1
a, (10.49)
which tells us how the temperature of the CMBR must be falling with theexpansion of the Universe. We shall show in §11.4 that the neutrino temperature
also should fall in the same way, although its value will be different from thevalue of CMBR temperature at the same instant.
By summing up (10.44) and(10.48) , the total density of the Universe can
be written as
ρ=ρ
M,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig3
+ρR,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig4
. (10.50)
In the following discussion, we shall refer to both photons and neutrinosas ‘radiation’. Some obvious conclusions can be drawn from the expression
(10.50) for the density. The radiation density (falling as a
−4) falls more rapidly
than the matter density (falling as a−3) with the expansion of the Universe.
Going backwards in time, as we approach the Big Bang closer and closer, the

<<<PAGE 337>>>

10.6 The evolution of the matter-dominated Universe 317
radiation density must be rising faster than the matter density with increasingly
smaller a. At the present time, we have
ρM,0/greatermuchρR,0.
However, there must be a past epoch when the matter and radiation densitieswere equal, before which the radiation was dominant. If a
eqwas the value of
the scale factor at that epoch of matter-radiation equality, on equating (10.44)
and(10.48) we get
a0
aeq=ρM,0
ρR,0=ρM,0c2
1.68aBT4
0(10.51)
w h e r ew eh a v em a d eu s eo f(10.46) and(10.47) . Substituting from (10.43) and
(10.45) ,w eg e t
a0
aeq=2.3×104/Omega1M,0h2. (10.52)
We can divide the history of the Universe into two distinct periods. At timesearlier than the matter-radiation equality when the scale factor awas smaller
than a
eqgiven by (10.52) , the Universe is said to be radiation-dominated.O nt h e
other hand, after the matter-radiation equality the Universe has become matter-
dominated.
To study the evolution of the Universe, we now need to solve the Fried-
mann equation (10.27) after substituting for ρfrom (10.50) . The calculations,
however, become much simpler without introducing any signiﬁcant error ifwe assume ρ=ρ
Mgiven by (10.44) when we study the matter-dominated
period of the Universe and assume ρ=ρRgiven by (10.48) when we study
the radiation-dominated period of the Universe. It is possible to get analyticalsolutions in these simpler cases. The next two sections will be devoted to solvingthe Friedmann equation for the matter-dominated and the radiation-dominated
Universe respectively.
10.6 The evolution of the matter-dominated Universe
We shall now solve the Friedmann equation (10.27) by taking ρ=ρMgiven by
(10.44) appropriate for the matter-dominated Universe. We need to consider the
three cases k=− 1,0,+1.
Let us ﬁrst consider the case k=0, for which the Friedmann equation leads
to(10.32) . On substituting from (10.44) in(10.32) ,w eh a v e
˙a=/radicalBigg
8πGρM,0a3
0
3a−1/2,

<<<PAGE 338>>>

318 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
of which the solution is
2
3a3
2=/radicalBigg
8πGρM,0a3
0
3t (10.53)
on setting t=0 at the epoch of the Big Bang when a=0. For the k=0 case,
the density is equal to the critical density given by (10.28) so that
ρM,0=3H2
0
8πG.
On substituting this in (10.53) ,w eg e t
a
a0=/parenleftbigg3
2H0t/parenrightbigg2/3
. (10.54)
We thus reach the very important conclusion that the size of the Universe
increases with time as t2/3. This solution for the k=0 case is often called the
Einstein–de Sitter model , since it was studied by Einstein and de Sitter (1932).
For the cases k=± 1, we use the quadrature formula (10.35) obtained from
the Friedmann equation (10.27) . On substituting (10.44) into (10.35) ,w eg e t
η=±/integraldisplayda/radicalbigg
8πGρM,0a3
0
3c2a−ka2. (10.55)
10.6.1 The closed solution ( k=+1)
As already discussed in §10.4 and as should be clear from (10.31) , this is the
case where the density is larger than the critical density, i.e. /Omega1M,0>1. When
k=+ 1, the quadrature (10.55) can be worked out to give
a=4πG
3c2ρM,0a3
0(1−cosη).
This can be written as
a
a0=1
2/parenleftBigg
8πGρM,0
3H2
0/parenrightBigg
a2
0H2
0
c2(1−cosη).
On making use of (10.28) ,(10.30) and(10.31) ,i tb e c o m e s
a
a0=/Omega1M,0
2(/Omega1 M,0−1)(1−cosη), (10.56)
where /Omega1M,0=ρM,0/ρc,0is the density parameter at the present epoch due to
matter. The evolution of aas a function of the time-like variable ηis given by
(10.56) . In order to bring in t,w eu s e (10.33) which gives

<<<PAGE 339>>>

10.6 The evolution of the matter-dominated Universe 319
t=1
c/integraldisplay
adη=/Omega1M,0a0
2c(/Omega1M,0−1)(η−sinη)
on substituting from (10.56) fora. Multiplying by H0and making use of
(10.31) ,w eg e t
H0t=/Omega1M,0
2(/Omega1 M,0−1)3/2(η−sinη). (10.57)
The two equations (10.56) and(10.57) together give an implicit solution of aas
a function of t. It follows from (10.56) thatagoes to zero when ηincreases
to 2π. In other words, this is a solution which corresponds to a Universe
eventually ending up in a big crunch. We have already used arguments based on
simple Newtonian mechanics in §10.4 to conclude that a Universe with k=+ 1,
which has ﬁnite volume and has density more than the critical density, shouldeventually collapse. This is now explicitly seen in the solution. Figure 10.5
shows a/a
0a saf u n c t i o no ft .
10.6.2 The open solution (k =−1)
This is the case corresponding to /Omega1M,0<1. With k=− 1, instead of (10.56)
and(10.57) ,w eh a v e
a
a0=/Omega1M,0
2(1−/Omega1M,0)(coshη−1), (10.58)
H0t=/Omega1M,0
2(1−/Omega1M,0)3/2(sinhη−η). (10.59)
Again these two equations together give an implicit solution of aas a function
oft. This solution of a/a0as a function of tis also plotted in Figure 10.5,
Fig. 10.5 The evolution of the scale factor a/a0as a function of the time tfor the cases
k=− 1,0,+1.

<<<PAGE 340>>>

320 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
which shows the solution for the k=0 case as well. It is seen that the solution
fork=− 1 increases forever at a rate faster than the rate of increase of the
critical solution k=0. We had already anticipated in §10.4 that the k=− 1
solution, which corresponds to an inﬁnite Universe with density less than the
critical density, will expand forever. The explicit solution now conﬁrms this.
As we pointed out in §10.5, it appears that /Omega1M,0is about 0.3. It would
then seem that the open solution is the appropriate solution for our Universe.
However, so far in our discussion, we have not included the cosmological con-
stant which would contribute another term to the Friedmann equation (10.27).
In§14.5 we shall discuss the observational evidence that this cosmological
constant may actually be non-zero, leading to an acceleration of the Universe.
The cosmological constant term, however, becomes more important with time.
At the present epoch, this term is comparable to the matter density term. Atearlier epochs, the cosmological term was less important. So the open solutionis presumably the appropriate solution for the evolution of the Universe at early
epochs and can be used up to the present epoch in many calculations without
introducing too much error. We shall show explicitly in §14.2 that the solution
with non-zero cosmological constant (given by (14.20) ) reduces at early times
to the approximate solution we are going to discuss now.
10.6.3 Approximate solution for early epochs
We see in Figure 10.5 that the solutions for all the three values of kbehave very
similarly at sufﬁciently early times. We can simplify the solutions for k=± 1
whenη/lessmuch1. Both (10.56) and(10.58) reduce to
a
a0≈/Omega1M,0
2|1−/Omega1M,0|η2
2
whenηis small. Similarly both (10.57) and(10.59) reduce to
H0t≈/Omega1M,0
2|1−/Omega1M,0|3/2η3
6.
Eliminating ηbetween these two equations, we get
a
a0≈/parenleftbigg3
2/Omega11/2
M,0H0t/parenrightbigg2/3
. (10.60)
This reduces to the critical solution (10.54) when the density parameter
/Omega1M,0is 1. Although (10.60) may not be strictly true at the present epoch, it is

<<<PAGE 341>>>

10.6 The evolution of the matter-dominated Universe 321
still very useful in many quick calculations. Since a=a0at the present epoch
t=t0, it follows from (10.60) that
t0≈2
3H−1
0/Omega1−1/2
M,0. (10.61)
Then (10.60) can be written as
a
a0≈/parenleftbiggt
t0/parenrightbigg2/3
. (10.62)
It may be pointed out that the ratio a/a0is a more observationally relevant
quantity than the scale factor aitself, since this ratio is related to the redshift z
through (10.24) . If a source is at redshift z, then light from it started at time tto
reach us at the present epoch t0. The relation between zandtcan be obtained
by combining (10.24) with (10.62) :
t
t0≈(1+z)−3/2. (10.63)
When we look at a galaxy at redshift z=1, we essentially see the galaxy as it
existed when the age of the Universe was 2−3/2times its present age.
As we already discussed, the very early Universe was radiation-dominated.
So(10.60) , based on the assumption that the Universe is matter-dominated,
should not hold at those early times. However, the Universe became matter-
dominated fairly early. From (10.52) and (10.62) , the epoch teqof matter-
radiation equality is given by
teq=2.9×10−7/Omega1−3/2
M,0h−3t0. (10.64)
Since t0is believed to be of the order of 1010years, the Universe would have
become matter-dominated a few thousand years after the Big Bang. From then
onwards, equations like (10.60) and(10.62) should hold till the present time.
10.6.4 The age of the Universe
An approximate expression for the age of the Universe is given in (10.61) ,w h e r e
we see that the age is shorter if /Omega1M,0is larger. One can understand this result
quite easily. A larger /Omega1M,0means a stronger deceleration, which implies that the
expansion rate of the early Universe would have been faster if /Omega1M,0was larger.
This faster expansion leads to a shorter age. Instead of using the approximate
expression (10.61) , one can easily ﬁnd out the exact value of the age t0for a
given /Omega1M,0.S i n c e a=a0at the present epoch, the age t0of the Universe is
given by the value of twhich makes a=a0.I f/Omega1 M,0>1, then the numerical
value of H0t0can be found from (10.56) and(10.57) . On the other hand, we have
to use (10.58) and(10.59) if/Omega1M,0<1.Figure 10.6 plots the numerical values
ofH0t0a saf u n c t i o no f/Omega1 M,0. The expansion rate of the Universe would have

<<<PAGE 342>>>

322 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
Fig. 10.6 The plot of H0t0against /Omega1M,0, showing how the age t0of the Universe
depends on /Omega1M,0.
been unchanged if /Omega1M,0were equal to zero, making t0equal to the Hubble time
H−1
0. We see in Figure 10.6 thatt0becomes a smaller and smaller fraction of the
Hubble time as /Omega1M,0is increased, giving the value (2/3) H−1
0when/Omega1M,0=1,
in accordance with (10.61) .
10.7 The evolution of the radiation-dominated Universe
We shall now discuss how the Universe evolved at the early times before teq
given by (10.64) when the Universe was dominated by radiation. In the case
of the matter-dominated Universe, it should be clear from Figure 10.5 that the
solutions for k=− 1,0,+1 converge at sufﬁciently early times. The reason
for this is not difﬁcult to understand. It is the curvature term kc2/a2in the
Friedmann equation (10.27) which is responsible for making the three solutions
different. At sufﬁciently early times, this term becomes negligible compared to
the mass density term which goes as a−3and becomes more dominant when
ais sufﬁciently small. During the radiation-dominated epoch, the radiation
density term going as a−4becomes even more dominant and we can ignore
the curvature term kc2/a2,s ot h a t (10.32) obtained by putting k=0i nt h e
Friedmann equation (10.27) is applicable. On substituting ρ=ρRas given by
(10.48) , we obtain from (10.32) that
a˙a=/radicalbigg
8πGρR,0
3a2
0,

<<<PAGE 343>>>

10.7 The evolution of the radiation-dominated Universe 323
of which the solution is
a
a0=/parenleftbigg32πGρR,0
3/parenrightbigg1/4
t1/2. (10.65)
The radiation-dominated Universe expanded with time as t1/2in contrast to the
early matter-dominated Universe which expanded as t2/3according to (10.62) .
We have pointed out in (10.49) that the temperature of the CMBR falls as
the inverse of a. So we expect
a
a0=T0
T.
Using this and substituting for ρR,0from (10.46) , we get from (10.65) that
T=/parenleftbigg3c2
32πGaB/parenrightbigg1/4
t−1/2. (10.66)
On substituting the values of c,GandaB, we obtain
T(in K) =1.52×1010
√t. (10.67)
Here Tis in kelvin as indicated and thas to be in seconds. It may be noted
that (10.66) and (10.67) are derived by assuming that photons were the only
relativistic particles in the early Universe. As we shall see in Chapter 11 ,t h e r e
were other relativistic particles and these equations have to be suitably modiﬁed
in more accurate calculations.
A typical photon in blackbody radiation at temperature Thas energy
E=κBT. It can be easily shown that an energy Ein eV corresponds to
temperature
T=1.16×104E(in eV). (10.68)
It is sometimes useful to express temperature in units of energy like eV . If we
do this, then (10.67) becomes
T(in MeV) =1.31√t. (10.69)
This is a very important equation which gives an indication of the typical energya photon (or any other kind of particle) would have at time tafter the Big Bang.
We shall make extensive use of (10.69) in the next chapter.
Since we have neglected the curvature term kc
2/a2, we now argue that this
term really becomes negligible compared to the other terms in the Friedmannequation (10.27) as we go close to the Big Bang. It follows from (10.31) that
|/Omega1−1|=c
2
a2H2=c2
˙a2

<<<PAGE 344>>>

324 The spacetime dynamics of the Universe
on using (10.23) .S i n c e agoes as t1/2, we ﬁnd from this that
|/Omega1−1|∝t. (10.70)
In other words, as t→0, the density parameter /Omega1approaches 1 arbitrarily
closely and the curvature term becomes totally insigniﬁcant compared to other
terms, in spite of the fact that the curvature term kc2/a2by itself becomes
inﬁnite as agoes to zero.
Exercises
10.1 Since the recession velocity of a galaxy can be determined reasonably
accurately from the redshift in its spectrum, an application of Hubble’s law to
estimate distance makes the estimated distance uncertain as h−1if the value
of the Hubble constant is uncertain. If the average density of the Universe is
determined by estimating the masses of galaxy clusters by the application ofthe virial theorem, show that the density parameter /Omega1determined therefrom
will be independent of the uncertainties in the Hubble constant.
10.2 Consider quasars with redshifts z=1 and z=4. We want to ﬁnd out
the age of the Universe (as a fraction of its present age) when light started
from these quasars. First do the straightforward estimates for the case /Omega1
M,0=
1. Then estimate the percentile errors you would make if it turned out that
/Omega1M,0=0.5 and /Omega1M,0=1.5.
10.3 Assuming the Universe to be matter-dominated, numerically calculate
the age of the Universe for different values of /Omega1M,0. Make the plot to produce
Figure 10.6.
10.4 Suppose the Universe had only radiation and no matter. Solve the Fried-
mann equation for the values 0, +1 and −1o fk . Make plots of the scale factor
aas functions of time for all the three cases.
10.5 According to the steady state theory of cosmology ( Bondi and Gold,
1948; Hoyle, 1948), the average density of the Universe remains constant due
to continuous creation of matter as the Universe expands. Using (9.17) and
(10.43), estimate the number of hydrogen atoms which, on an average, have
to be created per year in a volume of 1 km3to keep the average density of the
Universe constant.

<<<PAGE 345>>>

11
The thermal history of
the Universe
11.1 Setting the time table
The present uniform expansion of the Universe suggests that there was an epoch
in the past when the Universe was in a singular state with inﬁnite density. Sincemost of the known laws of physics become inapplicable to such a singularstate, we cannot extrapolate to earlier times before this epoch of singularity.
We therefore concern ourselves only with what happened after this epoch of
singularity, which is called the Big Bang. In the solutions discussed in §10.6
and§10.7, the time twas measured from the Big Bang.
The spacetime dynamics discussed in Chapter 10 sets the stage of the
Universe. Now we shall look at the dramatis personae w h ow e r ei n v o l v e di n
the grand drama which unfolded and is still unfolding against this backgroundstage of spacetime. How the temperature of the early Universe varied with time
is given by (10.67) and (10.69) . At times earlier than 1 s after the Big Bang,
typical photons had energies somewhat larger than 1 MeV . Since such pho-
tons are known to produce electron-positron pairs, the Universe at these earlytimes must have been full of electrons and positrons which would have been
approximately as abundant as photons. When photons had energies larger than
2 GeV at still earlier times, they would have given rise to proton-antiproton pairsand neutron-antineutron pairs along with pairs of many other particles listed inelementary particle physics textbooks and their antiparticles. At even higher
energies existing at still earlier times, the quarks making up the elementary
particles would have been free. The Universe at this very early time consisted ofquarks and leptons along with their antiparticles and the bosons which mediatethe various fundamental interactions. One often says that the early Universe
was the best laboratory of particle physics that ever existed. However, if all the
records of a laboratory have completely disappeared, then that laboratory wouldnot be of great interest to most of us today even if it was the best laboratory once
325

<<<PAGE 346>>>

326 The thermal history of the Universe
Fig. 11.1 Landmarks in the thermal history of the Universe. Adapted from Kolb and
Turner (1990, p. 73).
upon a time! We shall see in this chapter that many things which we observe now
have connections with what happened in the early Universe.
Figure 11.1 shows a timetable with time plotted in a logarithmic scale along
with temperature in K and in eV . When the temperatures were higher than
1 GeV , we enter the particle physics era. Since theoretical considerations of
these very early times are often of rather speculative nature and do not have
much direct connections with observational data, we shall not discuss muchabout times earlier than the particle physics era in this elementary textbook.Typical nuclear reactions involve energies of order MeV . During the epoch from
about t=1st o t=10
2s, particles in the Universe had energies appropriate for
nuclear reactions and various kinds of nuclear reactions must have taken place.
We shall discuss the issue of primordial nucleosynthesis at some detail laterin this chapter. It follows from (10.64) that the Universe was a few thousand
years old when it changed from being radiation-dominated to being matter-dominated. This important epoch is indicated in Figure 11.1 . Another landmark
epoch came a little bit later when Tfell to about 1 eV and formation of atoms
took place. Since typical ionization energies are of order eV , we would not
expect atoms when Twas larger than this and matter must have existed in the
form of free electrons and bare nuclei. Although (10.69) is no longer valid at
the epoch of atom formation when the Universe is already matter-dominated,
we can get an approximate value of time tfor this epoch by setting T=1e Vi n
(10.69) , which gives t≈5×10
4yr as the epoch of atom formation. There was
a very important consequence of the formation of atoms. Radiation interactedwith matter before this epoch primarily through Thomson scattering discussed

<<<PAGE 347>>>

11.2 Thermodynamic equilibrium 327
in§2.6.1. When the atoms formed, all the electrons got locked inside them and
there ceased to be any free electrons available to produce Thomson scattering.
So radiation got decoupled from matter and the Universe suddenly became
transparent to radiation. We shall discuss these things in §11.7.T h ea i mo ft h i s
chapter is to elaborate on the history of the Universe summarized in Figure 11.1
and to connect it to the present-day observations.
11.2 Thermodynamic equilibrium
Let us consider a reaction in which A,B,C, ...c o m b i n e t o p r oduce L,M,
N,...:
A+B+C+···← → L+M+N+··· , (11.1)
which can proceed in both directions. Under normal circumstances, we expect
this reaction to reach a chemical equilibrium when the concentrations of A,B,
C, ..., L,M,N, ...a r e s u c h t h a t t h e b a c k w a r d r a t e b a l a n c e s t h e f o r w a r d r a t e
and the concentrations do not change any more. It may be noted that we shallbe using the term chemical equilibrium even if (11.1) is strictly not a ‘chemical’
reaction, i.e. it can be a nuclear reaction involving nuclei. The condition for the
chemical equilibrium of reaction (11.1) is
μ
A+μB+μC+···= μL+μM+μN+···, (11.2)
where the μ-s are the chemical potentials. This is a very well-known condition
discussed in any standard textbook covering this topic (see, for example, Reif,
1965, §8.9) and we shall not get into a detailed discussion of this condition here.
Various kinds of nuclear and particle reactions were possible in the early
Universe. The fundamental question we want to ask now is whether these
reactions could reach chemical equilibrium. As the Universe expanded at therate H=˙a/a, the condition for chemical equilibrium kept changing. Only if
a reaction proceeded at a rate faster than this expansion rate, can we expectthe reaction to reach equilibrium. Suppose /Gamma1is the interaction rate per particle,
i.e. it is the number of interactions a particle is expected to have in unit time.Within time ∼1//Gamma1 , most of the particles will have one interaction and we
may expect the system to reach equilibrium if it starts from a state not too farfrom equilibrium. If /Gamma1/greatermuchH, then the reaction would be able to reach chemical
equilibrium and, as the Universe expanded, it would evolve through successivestates in chemical equilibrium appropriate to the physical conditions at the
successive instants of time. On the other hand, if /Gamma1/lessmuchH, then the reaction
would not proceed fast enough to change the concentrations of the particles
involved in the reaction. Let us write down

<<<PAGE 348>>>

328 The thermal history of the Universe
/Gamma1
H/greatermuch1 (11.3)
as the condition for a reaction to reach chemical equilibrium. Since the inter-
action rate /Gamma1depends on the density of the Universe, we expect /Gamma1to decrease
with the expansion of the Universe. Although Halso decreases with time (for
example, Hdecreases as t−1ifagoes as some power tnoft), the decrease
in/Gamma1is typically faster. We then expect the condition /Gamma1/greatermuchHto change over
to the condition /Gamma1/lessmuchHas the Universe evolves. In such a situation, a reaction
which was initially able to remain in chemical equilibrium eventually falls out ofequilibrium. The concentrations of the particles involved in the reaction are notexpected to change after the reaction goes out of equilibrium. So we can assumethe concentrations to be frozen at the values which they had when /Gamma1≈Hand
the reaction was just going out of equilibrium. It should be emphasized that theideas presented in this paragraph should be taken as rough rules of thumb. Toobtain more accurate results, one has to carry out a detailed calculation of thereaction in the expanding Universe (usually done numerically with computers).
When a reaction is able to reach chemical equilibrium, the concentrations
of the various species of particles involved in the reaction will be given bythe standard results of thermodynamic equilibrium. The number of particlesoccupying a quantum state with momentum pis given by
f(p)=/bracketleftbigg
exp/parenleftbiggE(p)−μ
κBT/parenrightbigg
±1/bracketrightbigg−1
, (11.4)
where we have to use the plus sign for fermions obeying Fermi–Dirac statistics(Fermi, 1926; Dirac ,1926) and the minus sign for bosons obeying Bose–
Einstein statistics (Bose, 1924; Einstein, 1924), E(p)=/radicalbig
p2c2+m2c4being
the energy associated with the momentum p. To obtain the actual number
density from (11.4), we have to keep in mind that the six-dimensional phase
space volume element dV d3p(where dVis the ordinary volume element) has
gd Vd3p/h3quantum states in it. Here gis the degeneracy, which is 2 for both
electrons and photons, corresponding to the two spin states and two degrees of
polarization respectively. Hence the number density per unit volume must be
given by multiplying (11.4) bygd3p/h3and then integrating over all possible
momenta, i.e.
n=g
(2π)3/integraldisplay
f(p)d3p
/planckover2pi13. (11.5)
The contribution to density made by this species of particles is
ρ=g
(2π)3/integraldisplayE(p)
c2f(p)d3p
/planckover2pi13. (11.6)
Let us make some comments on the chemical potential μappearing in
(11.2) and(11.4). It is well known that μ=0 for photons which can be created

<<<PAGE 349>>>

11.2 Thermodynamic equilibrium 329
or destroyed easily. If photons produce particle-antiparticle pairs, then (11.2)
is satisﬁed only if the sum of the chemical potentials of the particle and the
antiparticle is zero. In other words, if the chemical potential of the particle is
+μ, the chemical potential of the antiparticle has to be −μ. It follows from
(11.4) that these differences in chemical potential would make the number
densities of particles and antiparticles different.
We now consider the case κBT/greatermuchmc2such that most particles would have
energies much larger than the rest mass energy and would be relativistic, i.e.
we can write E≈pc. At such a high temperature, the Universe is expected
to be full of these particles and their antiparticles, which should be presentin comparable numbers. This is possible only if μis much smaller compared
toκ
BT. Writing d3p=4πp2dp,E=pcandμ=0, we ﬁnd from (11.4) and
(11.5) that
n=g
2π2/planckover2pi13/integraldisplay∞
0p2dp
epc/κBT±1. (11.7)
It similarly follows from (11.4) and(11.6) that
ρ=g
2π2c/planckover2pi13/integraldisplay∞
0p3dp
epc/κBT±1. (11.8)
Both (11.7) and(11.8) can be evaluated analytically (see Exercise 11.1). For the
cases of bosons and fermions, (11.7) can be integrated to give
n=⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩ζ(3)
π2g/parenleftBig
κBT
/planckover2pi1c/parenrightBig3
(boson ),
3
4ζ(3)
π2g/parenleftBig
κBT
/planckover2pi1c/parenrightBig3
(fermion ),(11.9)
where ζ(3)=1.202 is the Riemann zeta function (see, for example,
Abramowitz and Stegun, 1964, Chapter 23). Similarly from (11.8) we get
ρ=/braceleftBiggg
2c2aBT4(boson ),
7
8g
2c2aBT4(fermion ).(11.10)
Here
aB=π2κ4
B
15/planckover2pi13c3(11.11)
is the Stefan constant. If we take g=2 for photons, then the energy density
ρc2according to (11.10) isaBT4, which is the standard expression for energy
density of blackbody radiation at temperature T(see Exercise 2.1). It is now
instructive to determine the entropy density of this gas of relativistic bosons or
fermions. For this purpose, we begin with the standard thermodynamic relation
Td S=dU+Pd V, (11.12)

<<<PAGE 350>>>

330 The thermal history of the Universe
where the internal energy Uinside a volume Vis given by ρc2V.I fs is the
entropy density, then we can write S=sV. On making these substitutions,
(11.12) gives
TV ds =Vc2dρ+[(ρc2+P)−Ts]dV. (11.13)
We see in (11.10) thatρis a function of Talone. We expect the entropy density
salso to be a function of Talone. If both sandρare independent of V,
then consistency requires that the coefﬁcient of dVin(11.13) must be zero.
This means
s=ρc2+P
T. (11.14)
On making use of the fact that P=(1/3)ρ c2for a relativistic gas (see the
discussion in §10.5) and substituting for ρfrom (11.10) ,w eg e t
s=/braceleftBigg2g
3aBT3(boson ),
7
82g
3aBT3(fermion ).(11.15)
After devoting the last paragraph to the case κBT/greatermuchmc2when most parti-
cles are relativistic, we now take a brief look at the opposite case κBT/lessmuchmc2.
We can take
E(p)≈mc2+p2
2m
in(11.4) in this case. Substituting (11.4) in(11.5), the particle density in the
non-relativistic limit is found to be
n=g
/planckover2pi13/parenleftbiggmκBT
2π/parenrightbigg3/2
exp/parenleftbigg
−mc2−μ
κBT/parenrightbigg
. (11.16)
Note that the exponential factor is supposed to be quite small in the non-
relativistic limit. So the number density of non-relativistic particles under ther-modynamic equilibrium would be negligible compared to the number densityof relativistic particles.
We already pointed out in §10.5 that the CMBR still has a spectral distri-
bution appropriate for thermodynamic equilibrium even though the photons inthe CMBR are no longer in equilibrium with matter. So we can still use (11.9)
to calculate the number density of photons in the CMBR at present. Using Tas
given by (10.45) and taking g=2, we ﬁnd from (11.9) that the present photon
number density is
n
γ,0=4.14×108m−3. (11.17)
It is instructive to compare this with the present number density of baryons(i.e. the total number of protons and neutrons in unit volume). If /Omega1
B,0is the
contribution of baryons to the density parameter, then the number density nB,0

<<<PAGE 351>>>

11.3 Primordial nucleosynthesis 331
of baryons should clearly be /Omega1B,0ρc,0/mp,w h e r e mpis the mass of a proton.
On using (10.29) ,w eg e t
nB,0=11.3/Omega1B,0h2m−3. (11.18)
The ratio of baryon to photon number densities is an interesting dimensionless
quantity which has the value
η=nB,0
nγ,0=2.73×10−8/Omega1B,0h2. (11.19)
As the Universe expands, the photon number density nγfalls as T3,w h i c h ,i n
combination with (10.49) , suggests that nγfalls as a−3. The baryon number
density also is obviously falling as a−3. Hence the ratio of these number
densities does not change with time. In other words, the value of this ratio givenby(11.19) is not only its present value, but also its value at earlier or later times
(as long as there are no reactions to change n
γornBsuddenly). Thus ηis an
important quantity in cosmology and we shall comment on its signiﬁcance later.
11.3 Primordial nucleosynthesis
As indicated in Figure 11.1, the epoch from 1 s to 102s after the Big Bang
was suitable for nuclear reactions. In early work, Gamow (1946) suggested that
most of the heavy nuclei were synthesized during this short epoch just after theBig Bang. As we pointed out in §4.3, there is no stable nucleus of mass 5 or 8
and hence it is not easy for nuclear reactions to synthesize nuclei heavier thanhelium. In the interiors of heavy stars, this mass gap is superseded by the triplealpha reaction (4.28). This reaction, however, involves a three-body process and
cannot take place unless the number density of helium nuclei is sufﬁciently
high. Detailed calculations show that this reaction was very unlikely under the
conditions of the early Universe and heavier nuclei could not be synthesizedthere. We now believe that all heavy nuclei starting from
12C are produced
inside stars.
Realistic calculations of nucleosynthesis in the early Universe have to be
done numerically. Peebles (1966) and Wagoner, Fowler and Hoyle (1967) devel-
oped the ﬁrst codes soon after the discovery of the CMBR, which establishedthat the Universe really began with a hot Big Bang. The code perfected by
Wagoner (1973) came to be regarded as the ‘standard code’ on which most of
the later computations are based. The results depend on ηintroduced in (11.19) .
A higher ηimplies that there were more baryons per unit volume and nuclear
reactions were more likely to take place. Figure 11.2 shows the mass fractions
of various nuclei produced in the early Universe as a function of η. Although
this ﬁgure is based on results obtained by numerical simulation, we shall now
show that at least some of the results can be understood from general arguments.

<<<PAGE 352>>>

332 The thermal history of the Universe
Fig. 11.2 Theoretically calculated primordial abundances of various light nuclei as a
function of η. Adapted from Wagoner (1973).
Let us ﬁrst consider the production of helium. Two protons and two neutrons
have to combine to produce a helium nucleus. During the epoch of nuclear
reactions, the protons and neutrons should take part in reactions like (5.29)
and(5.30), which were listed as possible reactions inside neutron stars. These
reactions are mediated by the weak interaction. The crucial question is whether
these reactions would have been able to reach chemical equilibrium, for which
the condition is given by (11.3). To answer this question, we need to ﬁnd out the
reaction rate /Gamma1, which depends on the coupling constant of the weak interaction
and can be calculated from a knowledge of the half-life of a free neutron.
We know that free neutrons decay by the reaction (5.29) with a half-life of
10.5 minutes. Since not all readers may be familiar with the theory of weak
interactions, we skip the derivation and merely quote the result, which is
/Gamma1
H≈/bracketleftbiggT(in MeV)
0.8M e V/bracketrightbigg3
. (11.20)
It follows from this that the condition of chemical equilibrium (11.3) would
be satisﬁed when T(in MeV) /greatermuch0.8 MeV . Under this situation, we can apply
(11.16) to calculate the number densities of protons or neutrons. Since chemical
potentials are expected to be small compared to the rest masses, it follows from(11.16) that the ratio of these number densities will be
n
n
np=exp/bracketleftBigg
−(mn−mp)c2
κBT/bracketrightBigg
, (11.21)

<<<PAGE 353>>>

11.3 Primordial nucleosynthesis 333
where the various symbols have obvious meanings. There is a very simple
way of understanding (11.21) . We can regard the proton as the ground state
for a baryon and the neutron as the ﬁrst excited state. Then (11.21) can be
regarded merely as the Boltzmann distribution law (2.28) applied to this sit-
uation. As the temperature keeps decreasing, we expect (11.21) to be valid
tillT≈0.8 MeV , after which the reactions will no longer be able to maintain
thermodynamic equilibrium and the ratio nn/npwill be approximately frozen.
Since(mn−mp)c2=1.29 MeV , this frozen ratio is given by
nn
np≈e−1.29
0.8≈0.20. (11.22)
After the neutron number is frozen, these neutrons may eventually be used
up to synthesize helium. Let us assume that nnneutrons in the unit volume
combine with nnprotons to synthesize helium nuclei and the other np−nn
protons remain as protons. Then the helium mass fraction should be given by
2nn
nn+np=2(n n/np)
1+(nn/np)=0.33 (11.23)
on substituting from (11.22) . It may be noted that the ratio nn/npdoes not
remain completely frozen during the time of order 100 s when nucleosynthe-sis takes place, but decreases due to the decay of neutrons by the reaction(5.29) which is still possible even when thermodynamic equilibrium no longer
prevails. So this ratio becomes somewhat less than 0.20 given in (11.22) ,
leading to a smaller helium fraction compared to what is given in (11.23) .
Careful numerical simulations suggest a value of about 0.25 for the heliummass fraction. We see in Figure 11.2 that the helium mass fraction is nearly
independent of η, although it becomes slightly smaller for low η. The rea-
son behind this is not difﬁcult to understand. A low ηimplies a low baryon
number density, which means that the nuclear reactions which build up heliumnuclei would proceed at a slower rate and more neutrons would decay beforebeing bound up inside helium nuclei, thereby leading to a lower helium mass
fraction.
Let us now point out what the observational data tell us. Although the
mass fractions of higher elements are found to vary considerably in different
astrophysical sources, the helium fraction is found to be very similar in widely
different astrophysical systems, lying in the range 0.23–0.27. It is one of the
triumphs of Big Bang cosmology that this observation can be explained verynaturally if we assume that most of the helium was produced by primordialnucleosynthesis, with nuclear reactions in the interiors of stars contributing a
little bit afterwards. The theoretically calculated value of the helium fraction is
completely in agreement with observational data. The fact that the abundancesof higher elements vary considerably in different astrophysical sources suggests

<<<PAGE 354>>>

334 The thermal history of the Universe
that they were not produced in the early Universe, because such a production
would imply a more uniform distribution today.
We now consider the abundance of deuterium2H. It is an intermediate
product in the synthesis of helium, as can be seen from the ppchain reac-
tions listed in §4.3.I f ηis high and the nuclear reaction rate is fast, then
most of the deuterium would get converted into helium during the primordialnucleosynthesis era. On the other hand, a lower ηand a slower reaction rate
would imply that the synthesis of helium would not be so efﬁcient in thenucleosynthesis era and some deuterium would be left over. We therefore seeinFigure 11.2 that the deuterium fraction falls sharply with the increase in η.
From observations, it is found that the cosmic deuterium abundance is not less
than 10
−5. This puts an upper bound on η,w h i c hi sη< 10−9. A larger value
ofηwould not allow the observed deuterium to be left over after the primordial
nucleosynthesis.
This upper bound on ηhas a tremendously important signiﬁcance. It follows
from (11.19) that this upper bound on ηtranslates into an upper bound on /Omega1B,0,
which is /Omega1B,0<0.037 h−2. Even if we take 0.64 as the lowest possible value
ofhin accordance with (9.20), we are still bound by the limit /Omega1B,0<0.09. On
the other hand, the value of /Omega1M,0based on virial masses of clusters of galaxies
was quoted to be about 0.3 in (10.42) . We shall discuss in §14.5 that there is
other evidence suggesting that /Omega1M,0indeed has a value close to 0.3. How do we
reconcile this result with the limit /Omega1B,0<0.09? The only way of reconciling
these results is to conclude that a large part of the matter in the Universe isnon-baryonic in nature and hence is not included when we estimate /Omega1
B,0orη.
This is a truly extraordinary conclusion. The different objects around us and we
ourselves are made up of atoms with nuclei which consist of baryonic matter. If
much of the matter in the Universe is non-baryonic, it means that this matter is
not made up of ordinary atoms we are familiar with. As discussed in §10.5,w e
believe that most of the matter in the Universe does not emit light and hence isdark. We do not know much about the distribution of this dark matter in galaxies
or galaxy clusters. Now we conclude that a major component of this dark matter
is not even made up of ordinary atoms. What is it made up of then? We shallcome to this question in §11.5.
11.4 The cosmic neutrino background
Various thermal processes in the early Universe created photons and that iswhy we still have a cosmic background of blackbody radiation. Exactly sim-
ilarly we would expect a background of neutrinos because neutrinos were
created in the early Universe by reactions like (5.29) and(5.30) which involved
weak interactions and these neutrinos must be present today. When the weak

<<<PAGE 355>>>

11.4 The cosmic neutrino background 335
interaction rate was faster than the rate of expansion of the Universe, these
neutrinos must have been in thermodynamic equilibrium with matter and wouldhave satisﬁed relations like (11.9), (11.10) and(11.15) for fermions. After the
weak interaction rate became slower, the neutrinos would get decoupled frommatter and thereafter must have evolved adiabatically. We know that photonsin thermodynamic equilibrium (i.e. obeying the blackbody spectrum) continueto remain in thermodynamic equilibrium under adiabatic expansion, as we
shall prove explicitly in §14.3. If neutrinos are either massless or continue to
remain relativistic (i.e. the thermal energy continues to remain higher than rest
mass energy m
νc2), then exactly the same considerations should hold for the
background neutrinos as well. In other words, even after the neutrinos have
decoupled from matter, they should continue to have a distribution appropriate
for thermodynamic equilibrium, with the temperature Tfalling as a−1.I nt h e
early Universe, photons, neutrinos and matter particles must all have been inthermodynamic equilibrium and must have had the same temperature. Since the
temperatures of both photons and neutrinos fall as a
−1after decoupling, should
we still expect them to have the same temperature?
The background neutrinos would have the same temperature as the CMBR
photons only if nothing had happened to change the temperature of photons afterthe neutrinos decoupled from the other particles. We believe that one important
phenomenon had changed the temperature of the photons. When the neutrinosdecoupled, the electrons were still relativistic. So the Universe must have beenﬁlled with electrons and positrons with number densities given by (11.9).W h e n
the temperature fell, the electrons and positrons would have annihilated eachother creating photons, thereby putting more energy in the photon backgroundand increasing its temperature. Let T
ibe the temperature before the electron-
positron annihilation (i.e. it would have been the temperature of the electronsand positrons as well as photons) and let T
fbe the enhanced temperature
of the photons after this annihilation. Since this is an adiabatic process, weexpect the entropy to remain conserved. Equating the ﬁnal entropy with the
initial entropy, we shall now obtain a relation between T
iand Tf.T oﬁ n d
the initial entropy density si, we have to add up the contributions of photons,
electrons and positrons as given by (11.15) . For all these particles, we have
g=2 – because of the two polarization states of photons and two spin states of
electrons or positrons. Remembering that photons are bosons whereas electrons
and positrons are fermions, we get
si=/parenleftbigg4
3+7
8×4
3+7
8×4
3/parenrightbigg
aBT3
i=11
4×4
3aBT3
i. (11.24)
The ﬁnal entropy density sfis due only to the photons and must be
sf=4
3aBT3
f. (11.25)

<<<PAGE 356>>>

336 The thermal history of the Universe
Equating siandsfas given by the above two equations, we get
Tf
Ti=/parenleftbigg11
4/parenrightbigg1/3
. (11.26)
In other words, the photon temperature jumped by this factor after the electron-
positron annihilation, but the neutrino temperature did not change because the
neutrinos constituted a distinct system decoupled from other matter. Since both
the photon temperature and the neutrino temperature afterwards fell as a−1,t h e
photon temperature would still be larger than the neutrino temperature by thisfactor (11/4)
1/3. The present neutrino temperature should be
Tν,0=/parenleftbigg4
11/parenrightbigg1/3
T0, (11.27)
where T0is the present temperature of the CMBR given by (10.45) .O nt a k i n g
T0=2.735 K, we get
Tν,0=1.95 K. (11.28)
We can calculate the energy density of the neutrino background by using (11.10) .
Since there are three types of neutrinos (associated with electrons, muons andτ-particles) and each neutrino has an antineutrino, we take g=6 so that the
present energy density of the neutrino background, according to (11.10) ,i s
ρ
ν,0=7
83
c2aB/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg4
11/parenrightbigg1/3
T0/bracketrightBigg4
=0.68aB
c2T4
0=0.68ρ γ,0, (11.29)
where ργ,0is the present energy density of the CMBR. We have already made
use of this in writing down (10.47) , which is obtained by adding the energy
density of neutrinos to the energy density of photons.
At the end of this discussion, we again stress one point which we mentioned
at the beginning of this section. The contribution to density by neutrinos will begiven by (11.29) only if the neutrinos are still relativistic. If the neutrinos have
mass and if the thermal energies become smaller than m
νc2with the fall in
temperature, then it is possible for neutrinos to contribute much more to thedensity because there would be a lower bound in the contribution to densitymade by a neutrino. A neutrino with mass m
νhas to contribute at least mνto
density. We discuss this further in the next section.
11.5 The nature of dark matter
We have already pointed out that much of the matter in our Universe doesnot emit light. Evidence for dark matter comes from the rotation curves ofspiral galaxies (§9.2.2) and from the application of the virial theorem to galaxy

<<<PAGE 357>>>

11.5 The nature of dark matter 337
clusters (§9.5). In fact, luminous matter contributes only a small fraction to
the total matter density of the Universe, as discussed in §10.5. Primordial
nucleosynthesis calculations described in §11.3 lead us to the extraordinary
conclusion that much of the dark matter is non-baryonic, i.e. not made up
of ordinary atoms. We now brieﬂy discuss the question of what could be theconstituents of dark matter.
While neutrinos are very light particles, physicists wondered for a very long
time whether they are massless or have very small mass. If neutrinos have massand the masses of the three types of neutrinos are different, then it is possiblefor neutrinos to have oscillations in which one type of neutrino gets convertedinto another. Since these oscillations depend on the mass difference between
different kinds of neutrinos, the discovery of neutrino oscillations led to the
conclusion that |/Delta1m|
2should be of order 5 ×10−5eV2(Ahmad et al. ,2002).
While we do not know the individual masses of different types of neutrinos,we now know that neutrinos have mass. Is it then possible that the background
neutrinos are responsible for the non-baryonic mass part of dark matter?
To answer this question, let us ﬁrst ﬁnd out the number density of neutrinos.
As long as neutrinos are relativistic, the number density is given by (11.9).
It turns out that (11.9) can still be used to calculate the number density of
neutrinos even if they had become non-relativistic, provided we take Tto be
a quantity which falls off as a
−1in the expanding Universe. After learning
general relativity, the reader is asked in Exercise 14.4 to analyse the dynamics
of particles in the expanding Universe and to show this. On taking g=6a n d
substituting the temperature given by (11.28) , we obtain from (11.9) that
nν,0=3.36×108m−3. (11.30)
Ifmνis the average mass of neutrinos, then we have to divide mνnν,0byρc,0
given by (10.29) to get the density parameter /Omega1ν,0due to neutrinos, which turns
out to be
/Omega1ν,0=3.18×10−2h−2/parenleftBigmν
eV/parenrightBig
, (11.31)
where mνhas to be in eV . We have seen in (10.42) that/Omega1M,0should have a
value of about 0.3. Since the neutrino contribution to the density parameter has
to be less than this, we get the following limit by demanding that /Omega1ν,0given by
(11.31) should be less than 0.3:
mν<9.4h2eV. (11.32)
This is known as the Cowsik–McClelland limit and was a more stringent limit
on the neutrino mass than the limit from laboratory experiments when it was
ﬁrst pointed out (Cowsik and McClelland ,1972). This is an example of how
astrophysical considerations can be relevant in particle physics.

<<<PAGE 358>>>

338 The thermal history of the Universe
If we hypothesize that neutrinos have an average mass close to the Cowsik–
McClelland limit (11.32) , then we can solve the mystery of non-baryonic dark
matter because the neutrinos will provide the estimated mass of this dark matter.
There are, however, some serious difﬁculties with this hypothesis that dark
matter is made up of neutrinos with mass just a little less than the limit givenby(11.32) . Although we do not have a good idea about the distribution of
dark matter, observations indicate that it is not uniformly spread throughout
the Universe. Estimates of the masses of spiral galaxies and galaxy clusters
suggest that much of the dark matter should be gravitationally bound withthese systems. For this to be possible, the typical kinetic energy of dark matterparticles should not exceed the gravitational binding energy m
ν|/Phi1|,w h e r e/Phi1
is the gravitational potential associated with structures like galaxies and galaxyclusters. This condition is hard to satisfy if the limit of m
νis given by (11.32) .
If dark matter particles satisfy (11.32) , then that type of dark matter is called
hot dark matter . Such dark matter would tend to be distributed throughout the
Universe without clumping in the gravitational structures like galaxies or galaxystructures. If we want dark matter to be bound in these gravitational structures,then we need to have cold dark matter, in which particles are more massive,
move more slowly at a given temperature (since the thermal velocity is given
by√
2κBT/m) and can get gravitationally bound in galaxies or galaxy clusters.
When we discuss structure formation in §11.9, we shall point out that cold dark
matter helps to fulﬁl some requirements of structure formation as well.
In view of (11.32) , is it possible to have cold dark matter with particles
more massive than this limit? Note that we obtained (11.32) by using (11.9),
which would be applicable only if the particles were relativistic at the time of
decoupling. If the particles are so heavy that they were already non-relativistic
at the time of decoupling, then the number density would be given by (11.16)
rather than (11.9). Some supersymmetric theories of particle physics suggest
the possibility of some particle with mass of about a few GeV , which acts with
other particles only through the weak interaction. Such a particle is expected to
get decoupled from the other constituents of the Universe when the temperature
was of order MeV . This particle would remain in thermodynamic equilibriumbefore the decoupling and its number density at the time of decoupling would begiven by (11.16) . The exponential factor in (11.16) would ensure a low number
density of this particle. If the particle is more massive than about 3 GeV , detailedcalculations show that its number density would be sufﬁciently suppressed bythis exponential factor and it would not make a contribution to the densityparameter more than what is estimated from observations (i.e. /Omega1
M,0≈0.3).
The limit that the particles of cold dark matter have to be more massive than3 GeV is known as the Lee–Weinberg limit (Lee and Weinberg, 1977).
We basically conclude that dark matter particles could not have mass in the
range 10 eV to 3 GeV . They either have to be lighter than 10 eV (hot dark matter)
or heavier than 3 GeV (cold dark matter). Current evidence suggests the second

<<<PAGE 359>>>

11.6 Some considerations of the very early Universe 339
possibility that the dark matter in the Universe should be cold dark matter made
up of particles heavier than 3 GeV . We shall discuss this point further in §11.9.
11.6 Some considerations of the very early Universe
In§11.3 we considered the nuclear reaction era when the temperature of the
Universe was of order MeV (≈1010K). The next two sections followed the fate
of particles which got decoupled during this era. This era roughly lasted fromabout 10
−1st o1 02s after the Big Bang, according to (10.67) or(10.69) . With
new developments in particle physics in the last few decades, there has been
considerable interest in investigating what might have happened in the Universe
at still earlier times when the temperature was of the order of GeV or higher.The Universe at this extremely early epoch is usually referred to as the very
early Universe. The study of the very early Universe is still a rather speculativesubject, without too many connections with present-day astrophysical data. It isbeyond the scope of this book to get into that subject. We merely touch upontwo topics which have some astrophysical relevance.
11.6.1 The horizon problem and inﬂation
Since the Universe began with a violent Big Bang, it is very unlikely thatthe Universe was created as a very homogeneous system. Why then is theUniverse so homogeneous now? Suppose inhomogeneities are suddenly created
inside a gas kept within a container. We expect that the gas from regions of
higher density will move to regions of lower density to establish homogeneityagain. If c
sis the sound speed, we expect that regions of size cstwill become
homogeneous in time t. At the present time when the age of the Universe is t,w e
could not have received information from regions further away than ctbecause
any information starting from those regions beyond ctwould not be able to
reach us by today. Hence a sphere of radius ctaround us is our horizon.W e
can have causal contacts only with regions inside this horizon. We may expect
the Universe to have become homogeneous over regions of horizon size, but not
over larger regions. It may be noted that an accurate calculation of the horizonin an expanding Universe requires a more careful analysis of light propagation(to be discussed in §14.3). But we need not get into those details.
There is enough evidence to show that the Universe is actually homoge-
neous over regions much larger than the horizon. We have discussed the CMBRin§10.5. We shall point out in §11.7 that photons in the CMBR reach us
after travelling through space for time comparable to the age of the Universe.
Consider CMBR photons coming from two diametrically opposite regions in
the sky. These two regions are causally connected to us, but are not causallyconnected to each other because the information from one of the regions had

<<<PAGE 360>>>

340 The thermal history of the Universe
just time enough to reach us and did not yet have time to reach the other region.
The isotropy of CMBR, however, suggests that these two regions which appar-ently had never been in causal contact have the same physical characteristics,
since they produce CMBR of exactly the same nature. How is it possible that
regions which are out of each other’s horizons and which have never been incausal contact are so homogeneous? This is known as the horizon problem in
cosmology.
Guth (1981) proposed a solution to the horizon problem. On the basis of
some ﬁeld theoretic arguments which are beyond the scope of this book, Guth
(1981) suggested that there was a brief phase in the very early Universe whenthe Universe expanded very rapidly and became larger by several orders of
magnitude. This is called inﬂation. If this is true, then the Universe before
inﬂation must have been much, much smaller than what we would expect it
to be if inﬂation had not taken place. Different parts of the Universe could havebeen causally connected if the Universe was very small before inﬂation and
thereby the homogeneity of the Universe could have been established.
11.6.2 Baryogenesis
According to (11.19) , the photon number density nγ,0is nearly eight orders of
magnitude larger than the baryon number density nB,0. As long as new photons
or baryons are not created, both these numbers fall as a−3and their ratio does
not change. Even at the time when photons decoupled from matter, this ratiomust have had this value. Why are there many more photons than baryons?
In the early Universe when the temperature was higher than a few GeV
and baryon-antibaryon pairs could be formed, the number of either baryons or
antibaryons would have been comparable to the number of photons, since all
these numbers would have been given by (11.9). But the number of baryons
must have been slightly larger than the number of antibaryons to ensure that
some baryons were left over after the baryon-antibaryon annihilation whichmust have taken place when the temperature fell below GeV . If /Delta1n
Bwas the
excess in the number density of baryons compared to the number density ofantibaryons before the annihilation, then we must have
/Delta1n
B
nB≈10−8(11.33)
if we want the baryon-to-photon ratio to have a value like this after annihilation.
Many physicists feel that it is esthetically more satisfying to assume that
the Universe was created with equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons ratherthan to assume that the Universe was created with such a tiny imbalance. If the
Universe really had equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons in the beginning,
then the net baryon number /Delta1n
Bwas initially zero and it had to change to a
non-zero value later. We ﬁnd the baryon number to be a conserved quantity

<<<PAGE 361>>>

11.7 The formation of atoms and the last scattering surface 341
in all particle interactions we study at the present time. If the Universe was
created with equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons, then the small excessof baryons over antibaryons could arise only if baryon number conservation
was violated in the very early Universe. This is known as the problem of
baryogenesis and has been of some interest to theoretical particle physicists.
11.7 The formation of atoms and the last scattering surface
After discussing the physics of the nucleosynthesis era and its consequences in§11.3–§11.5, we took a brief digression in §11.6 to raise some theoretical issues
pertaining to still earlier times. Now we again follow the evolutionary historyof the Universe and look at some of the later landmarks in that evolutionaryhistory. After the electron-positron annihilation discussed in §11.4, the Universe
consisted of the basic constituents of ordinary matter – protons, helium nuclei
and electrons – in addition to the non-baryonic matter and the relativistic
particles (photons and neutrinos). We have seen in (10.52) that the Universe
became matter-dominated when its size was 1 +z=2.3×10
4/Omega1M,0h2times
smaller than its present size. This happened about 104yr after the Big Bang, as
indicated in (10.64) . Since the temperature at that time was 2.735 K multiplied
by this redshift factor, the Universe was still too hot for the formation of atoms.
We know that matter and radiation were in equilibrium in the early
Universe. We now ask the question how long this coupling between matter
and radiation continued. We have seen in §2.6.1 that photons interact with
electrons through Thomson scattering. As long as electrons are free, we expect
Thomson scattering to keep matter and radiation in equilibrium. Radiation getsdecoupled from matter when atoms form and all electrons get locked up inside
atoms. We can apply the Saha equation (2.29) to estimate the ionization fraction
which gives a measure of the number of free electrons. The ionization potential
for hydrogen is χ=13.6 eV , corresponding to a temperature of 1 .5×10
5K
by(10.68) . However, a simple application of (2.29) shows that the number
of free electrons becomes insigniﬁcant only when the temperature falls to amuch lower value of about 3000 K (see Exercise 11.4 ). We thus conclude
that the Universe becomes transparent to photons when the temperature fallsbelow 3000 K, causing radiation to get decoupled from matter. Interestingly, the
plot of stellar opacity in Figure 2.8 shows that stellar material also becomes
transparent when the temperature falls to about this value. Since the present
CMBR temperature is 2.735 K, a simple application of (10.49) suggests that the
Universe must have been about 1000 times smaller in size when the temperature
was 3000 K. A more careful calculation gives the redshift z
dec≈1100 as the era
when matter-radiation decoupling took place. The Universe became transparent
after this decoupling and photons no longer interacted with matter.

<<<PAGE 362>>>

342 The thermal history of the Universe
All the CMBR photons which reach us today last interacted with matter at
the era of redshift zdec≈1100. These photons started as blackbody radiation of
temperature 3000 K. The redshift of 1100 has made them the present blackbody
radiation of temperature 2.735 K. When we look at the Sun, we basically see
photons which last interacted with matter at the solar surface, since the spacebetween the solar surface and us is transparent to visible light. So the photonscoming from the Sun show us the solar surface. In exactly the same way, the
CMBR photons coming from all directions show us a surface of primordial
matter surrounding us as it existed at redshift z
dec≈1100. This is called the
last scattering surface . If the primordial matter at redshift zdec≈1100 was
completely homogeneous, then this last scattering surface would appear smooth
and CMBR coming from it would be totally isotropic. On the other hand, if
there were inhomogeneities in the last scattering surface, they would manifestthemselves as angular anisotropies in the CMBR.
11.7.1 Primary anisotropies in CMBR
We believe that the matter distribution in the primordial Universe was reason-ably homogeneous. A standard paradigm in cosmology is that there were somesmall initial perturbations in matter density which kept on being enhanced withtime as the Universe expanded and eventually led to the formation of structures
that we see today – stars, galaxies and galaxy clusters. If this paradigm is cor-
rect, then there must have been some density perturbations in the last scatteringsurface, causing anisotropies in the CMBR. We pointed out in §10.5 that the
mission COBE showed the spectrum of CMBR to be a perfect blackbody spec-
trum (Mather et al. ,1990). COBE also kept looking for anisotropies in CMBR
and ﬁnally discovered them ( Smoot et al. ,1992). It was found that CMBR looks
exactly like blackbody radiation in all directions, but the temperature of the
blackbody radiation was found to vary slightly from direction to direction. The
temperature variation was discovered to be of order
/Delta1T
T≈10−5. (11.34)
The upper panel of Figure 11.3 shows a map of this temperature anisotropy
as discovered by COBE ( Smoot et al. ,1992). Since COBE had an angular
resolution of about 7◦, the temperature variation at smaller angular scales could
not be determined by COBE. This was ﬁnally achieved by the later mission
WMAP. The lower panel of Figure 11.3 is the temperature anisotropy obtained
by WMAP ( Bennett et al. ,2003). We shall discuss in §11.9 how these inhomo-
geneities in the last scattering surface grew to produce structures. The typical
angular size of anisotropies can be used to put important constraints on various
cosmological parameters. This topic will be taken up in §14.5. The anisotropies
in CMBR resulting from irregularities in the last scattering surface are often

<<<PAGE 363>>>

11.7 The formation of atoms and the last scattering surface 343
Fig. 11.3 Map of the CMBR temperature distribution in different directions of the sky,
as obtained by (a) COBE ( Smoot et al., 1992): upper panel; and (b) WMAP (Bennett
et al., 2003): lower panel.
called primary anisotropies, to distinguish them from anisotropies which may
arise during the passage of the CMBR photons from the last scattering surface
to us.
11.7.2 The Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect
We have said that the photons from the last scattering surface reach us without
interacting with matter any more. This is an almost correct statement, sincemost of the space between the last scattering surface and us is devoid of freeelectrons. There is, however, one important exception. We have discussed in
§9.5 that galaxy clusters contain hot gas, which is ionized and has free electrons.
So CMBR photons passing through galaxy clusters can interact with the free
electrons in the hot gas. In normal Thomson scattering, photons scatter off elec-trons without any signiﬁcant change in energy. Thomson scattering involving
an energy exchange between photons and electrons is called the Compton effect
(Compton, 1923). While the mathematical theory of Thomson scattering can
be developed by treating the photons as making up a classical electromagnetic

<<<PAGE 364>>>

344 The thermal history of the Universe
wave (as discussed in §2.6.1), the theory of the Compton effect requires a
treatment of photons as particles. The Compton effect becomes important when
the photon energy is not negligible compared to the rest mass energy of the
electron (as in the case of X-ray photons) and some energy can be transferred
from the photon to the electron (see, for example, Yarwood ,1958, §7.20). On
the other hand, when an electron with high kinetic energy interacts with a low-energy photon, we can have the inverse Compton effect in which energy is
transferred from the electron to the photon. This happens when CMBR photonsinteract with the free electrons in a galaxy cluster, which are highly energeticbecause of the high temperature of the cluster gas. This transfer of energy fromthe electrons in the hot cluster gas to the CMBR photons is known as the
Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect (Sunyaev and Zeldovich, 1972). As a result of this,
some of the radio photons in the CMBR get scattered to become X-ray photons,
leading to a depletion of CMBR intensity in radio frequencies in the directionsof galaxy clusters. From this depletion in intensity, one can estimate the optical
depth (usually /lessmuch1) of CMBR photons through the cluster gas. For a spherical
cluster of radius R
cand internal electron density ne, the maximum optical depth
at the centre would be of order 2σ TneRc,w h e r eσ Tis the Thomson scattering
cross-section.
One important application of the Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect is that it can be
used to estimate the distances of galaxy clusters, thereby leading to a determi-
nation of the Hubble constant. We get neRcfrom the depletion in the CMBR
intensity. The angular size of the cluster is equal to 2 Rcdivided by its distance.
The X-ray emission from the cluster gas by bremsstrahlung is governed by(8.70), which gives the emissivity per unit volume. On measuring the X-rayﬂux from the cluster received by us and combining it with the other measured
quantities such as the angular size of the cluster and the depletion in the CMBR
intensity, we can ﬁnd the distance to the cluster (see Exercise 11.5). The Hubble
constant derived from the Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect somehow turns out to beslightly lower than its value measured by the other methods.
11.8 Evidence for evolution during redshifts z∼1–6
We can get direct information about some material object in the astronomicalUniverse if it either emits radiation or absorbs radiation passing through it. We
can study the distribution of primordial matter at the moment of its decoupling
from radiation by analysing the CMBR which was emitted by this matter. Afterthe matter-radiation decoupling, however, the matter in the Universe becametransparent and did not emit any more radiation until stars and galaxies formed
long afterwards. The era between the matter-radiation decoupling (around z∼
1100) and the era when the ﬁrst stars formed is often called the ‘dark age’ in
cosmology. During this dark age, matter did not emit any radiation that we can

<<<PAGE 365>>>

11.8 Evidence for evolution during redshifts z∼1–6 345
detect today, although the CMBR that had got decoupled from matter remained
present and kept on being redshifted to lower temperatures as the Universeexpanded. We now discuss observations which give us an indication how the
Universe might have looked like at the end of the dark age, when there were
again radiation-emitting sources which we can try to discover today.
This new ﬁeld of studying astronomical objects at redshifts lying in the
range z∼1–6 has blossomed only in the last few years when telescopes like
the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) allowed astronomers to study faraway faintsources which could not be studied earlier. We do not plan to provide a fullcoverage of this newly emerging ﬁeld here. We shall restrict our discussion hereonly to the question of what the Universe looked like at these high redshifts –
especially to the question whether the Universe looked substantially different
from the present Universe and whether we see clear indications of evolution.Another important issue is whether we can determine important cosmologicalparameters (such as /Omega1
M,0) by using high-redshift observations. Since this topic
requires a knowledge of relativistic cosmology, we postpone the discussion ofthis important topic to Chapter 14 .
11.8.1 Quasars and galaxies at high redshift
Since quasars are intrinsically brighter than normal galaxies, they are muchmore likely to be discovered at large redshifts compared to normal galaxies.Quasars were therefore amongst the ﬁrst objects at high redshifts to be studiedsystematically by astronomers. Figure 11.4 shows a plot of quasar number
density in co-moving volume as a function of redshift. Keeping in mind that
Fig. 11.4 The plot of quasar number density in co-moving volume as a function of
redshift. From Peterson (1997, p. 17), based on the data catalogued by Hewitt and
Burbidge (1993). ( c/circlecopyrtCambridge University Press.)

<<<PAGE 366>>>

346 The thermal history of the Universe
higher redshifts mean earlier times, it is very clear from this plot that the
quasar number density has changed with the age of the Universe. It was highestaround redshift z∼2. The evolution of quasar number density was one of the
ﬁrst pieces of evidence of evolution in the world of galaxies discovered byastronomers. As discussed in §9.4.3, we believe that quasar energy emission
is caused by gas falling into a supermassive black hole. After the formationof a galaxy, it presumably takes some time for a supermassive black hole to
develop at its centre. It is likely that the majority of galaxies formed well before
the redshift of z∼2 when quasars were most abundant, but central black holes
took time to form. Since the black hole has to be fed with infalling gas in orderto produce quasar activity, we expect such activity to be more prevalent when
more gas is available. It is possible that the availability of gas decreases with
the age of a galaxy as more gas is used up for star formation. This scenariogives a qualitative explanation of why the quasar number density was maximumaround z∼2. At earlier times, not many galaxies had supermassive black holes
at their centres. At later times, the availability of gas for feeding the black holesdecreased. This suggests that there must be many dead quasars in our presentUniverse. These are galaxies with supermassive black holes at their centres,which had acted as quasars once upon a time, but have now run out of gas to
feed the central engine.
Since a powerful telescope can detect many millions of galaxies, it is
notoriously difﬁcult to isolate high-redshift galaxies in this vast sample. Also,
a high-redshift normal galaxy would appear very faint to us (as will be shown
§14.4.1) and can be imaged only after a very long exposure. In December 1995
HST imaged a very small portion of the sky without any special characteristicsfor about 10 days (Williams et al. ,1996). The resulting image, known as the
Hubble Deep Field ,i ss h o w ni nFigure 11.5. It shows about 1500 galaxies at
various stages of evolution, some of the galaxies being much fainter than anygalaxies imaged before. From a detailed analysis of the Hubble Deep Field, it isconcluded that the star formation rate was maximum during redshifts z∼1–1.5
(Hughes et al. ,1998).
To sum up, although some galaxies and quasars might have formed even
before z∼6, such phenomena as quasar activity and star formation reached
their maxima much later. It is, however, clear that the Universe revealed by the
furthest quasars and furthest normal galaxies is quite different from the present
Universe. There is unmistakable evidence for evolution. We now consider thematerial in the space between galaxies, to ﬁnd out if this material gives anymore clues in completing the story of the earliest galaxies.
11.8.2 The intergalactic medium
Apart from the gas in clusters of galaxies, is there matter in regions ofspace between clusters and outside of galaxies? Even if there is matter in the

<<<PAGE 367>>>

11.8 Evidence for evolution during redshifts z∼1–6 347
Fig. 11.5 The Hubble Deep Field, photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
From Williams et al. (1996). ( c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with
permission from Astronomical Journal .)
intergalactic space, the question is how we can detect it. The emission from
the intergalactic medium lying outside galaxy clusters has not been detectedin any band of the electromagnetic spectrum. The only other way of checking
the existence of the intergalactic medium is to look for absorption lines in
the spectra of objects lying very faraway. Since quasars are the most farawayobjects which are bright enough to obtain spectra from, looking for absorptionlines in the spectra of quasars is the best way of searching for the intergalactic
medium.
Let us consider the Lyman-α absorption line caused by the transition
1s→2pin a hydrogen atom. If an absorbing system is mainly made up of
neutral hydrogen atoms, then we expect this line to be one of the strongestabsorption lines. The rest wavelength of this line is λ
Lα=1216 ˚A. Suppose a
quasar is at redshift zem. Since quasars typically have broad emission lines, we
expect a broad emission line at the redshifted wavelength (1+zem)λLαof the
Lyman- αline. If there is some absorbing material on the line of sight lying at
some intermediate redshift zabs(obviously we expect 0 <zabs<zem), then we
expect absorption at wavelength (1+zabs)λLα. If there is neutral hydrogen gas
all along the line of sight, then we would expect to see an absorption trough from

<<<PAGE 368>>>

348 The thermal history of the Universe
Fig. 11.6 The spectrum of a quasar at redshift zem=2.6. From Wolfe et al. (1993).
(c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from Astrophysical
Journal.)
λLαto(1+zem)λLαin the spectrum of the quasar corresponding to the full run
of possible values of zabs. The presence or absence of such an absorption trough
in the spectrum of a distant quasar would give us an estimate of the amount of
neutral hydrogen gas over the line of sight ( Gunn and Peterson, 1965).
Figure 11.6 shows the spectrum of a quasar at redshift zem=2.60, for
which the Lyman- αemission line is at 4380 ˚A. We, however, do not see a
continuous absorption trough from 1216 ˚A to 4380 ˚A. Instead of a trough, we
ﬁnd a large number of narrowly spaced absorption lines. These absorption linesare collectively referred to as the Lyman-α forest. This implies that we do not
have a uniform distribution of neutral hydrogen gas along the line of sight. There
must be many clouds of neutral hydrogen lying on the path at different redshifts,
which are causing the absorption lines. In the particular spectrum shown inFigure 11.6, there is a prominent absorption feature at 3650 ˚A (corresponding
to redshift z
abs=2.0) where the radiation seems to fall almost to zero intensity.
There must be a very large cloud at this redshift zabs=2.0. Such large dips
in the spectra indicating the presence of large hydrogen clouds are found veryoften in the spectra of many distant quasars.
Readers wishing to know how to analyse these features in quasar spectra
quantitatively may consult Peebles (1993, §23). Here we summarize the main
conclusions qualitatively. The absence of an absorption trough, which is oftenreferred to as the Gunn–Peterson test (Gunn and Peterson ,1965), shows that
there is very little neutral hydrogen gas outside the clouds and one quanti-
tatively ﬁnds that the number density of hydrogen atoms has to be less than
about 10
−6m−3. For the sake of comparison, remember that the density of
X-ray emitting gas in galaxy clusters is of order 103particles m−3.T h el a r g e
hydrogen clouds producing prominent dips in the quasar spectra (like the dip at
3650 ˚Ai nFigure 11.6 ) are estimated to have masses comparable to the mass
of a typical galaxy. The most obvious possibility is that these are galaxies in
the making. The smaller clouds producing the absorption lines of the Lyman- α

<<<PAGE 369>>>

11.9 Structure formation 349
forest, however, have much smaller masses of the order of a few hundred
M⊙. Careful analysis of observational data shows that these smaller clouds are
most abundant at redshifts z≈2–3 and become much less abundant at lower
redshifts.
The spectra of distant quasars like the one shown in Figure 11.6 make it
clear that neutral hydrogen is mainly found inside isolated clouds. There is very
little neutral hydrogen outside these clouds. But does this mean that there is no
material outside the clouds and space is really empty in those regions? A more
plausible assumption is that there is hydrogen outside the clouds, but it has beenionized and hence is not producing the Lyman- αabsorption line. As pointed
out in §11.7, matter was ionized before z≈1100. Then neutral atoms formed,
leading to the matter-radiation decoupling. When the ﬁrst stars, galaxies andquasars started forming, the ionizing radiation from these objects presumablyionized the intergalactic medium again. This is called the reionization .T h e
absence of neutral hydrogen atoms between the distant quasars and us (apart
from the Lyman- αclouds) is believed to be a consequence of this reionization.
However, if light started from a very distant quasar before the reionization, then
the light path would initially pass through space ﬁlled with neutral hydrogenand we would expect to see a Gunn–Peterson trough in the spectrum at the
lower-wavelength side of the redshifted Lyman- αline. There are indications
that quasars with redshifts larger than z≈6 show such troughs in their spectra
(Becker et al. ,2001).
Altogether, we get a picture of the Universe at redshifts z∼2–6 which
is very different from the present-day Universe. Already some quasars have
formed and ionized the intergalactic medium. Embedded in this ionizedmedium, there are clouds of neutral hydrogen (presumably their interiors are
shielded from ionizing photons due to higher densities) with masses of order
a few hundred M
⊙. There are also more massive clouds which appear like
galaxies in the making.
11.9 Structure formation
As discussed in §11.7.1, matter was distributed fairly uniformly at the era
z≈1100 when matter-radiation decoupling took place, the density perturba-
tions at that era being of the order of 10−5. On the other hand, the observations
discussed in §11.8 suggest that the ﬁrst stars, galaxies and quasars should have
formed some time before z≈6. How do we connect the two? Presumably the
very small density perturbations present in era z≈1100 grew by gravitational
instability to become the ﬁrst stars and galaxies before z≈6. Understanding
the details of how this happened is the subject of structure formation.T h i si sa n
enormously complex subject on which quite a lot of research is being done atthe present time. Here we shall touch upon only some of the key issues.

<<<PAGE 370>>>

350 The thermal history of the Universe
In§8.3 we discussed the gravitational instability ﬁrst studied by Jeans
(1902), which showed that density enhancements having masses larger than
the Jeans mass keep growing due to the stronger gravitational forces in the
regions of density enhancements. The analysis in §8.3 was done for gas in a
non-expanding region. To understand the growth of density perturbations in
the expanding Universe, we have to carry out the Jeans analysis against anexpanding background. This analysis is somewhat more complicated and is
given in many standard textbooks ( Kolb and Turner, 1990, §9.2; Narlikar, 1993,
§7.2). Here we shall not reproduce that derivation (but see Exercise 11.6). Let
us summarize the main conclusions only.
1. It is found that the perturbations remained frozen and could not grow as
long as the Universe was radiation-dominated.
2. Only after the Universe becomes matter-dominated, can those perturba-
tions grow for which the wavenumber kis less than k
Jgiven by (8.21).
3. In contrast to the result in §8.3 that growing perturbations grow expo-
nentially in time, a growing density perturbation in the matter-dominated
expanding Universe is found to grow as
δρ
ρ∝t2/3. (11.35)
According to (10.60) , the scale factor ain the matter-dominated Universe
also grows as the 2/3p o w e ro ft . On the basis of (10.60) and(11.35) , we can
write
δρ
ρ∝a. (11.36)
It should be remembered that this result is based on a linear analysis, like thelinear analysis presented in §8.3. When the perturbation grows to be of the order
of 1, the nonlinear effects become important and thereafter the perturbation cangrow much faster than what is suggested by (11.36) .
The result (11.36) at once leads us to a difﬁculty. The density perturbations
were of order 10
−5at the era z≈1100. Since the scale factor has grown by a
factor of 103between that era and the present time, a straightforward application
of(11.36) suggests that δρ/ρ at the present time should be of the order of
only 10−2. This certainly contradicts the existence of various structures in the
Universe that we see at the present time. Since 10−2is quite small compared
to 1, we cannot hope to get around this difﬁculty by invoking nonlinear effects.
Where could our arguments go wrong?
To ﬁnd a clue for solving this puzzle, let us look at the expression of the
critical wavenumber kJas given by (8.21). For the early matter-dominated era,
if we take a∝t2/3, the Friedmann equation (10.27) gives
ρ≈1
6πGt2(11.37)

<<<PAGE 371>>>

11.9 Structure formation 351
on neglecting the curvature term kc2/a2, which was insigniﬁcant at early times.
On substituting this for ρ0in(8.21),w eg e t
k2
J=2
3c2st2. (11.38)
The corresponding Jeans wavelength is
λJ=2π
kJ=√
6πcst. (11.39)
A perturbation would grow only if its wavelength is larger than λJ.W en o w
consider the sound speed csappearing in (11.39) . After the matter-radiation
decoupling, it is given by (8.15). Before the formation of atoms, however, a
perturbation in matter density would be accompanied by a perturbation in the
radiation ﬁeld which was coupled to matter. Since the pressure of the radiationﬁeld is P=(1/3)ρ c
2, the sound speed in the radiation ﬁeld can be as large as
cs=1√
3c.
On substituting this in (11.39) ,w eﬁ n d
λJ=√
2πct. (11.40)
This means that the Jeans length was even somewhat larger than the horizonsize (of order ct) before matter-radiation decoupling and then suddenly fell to a
much smaller value given by (11.39) after the decoupling when c
sbecomes
equal to the ordinary sound speed in the gas. Although perturbations can,in principle, grow after the Universe became matter-dominated, most of theperturbations would have wavelengths smaller than the Jeans length (11.40)
and would not grow as long as matter and radiation remained coupled. Only
after the radiation becomes decoupled, does the Jeans length become small and
perturbations larger than it start growing.
We have discussed in §11.5 the possibility that much of the matter in the
Universe is non-baryonic cold dark matter. If this is true, then the situation
can be somewhat tricky. We expect only the baryonic matter to interact with
radiation and to be coupled with it till the formation of atoms. Since the colddark matter can have only the weak interaction, it must have become decoupledfrom the other components of the Universe when the temperature fell below
MeV values. By the time the Universe became matter-dominated, the cold dark
matter was totally decoupled and the Jeans length for the cold dark matter wouldbe given by (11.39) , with c
srepresenting the sound speed in the cold dark matter.
This Jeans length would be much smaller than the Jeans length of baryonic mat-
ter given by (11.40) before the formation of atoms. So, as soon as the Universe
became matter-dominated and it became possible for perturbations to grow,
the perturbations in cold dark matter larger than its Jeans length would start

<<<PAGE 372>>>

352 The thermal history of the Universe
Fig. 11.7 Sketch indicating how perturbations in baryonic matter (solid line) and in
cold dark matter (dashed line) would have grown.
growing. Eventually, when the atoms form, the baryonic matter also becomes
decoupled and its Jeans length drops drastically, allowing perturbations larger
than its Jeans length to grow. By that time, the perturbations in the cold dark
matter would have grown considerably and would have produced gravitationalpotential wells in the regions where the cold dark matter got clumped. Oncethe baryonic perturbations are allowed to grow after the formation of atoms, the
baryonic matter would quickly fall in the gravitational potential wells created
by the cold dark matter.
Figure 11.7 gives a sketch of how the perturbations must have grown. When
the Universe was radiation-dominated till t=t
eq, the perturbations in the bary-
onic matter and the cold dark matter must have had similar amplitudes and couldnot grow. Since perturbations in the baryonic matter remained frozen till thedecoupling time t=t
decand CMBR observations tell us that the perturbations
at the time tdecwere of amplitude 10−5, we expect the primordial perturbations
also to have this amplitude. Since cold dark matter perturbations started growingfrom t=t
eqwhen a=aeqgiven by (10.52) and the perturbation growth rate
is given by (11.36) , we expect the dark matter perturbations to become close
to 1 by the present time. After t=tdec, the baryonic perturbations fell in the
potential wells of the cold dark matter and started following the cold darkmatter perturbations, as indicated by the solid line in Figure 11.7. Hence the
baryonic perturbations also should become of order 1 by the present time. Whenthe perturbations are no longer very small compared to 1, nonlinear effects start
becoming important and the clustering of matter to produce various structures
proceeds at a much faster rate. Evolution due to these nonlinear effects can bestudied best by carrying on detailed numerical simulations.

<<<PAGE 373>>>

Exercises 353
Many ambitious numerical simulations of structure formation are being
carried out by different groups, following the pioneering early work by Davis
et al. (1985). These simulations are still not realistic enough to show matter
eventually forming stars. First of all, the grid spacing in most of the simulations
is much larger than the size of a star. Secondly, star formation involves severalcomplicated physical processes and it is not easy to include them in a simula-tion which has to follow the large-scale perturbations as well. However, these
simulations indicate that structures like what we see today may indeed form
if the Universe contains a signiﬁcant amount of cold dark matter in additionto baryonic matter. This is taken as further compelling evidence that the darkmatter in the Universe is cold and not hot. Only if the Universe has a large
amount of cold dark matter, would baryonic perturbations having amplitude of
order 10
−5attdecbe able to grow enough by the present time, by falling in the
potential wells created by the cold dark matter, so as to explain the observedstructures of today.
Exercises
11.1 (a) Using the deﬁnition of the Riemann zeta function
ζ(n)=∞/summationdisplay
k=1k−n
derive (11.9) for bosons from (11.7) . Express (11.8) for bosons in terms of
ζ(4)and then obtain (11.10) for bosons by using the fact that ζ(4)=π4/90.
[Hint: You can use
1
ex−1=e−x+e−2x+e−3x+e−4x+···
to evaluate the integrals in (11.7) and(11.8) .]
(b) Deﬁning
I±
n=/integraldisplay∞
0xndx
ex±1,
show that I−
n−I+
n=2−nI−
n. Use this relation to derive expressions for
fermions in (11.9) and(11.10) from the expressions for bosons.
11.2 If the reaction rate for the reaction n+νe←→ p+e−were to fall
below the expansion rate of the Universe at a temperature T≈0.4 MeV , what
would have been the helium abundance in the Universe?
11.3 In the early Universe before electron-positron annihilation, the electron
number density must have been slightly higher than the positron number
density. Show that this implies that the chemical potentials for electrons and

<<<PAGE 374>>>

354 The thermal history of the Universe
positrons have to be non-zero. How can one calculate these chemical potentials
theoretically?
11.4 Estimate the gas pressure in the Universe at the epoch corresponding
toz≈1100 and consider hydrogen gas kept at that pressure. Apply the Saha
equation (2.29) to calculate numerically the ionization fraction xfor different
temperatures Tand plot xas a function of T. You will ﬁnd that xchanges from
values close to 0 to values close to 1 within a not very wide temperature range.
What is the approximate temperature at which this transition takes place?
11.5 Suppose we ﬁnd the optical depth τof CMBR photons passing through
the middle of a galaxy cluster from the Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect and we also
measure the X-ray ﬂux fνat frequency νfrom the hot gas in the cluster.
Assuming that the hot gas makes up a sphere of radius Rcwith uniform
electron density neinside, we obviously have τ=2σTRcneand
fν=4
3πR3
c/epsilon1ν
4πD2,
where /epsilon1νis the emissivity per unit volume of the hot gas and Dis the distance
of the galaxy cluster. Following (8.70) , we can write
/epsilon1ν=An2
e√
Te−hν/κ BT.
Now show that
D=A/Delta1θ
24σ2
T√
Te−hν/κ BTτ2
fν,
where /Delta1θ=2Rc/Dis the observed angular size of the X-ray emitting gas
sphere. This expression for Dis used to determine the distances of galaxy
clusters. [Note: If the galaxy cluster is at a large redshift, then some corrections
have to be applied to the above expression for D.]
11.6 We have discussed in §10.4 how the Friedmann equation can be obtained
classically by considering the radial expansion of a spherical shell located at
a(t)at time t. Suppose there is a perturbation in the central region such that
the radius a(t)has become a(t)+l(t). For small l(t), show that
d2l
dt2=2GM
a3l=8πG
3ρ(t)l,
where Mis the mass inside the spherical shell and
ρ=3
4πM
a3.

<<<PAGE 375>>>

Exercises 355
If the material within the shell a(t)evolves slightly differently due to this
perturbation compared to what we would expect from the Friedmann equa-
tion, the density difference compared to the unperturbed density leads to the
parameter
δ=δρ
ρ=− 3l
a.
For a marginally critical situation (i.e. for a situation in which the total mechan-
ical energy of the unperturbed shell is zero), derive the equation for δ:
¨δ+4
3t˙δ−2
3t2δ=0.
This equation tells us how a density perturbation in the central region of
expansion would evolve. It turns out that the evolution equation of densityperturbations in the expanding matter-dominated Universe is exactly this if
k/lessmuchk
J. Show that
δ∝t2/3
is a solution.

<<<PAGE 376>>>



<<<PAGE 377>>>

12
Elements of tensors and
general relativity
12.1 Introduction
We have pointed out in §10.2 that in general relativity we have to deal with the
curvature of spacetime and that tensors provide a natural mathematical language
for describing such curvature. We now plan to give an introduction to tensoranalysis and then an introduction to general relativity at a technical level. It will
be useful for readers to be familiar with the qualitative concepts introduced in
§10.2 before studying this chapter.
Since general relativity is a challenging subject, it is helpful to clearly
distinguish the purely mathematical topics from the physical concepts of general
relativity. So, when we develop tensor analysis in the next section, we shall
develop it as a purely mathematical subject without bringing in general rela-tivistic concerns at all. The two-dimensional metrics (10.7), (10.8) and(10.9)
introduced in §10.2 will be used as illustrative examples repeatedly to clarify
various points. When various formulae of tensor analysis are applied to metricsof dimensions higher than two, the algebra can be horrendous. It is, therefore,advisable to develop a familiarity with tensors by ﬁrst applying the importantresults to two-dimensional surfaces.
After introducing the basics of tensor analysis in the next section, we
shall start developing the basic concepts of general relativity from §12.3.S i n c e
general relativity is now used in many areas of astrophysics, a minimum knowl-edge of general relativity is expected nowadays from a student of astrophysics,
irrespective of the area of specialization. What will be presented in this chapter
is somewhat like that bare minimum. There are many excellent textbooks onthis subject, to which the reader can turn in order to learn the subject at a
greater depth.
357

<<<PAGE 378>>>

358 Elements of tensors and general relativity
12.2 The world of tensors
It requires a little bit of practice to feel comfortable with tensors. While we
shall introduce all the basic notions, we shall be rather brief, and some previousacquaintance with tensor algebra at least may be helpful in following ourdiscussion.
12.2.1 What is a tensor?
In elementary textbooks of physics, usually two kinds of physical quantitiesare introduced: scalars and vectors. A vector is deﬁned as a quantity which hasboth magnitude and direction. There is, however, an alternative way of deﬁning
a vector. A vector has components of which each one is associated with one
coordinate axis (i.e. components A
x,AyandAzof the vector Aare associated
with x,yandzaxes respectively) and they transform in some particular way
when we change from one coordinate system to another. Since this alternative
deﬁnition of vectors provides a natural entry point into the world of tensors,
let us consider in some detail how the components of a vector transform onchanging the coordinate system.
In order to ﬁnd out how the components of a vector transform, we ﬁrst
need to know how the components of a vector are deﬁned in a coordinatesystem. Let us take the concrete examples of the generalized velocity andthe generalized force which we encounter in Lagrangian mechanics (see, forexample, Goldstein ,1980, §1–4; Landau and Lifshitz, 1976, §1). Suppose
we denote the generalized coordinates in a system by x
i,w h e r e ican have
values i=1,2,..., N. The rationale of writing ias a superscript rather than a
subscript will be clear as we proceed. A component of the generalized velocityis given by dx
i/dt, whereas a component of the generalized force is given by
−∂V/∂xiwhere Vis the potential. If components of generalized velocity and
generalized force are deﬁned in another coordinate system xiin exactly the
same way, then the chain rule of partial differentiation implies
dxi
dt=N/summationdisplay
k=1dxk
dt∂xi
∂xk, (12.1)
∂V
∂xi=N/summationdisplay
k=1∂V
∂xk∂xk
∂xi. (12.2)
It should be noted that these two transformation laws are slightly different. Vec-tors transforming like dx
i/dtare called contravariant vectors and are indicated
by superscripts, whereas vectors transforming like ∂V/∂xiare called covariant
vectors and are indicated by subscripts ( iinxiorxiappearing at the bottom of
a derivative should be treated as subscript). We also introduce the well-known

<<<PAGE 379>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 359
summation convention that if an index is repeated twice in a term, once as a sub-
script and once as a superscript, then it automatically implies summation over
the possible values of that index and it is not necessary to put the summation
sign explicitly. Using this summation convention, the transformation laws for a
contravariant vector Aiand a covariant vector Aiwould be
Ai=Ak∂xi
∂xk, (12.3)
Ai=Ak∂xk
∂xi, (12.4)
where AiandAiare components of these contravariant and covariant vectors
in the coordinate system xi. By comparing (12.3) with (12.1) and(12.4) with
(12.2), it is clear that the generalized velocity dxi/dttransforms as a contravari-
ant vector and the generalized force −∂V/∂xitransforms as a covariant vector.
If we consider the transformation from one Cartesian frame to another (for
example, due to a rotation from one frame to the other in two dimensions),
it is easy to show that
∂xi
∂xk=∂xk
∂xi.
This implies that the distinction between contravariant and covariant vectorsdisappears if we consider only transformations between Cartesian frames.
A component of a vector is associated with only one coordinate axis. In the
case of a general tensor, a component can be associated with several coordinateaxes. So a component will generally have several indices. The transformationlaw of a general tensor will be the following:
Tab..d
l..n=Tαβ..δ
λ..ν∂xa
∂xα∂xb
∂xβ..∂xd
∂xδ∂xλ
∂xl..∂xν
∂xn. (12.5)
Note that some indices are put as superscripts and some as subscripts dependingon whether the corresponding parts of the transformation are like contravariant
vectors or covariant vectors.
From the transformation law (12.5) of tensors, it is very easy to show that
the product A
iBkof two vectors AiandBkshould transform like a tensor with
two covariant components iandk. This can be generalized to the result that
the product of two tensors gives a tensor of higher rank. One very important
operation is the contraction of tensors. Suppose we write n=din the tensor
Tab..d
l..n. This, by the summation convention, implies that we are summing over
all possible values of n=d. It follows from (12.5) that
Tab..d
l..d=Tαβ..δ
λ..ν∂xa
∂xα∂xb
∂xβ..∂xd
∂xδ∂xλ
∂xl..∂xν
∂xd.

<<<PAGE 380>>>

360 Elements of tensors and general relativity
Using the fact that
∂xd
∂xδ∂xν
∂xd=δν
δ,
we easily get
Tab..d
l..d=Tαβ..δ
λ..δ∂xa
∂xα∂xb
∂xβ..∂xλ
∂xl.. (12.6)
on making use of the obvious result Tαβ..δ
λ..νδν
δ=Tαβ..δ
λ..δfollowing from the
properties of the Kronecker δ. We leave it as an exercise for the reader to verify
thatδi
ktransforms like a tensor, but not δikorδik(the Kronecker δin any form is
assumed to have the value 1 if i=kand 0 otherwise). It is clear from (12.6) that
Tαβ..δ
λ..δtransforms like a tensor with one contravariant index and one covariant
index less compared to Tαβ..δ
λ..ν. Thus the operation of contraction reduces the
rank of the tensor (by reducing one contravariant rank and one covariant rank).
12.2.2 The metric tensor
We have pointed out in §10.2 that the distance between two nearby points
in a space is given by (10.5). Using our present notation and the summation
convention, we can write
ds2=gikdxidxk. (12.7)
Although xidoes not transform as a vector, dxiis clearly a contravariant vector.
Hence gikdxldsmmust be a tensor which, after two contractions, would give a
scalar, implying that ds2is a scalar.
We pointed out in §10.2 that it is the metric tensor gikwhich determines
whether a space is curved or not. We shall now develop the mathematical
machinery to calculate curvature. As we develop the techniques, we shallillustrate them by applying them to the metrics
ds
2=dr2+r2dθ2, (12.8)
ds2=a2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2), (12.9)
where (12.8) corresponds to a plane using polar coordinates and (12.9) corre-
sponds to the surface of a sphere. We shall also sometimes consider the metric
ds2=a2(dx2
1+sinh2x1dx2
2), (12.10)
which corresponds to the surface having the property of a saddle point at everypoint. We pointed out in §10.2 that these three metrics can be written in the
forms (10.7)–(10.9) by using very similar notation and also discussed that these
correspond to the only three possible uniform two-dimensional surfaces (i.e.surfaces in which every point is equivalent). It may be noted that (12.7) allows

<<<PAGE 381>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 361
for cross-terms of the form g12dx1dx2. The metrics (12.8)–(12.10),h o w e v e r ,
have only pure quadratic terms and no cross-terms. If the coordinate system is
orthogonal, then we do not have cross-terms in the expression of ds2.I nt h i s
book, we shall restrict our discussions to only simple metrics without cross-terms corresponding to orthogonal coordinates. In other words, we shall only beconcerned with metric tensors g
ikwhich have non-zero terms on the diagonal
alone when represented in the form of a matrix. For the three metrics (12.8)–
(12.10) , the components of the metric tensor respectively are
grr=1,gθθ=r2,grθ=gθr=0, (12.11)
gθθ=a2,gφφ=a2sin2θ,gθφ=gφθ=0, (12.12)
g11=a2,g22=a2sinh2x1,g12=g21=0. (12.13)
There are astrophysical situations where the cross-terms become important,such as the Kerr metric of a rotating black hole, which is beyond this elementary
book.
From a contravariant vector A
i, it is possible to construct the corresponding
covariant vector in the following way
Ai=gikAk. (12.14)
This is often called the lowering of an index. It is very easy to do it if the
metric is diagonal. For example, if (Ar,Aθ)are the contravariant components
of a vector in the plane with the metric tensor (12.11) , then the corresponding
covariant components are (Ar=Ar,Aθ=r2Aθ). Suppose dxianddxkhave
corresponding covariant vectors dxianddxkobtained according to (12.14) .I t
should be possible to write the metric in the form
ds2=gikdxidxk. (12.15)
By requiring that ds2given by (12.7) and(12.15) should be equal, the reader is
asked to show that
gikgkl=δi
l. (12.16)
For a diagonal metric tensor gik, it is particularly easy to obtain the correspond-
inggik. One merely has to take the inverse of the diagonal elements while
leaving the off-diagonal elements zero in order to satisfy (12.16) . For example,
for the metric tensor (12.12) corresponding to the surface of a sphere, it is easily
seen that
gθθ=1
a2,gφφ=1
a2sin2θ,gθφ=gφθ=0 (12.17)
would satisfy (12.16) . Once the covariant metric tensor gikhas been introduced,
we can use it to raise an index and obtain a contravariant vector from a covariant

<<<PAGE 382>>>

362 Elements of tensors and general relativity
Fig. 12.1 A constant vector ﬁeld A, shown with the point Pwhere we consider the
components of this vector ﬁeld.
vector in the following way
Ai=gikAk. (12.18)
Starting from a contravariant vector Ai, if we once lower the index by (12.14)
and then raise it again by (12.18) , then it is easy to use (12.16) to show that
we get back the same vector Ai. It may be noticed that we are repeatedly
leaving various simple steps to the readers so that they can carry out these steps
themselves and become conversant with tensor operations.
We often have to deal with components of a vector along the coordinate
directions. For a particle moving in a plane, for example, the components of
velocity in polar coordinates are (˙r,r˙θ). We can call these vectorial com-
ponents. It is obvious that the vectorial components in different orthogonal
coordinate systems will not transform amongst each other according to either(12.3) or(12.4). However, if we divide the two vectorial components of velocity
by√
grr=1a n d√gθθ=rrespectively, then we get the contravariant velocity
vector (˙r,˙θ)in polar coordinates. In general, if we divide the i-th vectorial
component of a vector in an orthogonal coordinate system by√giia n dd ot h i s
for each component, then we get a set of components of the vector which would
transform between orthogonal coordinates in accordance with the rule (12.3)
for contravariant vectors. Similarly, if we multiply the vectorial components
by√gii, then we would get the components of the corresponding covariant
vector. As an example, let us consider a constant vector ﬁeld Ain a plane and
ﬁnd its components in polar coordinates if we assume Ato transform like a
contravariant vector. Let us measure θfrom the direction of Aas shown in
Figure 12.1 . At a point Pwith coordinates (r,θ), the vectorial components of A
in polar coordinates are (Acosθ,−Asinθ). Making use of (12.11) , we easily
see that the contravariant form of the constant vector in polar coordinates will be
Ar=Acosθ,Aθ=− Asinθ
r, (12.19)

<<<PAGE 383>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 363
whereas the covariant form will be
Ar=Acosθ,Aθ=− Arsinθ. (12.20)
One can easily check that these expressions for different components will follow
on applying (12.3) and(12.4) to the components in Cartesian coordinates: Ax=
Ax=A,Ay=Ay=0. It should be apparent that the question of whether a
vector is contravariant or covariant does not make sense until we are told how
its components in an arbitrary coordinate system are to be taken. For example,
from a knowledge of how the generalized velocity or the generalized force is to
be deﬁned in different coordinates, we could use (12.1) and(12.2) to conclude
that they transform as contravariant and covariant vectors respectively.
12.2.3 Differentiation of tensors
Let us consider a contravariant vector ﬁeld Ak(xm). In another coordinate
system xl, this same vector ﬁeld will be denoted by Ai(xl), the transformation
law being given by (12.3). It readily follows from (12.3) that
∂Ai
∂xl=∂Ak
∂xm∂xm
∂xl∂xi
∂xk+Ak∂xm
∂xl∂2xi
∂xm∂xk.
Due to the presence of the second term on the right-hand side, it is clear that the
derivative ∂Ak/∂xmdoes not transform like a tensor. To understand the physical
reason behind it, we consider the contravariant form of a constant vector ﬁeld
given by (12.19) . It follows from (12.19) that
∂Ar
∂θ=− Asinθ.
Even though we may expect the derivative of a constant vector ﬁeld to bezero, that is not the case. This is presumably due to the fact that we are usingcurvilinear coordinates. From the derivative, we have to remove the part comingdue to the curvature of the coordinate system in order to get a more physically
meaningful expression of the derivative. We now discuss how to do it.
In order to differentiate a vector ﬁeld A, we need to subtract A(x) from
A(x+dx). Now we can sensibly talk of adding or subtracting vectors only if
they are at the same point. So we need to do what is called a parallel transport
ofA(x) tox+dxbefore we subtract it from A(x+dx). We expect that A
will change to A+δAunder such a parallel transport. For example, when we
transport a vector Aeven on a plane surface, its components in polar coordinates
(A
r,Aθ)will in general change. On physical grounds, we expect that the change
δAiinAiunder parallel transport from xltoxl+dxlwill be proportional to
the displacement and to the vector itself. Hence we can write
δAi=−/Gamma1i
klAkdxl, (12.21)

<<<PAGE 384>>>

364 Elements of tensors and general relativity
where /Gamma1i
klis known as the Christoffel symbol , named after Christoffel (1869)
who introduced it. The Christoffel symbol is not a tensor because δAiis not a
tensor. We now expect a proper derivative of Aito be given by
DAi
Dxl=lim
dxl→0Ai(xl+dxl)−[Ai(xl)+δAi]
dxl.
On substituting for δAifrom (12.21) and writing
Ai(xl+dxl)=Ai(xl)+∂Ai
∂xldxl,
we get
DAi
Dxl=∂Ai
∂xl+/Gamma1i
klAk. (12.22)
This is known as the covariant derivative. It may be noted that the ordi-
nary derivative ∂Ai/∂xland the covariant derivative DAi/Dxlare sometimes
denoted by symbols Ai
,land Ai
;l. Other popular symbols for these derivatives
are∂lAiand∇lAi. We shall, however, use the longer notation in this book in
order to avoid introducing too many new notations in our short discussion of
general relativity.
In order to calculate the covariant derivate of a vector, we ﬁrst need to ﬁgure
out how to evaluate the Christoffel symbols appearing in the expression (12.22)
of the covariant derivative. It is possible to ﬁnd the Christoffel symbols fromthe metric tensor. For deriving the relation of Christoffel symbols to the metric
tensor, we ﬁrst have to ﬁgure out the expressions of covariant derivatives for acovariant vector A
iand tensors of higher rank. By noting that AiBiis a scalar
for which we must have δ(AiBi)=0, we obtain
BiδAi=− AiδBi=Ai/Gamma1i
klBkdxl.
For indices which are summed (i.e. which are repeated twice above and below),we can change the symbols without affecting anything else. So we can write theabove relation as
B
iδAi=Ak/Gamma1k
ilBidxl,
from which it follows that
δAi=/Gamma1k
ilAkdxl. (12.23)
It is now easy to show that
DA i
Dxl=∂Ai
∂xl−/Gamma1k
ilAk. (12.24)

<<<PAGE 385>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 365
We leave it for the reader to argue that the covariant derivative of the tensor Aik
must be given by
DA ik
Dxl=∂Aik
∂xl−/Gamma1m
klAim−/Gamma1m
ilAmk. (12.25)
We now show that the Christoffel symbol is symmetric in its bottom two indices.
Let us consider a vector
Ai=∂V
∂xi,
where Vis a scalar ﬁeld. We readily ﬁnd that
DA i
Dxk−DA k
Dxi=(/Gamma1l
ki−/Gamma1l
ik)∂V
∂xl.
We note that the left-hand side is a tensor, which should transform between
frames by obeying tensor transformation formulae. It is obvious that the left-
hand side in a Cartesian frame is zero and hence it must be zero in all frames.Then the right-hand side also should be zero, implying
/Gamma1
l
ik=/Gamma1l
ki. (12.26)
Now, if Aiis the covariant vector associated with Ai,t h e n
DA i
Dxl=D
Dxl(gikAk)=gikDAk
Dxl+AkDgik
Dxl.
Since AiandAiessentially correspond to the same physical entity, their covari-
ant derivatives also must be the same physical entity and should be related toeach other as
DA
i
Dxl=gikDAk
Dxl.
It then follows that we must have
Dgik
Dxl=0. (12.27)
From (12.25) and(12.27) ,w eh a v e
∂gik
∂xl=/Gamma1m
klgim+/Gamma1m
ilgmk. (12.28)
On permuting the symbols, we also have
∂gli
∂xk=/Gamma1m
ikglm+/Gamma1m
lkgmi, (12.29)
∂gkl
∂xi=/Gamma1m
ligkm+/Gamma1m
kigml. (12.30)

<<<PAGE 386>>>

366 Elements of tensors and general relativity
On subtracting (12.28) from the sum of (12.29) and(12.30) ,w eg e t
2/Gamma1n
ikgln=∂gli
∂xk+∂gkl
∂xi−∂gik
∂xl
on keeping in mind the symmetry property (12.26) of the Christoffel symbol
(as well as the symmetry property of the metric tensor). On multiplying this
equation by gmland making use of (12.16) , we ﬁnally have
/Gamma1m
ik=1
2gml/parenleftbigg∂gli
∂xk+∂glk
∂xi−∂gik
∂xl/parenrightbigg
. (12.31)
This is the ﬁnal expression of the Christoffel symbol in terms of the metrictensor. If we have the metric tensor for a space, we can calculate the Christoffel
symbols by using (12.31) and then work out any covariant derivatives. It is
obvious that the Christoffel symbols are zero in a Cartesian coordinate system.
Even when the space is curved, it can be shown that it is possible to introduceCartesian coordinates in a local region in such a way that the spatial derivatives
of the metric tensor are zero and the Christoffel symbols vanish. It is, however,
not possible to make the higher derivatives of the metric tensor zero in a generalsituation.
Calculating Christoffel symbols for spaces of several dimensions can
involve quite a bit of algebra, even though the algebra is usually straightforwardif the metric tensor is not too complicated. For four-dimensional spacetime,for example, ikin/Gamma1
m
ikcan have 10 independent combinations in view of the
symmetry. Since mcan have four possible values, it is clear that the Christoffel
symbol will have 40 components in four-dimensional spacetime. We shall see in§12.2.4 that one has to do further computations to obtain the curvature of space-
time from the Christoffel symbols. In general relativistic applications, often we
have to do this very long algebra involving quantities with many components.
We shall only consider the two-dimensional metrics (12.8) and(12.9) here for
illustrative purposes. The metric tensors for them are explicitly written down in(12.11) and(12.12) respectively. On substituting (12.11) into (12.31) ,w eﬁ n d
that the Christoffel symbols for the plane in polar coordinates are
/Gamma1
r
θθ=−r,/Gamma1θ
rθ=1
r, (12.32)
whereas the other four components (since the Christoffel symbol has six inde-pendent components in two dimensions) turn out to be zero. For the surface of
the sphere with the metric tensor given by (12.12) , the only non-zero compo-
nents are
/Gamma1
θ
φφ=− sinθcosθ, /Gamma1φ
θφ=cotθ. (12.33)
We have seen that the ordinary derivatives of the constant vector ﬁeld given by
(12.19) are non-zero. Now we are ready to show that the covariant derivatives

<<<PAGE 387>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 367
are zero, as we expect in the case of a constant vector ﬁeld. Using (12.22) ,w e
can write down
DAr
Dθ=∂Ar
∂θ+/Gamma1r
kθAk=∂Ar
∂θ+/Gamma1r
θθAθ,
since the other term is zero due to the fact that /Gamma1r
rθ=0.On substituting for
(Ar,Aθ)from (12.19) and using /Gamma1r
θθ=−r,w eﬁ n dt h a t
DAr
Dθ=0.
The other components of the covariant derivative can also similarly be shown to
be zero. Since the covariant derivative is a proper tensor and we know that the
covariant derivative of a constant vector ﬁeld in Cartesian coordinates (wherethe derivative reduces to an ordinary derivative) is zero, we would expect it to bezero in the other coordinates as well. The small demonstration of this by explicit
calculations has hopefully given the reader some idea of how such calculations
are done.
12.2.4 Curvature
Suppose a vector Ailying on a ﬂat surface is made to undergo parallel transport
along a closed path and eventually brought back to its original location. Weexpect the ﬁnal vector to be identical with the initial vector. On the other hand,if we have a curved surface, then the parallel transport of a vector along some
arbitrary closed path may not bring it back to its original self. From (12.23) we
conclude that the change in the A
kafter parallel transport along a closed path C
will be
/Delta1Ak=/contintegraldisplay
C/Gamma1i
klAidxl. (12.34)
Whether a surface is plane or curved can be inferred by ﬁnding out if the right-
hand side of (12.34) is zero or non-zero for arbitrary closed paths. The same
considerations should apply to higher dimensions as well. We can conclude aspace to have zero curvature if/contintegraltext
C/Gamma1i
klAidxlaround any arbitrary closed path is
always zero. On the other hand, if we can ﬁnd some closed path such that thisline integral over it is non-zero, then the space must be curved.
To proceed further, we have to convert the line integral of (12.34) into a
surface integral. Let us try to write down Stokes’s theorem of ordinary vector
analysis in tensorial notation. We consider ordinary three-dimensional Cartesian
space. An element of area dsis a pseudovector from which we can construct a
tensor

<<<PAGE 388>>>

368 Elements of tensors and general relativity
dfik=⎛
⎝0 dsz−ds y
−ds z0 dsx
dsy−ds x0⎞⎠.
On using this notation, Stokes’s theorem can be written as
/contintegraldisplay
CAidxi=1
2/integraldisplay
dfik/parenleftbigg∂Ak
∂xi−∂Ai
∂xk/parenrightbigg
, (12.35)
where the right-hand side is a surface integral over a surface of which Cis the
boundary. This tensorial expression of Stokes’s theorem holds for curved space
and for higher dimensions also, though we shall not try to justify it here. Onconverting the right-hand side of (12.34) into a surface integral with the help of
Stokes’s theorem, we get
/Delta1A
k=1
2/integraldisplay/bracketleftbigg∂
∂xl(/Gamma1i
kmAi)−∂
∂xm(/Gamma1i
klAi)/bracketrightbigg
dflm
=1
2/integraldisplay/bracketleftBigg
∂/Gamma1i
km
∂xlAi−∂/Gamma1i
kl
∂xmAi+/Gamma1i
km∂Ai
∂xl−/Gamma1i
kl∂Ai
∂xm/bracketrightBigg
dflm.
Now the change in Aiin the present situation is caused by parallel transport
from its original position. So the change in Aimust be given by (12.23) from
which it follows that
∂Ai
∂xl=/Gamma1n
ilAn.
Using this we get
/Delta1Ak=1
2/integraldisplay/bracketleftBigg
∂/Gamma1i
km
∂xl−∂/Gamma1i
kl
∂xm+/Gamma1n
km/Gamma1i
nl−/Gamma1n
kl/Gamma1i
nm/bracketrightBigg
Aidflm.
This can be written as
/Delta1Ak=1
2/integraldisplay
Ri
klmAidflm, (12.36)
where
Ri
klm=∂/Gamma1i
km
∂xl−∂/Gamma1i
kl
∂xm+/Gamma1n
km/Gamma1i
nl−/Gamma1n
kl/Gamma1i
nm. (12.37)
As we have already pointed out, whether a space is ﬂat or curved can bedetermined by ﬁnding out if /Delta1A
kis always zero or not. This in turn depends
of whether Ri
kmlis zero or non-zero, as should be clear from (12.36) .W e
thus conclude that Ri
klmgiven by (12.37) is a measure of the curvature of
space. It is called the Riemann curvature tensor, after Riemann who carried
out pathbreaking studies on the curvature of space (Riemann, 1868).

<<<PAGE 389>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 369
Just from the deﬁnition of Ri
klmgiven by (12.37) , the following symmetry
properties follow
Ri
klm=− Ri
kml, (12.38)
Ri
klm+Ri
mkl+Ri
lmk=0. (12.39)
Another important result, known as the Bianchi identity,i s
DRn
ikl
Dxm+DRn
imk
Dxl+DRn
ilm
Dxk=0. (12.40)
The best way of proving this identity is to go to a Cartesian frame and use
the result following from (12.5) that, if a tensor has all components zero in a
Cartesian frame, it must be identically zero in all frames. Now, if the spaceunder consideration is curved, it is possible to introduce a Cartesian coordinateonly in a local region. The Christoffel symbol /Gamma1
i
kmcan be made zero in the local
Cartesian frame, but its derivatives may not be zero. It follows from (12.37) that
at this local point we should have
DRn
ikl
Dxm=∂2/Gamma1n
il
∂xm∂xk−∂2/Gamma1n
ik
∂xm∂xl,
since the covariant derivative reduces to the ordinary derivative in the localregion of the Cartesian frame. If we write similar expressions for the other
terms in (12.40) and add them up, we establish the identity in the local Cartesian
frame. Due to its tensorial nature, it then follows that the Bianchi identity must
be a general identity true in all frames.
From the curvature tensor R
i
klm, we can obtain a tensor Rkmof lower rank
by contracting iwith l:
Rkm=Ri
kim=∂/Gamma1i
km
∂xi−∂/Gamma1i
ki
∂xm+/Gamma1n
km/Gamma1i
ni−/Gamma1n
ki/Gamma1i
nm. (12.41)
This tensor Rkmis known as the Ricci tensor. It is straightforward to show that
Rkmis symmetric, i.e.
Rkm=Rmk.
We can ﬁnally obtain a scalar
R=gmkRmk (12.42)
known as the scalar curvature.
So far our discussion of curvature has been completely formal. Readers
may now develop some appreciation of this tensorial machinery by applying
it to the metric (12.9) pertaining to the surface of a sphere, of which the non-
zero Christoffel symbols are given in (12.33) . Let us try to calculate the scalar
curvature, for which we need RθθandRφφ.N o w

<<<PAGE 390>>>

370 Elements of tensors and general relativity
Rθθ=Rθ
θθθ+Rφ
θφθ=Rφ
θφθ,
since Rθ
θθθ=0 due to the antisymmetry property (12.38) . We thus need to
calculate only one component of the curvature tensor to obtain Rθθ.O nu s i n g
the expressions of Christoffel symbols given by (12.33) , it easily follows from
the deﬁnition (12.37) of the curvature tensor that
Rθθ=Rφ
θφθ=1.
A similar calculation gives
Rφφ=Rθ
φθφ=sin2θ.
Finally the scalar curvature is given by
R=gθθRθθ+gφφRφφ=1
a2.1+1
a2sin2θ.sin2θ=2
a2(12.43)
on making use of (12.17) . Although the Riemann tensor has many components,
we did not have to do too much algebra to obtain the scalar curvature. Thus
calculating the curvature of a simple two-dimensional metric is not too com-
plicated. The curvature calculation for any four-dimensional spacetime metric
usually involves a horrendous amount of straightforward algebra. We also notefrom (12.43) that the curvature scalar is a constant over the surface of the sphere,
which is expected from the fact that this surface is uniform. We leave it as an
exercise for the reader to show that the scalar curvature for the metric (12.10)
is−2/a
2. The metrics (12.9) and(12.10) give the only two uniformly curved
surfaces possible in two dimensions, one with uniform positive curvature and
the other with uniform negative curvature. It is easy to show that all components
of the curvature tensor are zero for the metric (12.8) corresponding to a plane.
Given the metric of a space (or a spacetime), we now have the machinery to ﬁnd
out whether it is curved or ﬂat.
We end our discussion of curvature by introducing another tensor which
turns out to be very important in the formulation of general relativity, as weshall see later. It is the Einstein tensor deﬁned as
G
ik=Rik−1
2gikR. (12.44)
One of its very important properties is that it is a divergenceless tensor satisfying
DG ik
Dxk=0. (12.45)
From the deﬁnition (12.44) of the Einstein tensor, this implies
DR ik
Dxk−1
2gik∂R
∂xk=0. (12.46)

<<<PAGE 391>>>

12.2 The world of tensors 371
To prove this, we need to begin from the Bianchi identity (12.40) . Writing
Rn
imk=− Rn
ikmin the second term of (12.40) , we (i) contract nandk, and (ii)
multiply by gim.T h i sg i v e s
DRm
l
Dxm−∂R
∂xl+D
Dxn(gimRn
ilm)=0 (12.47)
on remembering that the covariant derivative of the metric tensor is zero, as
indicated by (12.27) , and the covariant derivative of a scalar reduces to its
ordinary derivative. In Exercise 12.3 the reader is given some hints to show that
gimRn
ilm=Rn
l. This implies that the last term in (12.47) is the same as the ﬁrst
term, giving an equation which is easily seen to be equivalent with (12.46) .T h i s
essentially establishes that the Einstein tensor is divergenceless as encapsulated
in(12.45) – a result which is going to be crucially important when we formulate
general relativity.
12.2.5 Geodesics
The shortest path between two points in a plane surface or in a ﬂat space is astraight line. If the surface or the space is curved, then the shortest path betweentwo points is called a geodesic. We have pointed out in §10.2 that one of the
central ideas of general relativity is that a particle moves along a geodesic in thefour-dimensional spacetime. Before we get into the physics of general relativity,the last mathematical question we have to address is to show how we obtaingeodesics in a particular space of which the metric tensor is known.
Let us consider an arbitrary path between two points AandB. The length
dsof a small segment of this path is given by (12.7). Hence the length of the
whole path must be
s=/integraldisplay
B
A/radicalBigg
gikdxi
dλdxk
dλdλ, (12.48)
where λis a parameter measured along the path. On writing
L=/radicalBigg
gikdxi
dλdxk
dλ(12.49)
the length of the path is
s=/integraldisplayB
ALdλ
and the condition for the path to be an extremum is given by the Lagrangeequation
d
dλ/parenleftbigg∂L
∂(dxi/dλ)/parenrightbigg
−∂L
∂xi=0.

<<<PAGE 392>>>

372 Elements of tensors and general relativity
(See, for example, Mathews and Walker, 1979, §12–1.) On substituting the
expression of Lgiven by (12.49) into this Lagrange equation and remembering
that
/radicalBigg
gikdxi
dλdxk
dλ=ds
dλ,
a few steps of easy algebra give
d
ds/parenleftbigg
gikdxk
ds/parenrightbigg
−1
2∂gkl
∂xidxk
dsdxl
ds=0. (12.50)
Now the ﬁrst term of this equation is
d
ds/parenleftbigg
gikdxk
ds/parenrightbigg
=gikd2xk
ds2+∂gik
∂xldxl
dsdxk
ds
=gikd2xk
ds2+1
2/parenleftbigg∂gik
∂xl+∂gil
∂xk/parenrightbiggdxl
dsdxk
ds.
On substituting this in (12.50) ,w eh a v e
gikd2xk
ds2=−1
2/parenleftbigg∂gik
∂xl+∂gil
∂xk−∂gkl
∂xi/parenrightbiggdxk
dsdxl
ds.
Multiplying this by gmi, we ﬁnally get
d2xm
ds2=−/Gamma1m
kldxk
dsdxl
ds, (12.51)
where /Gamma1m
klis the Christoffel symbol deﬁned in (12.31) .T h i sequation (12.51) is
ﬁnally the geodesic equation which has to be satisﬁed by a curve in space if it
happens to be a geodesic in that space.
Whenever we obtain any important tensorial relation, we have been illus-
trating it by applying it to one of the two-dimensional metrics. We follow the
same approach now. Since the metric (12.8) corresponds to a plane surface,
the geodesic for this metric must be a straight line. Hence we expect that thegeodesic equation (12.51) applied to this metric should give us a straight line.
We now explicitly show this. The non-zero Christoffel symbols of this metric(12.8) are given in (12.32) . On substituting these in (12.51) , we get the following
two equations
d
2r
ds2=r/parenleftbiggdθ
ds/parenrightbigg2
, (12.52)
d2θ
ds2=−2
rdr
dsdθ
ds. (12.53)

<<<PAGE 393>>>

12.3 Metric for weak gravitational ﬁeld 373
The factor 2 in (12.53) comes from the two equal terms arising out of the
combinations rθandθr.N o w(12.53) is equivalent to
1
r2d
ds/parenleftbigg
r2dθ
ds/parenrightbigg
=0.
It follows from this that r2(dθ/ds)must be a constant along the geodesic. We
therefore write
dθ
ds=l
r2, (12.54)
where lis a constant. On dividing the metric (12.8) byds2, we obtain
/parenleftbiggdr
ds/parenrightbigg2
=1−r2/parenleftbiggdθ
ds/parenrightbigg2
=1−l2
r2
so that
dr
ds=±/radicalBigg
1−l2
r2. (12.55)
Dividing (12.54) by(12.55) ,w eg e t
dθ
dr=±l/r2
/radicalBig
1−l2
r2,
of which a solution is
θ=θ0±cos−1/parenleftbiggl
r/parenrightbigg
,
where θ0is the constant of integration. This solution can be put in the form
rcos(θ−θ0)=l, (12.56)
which is clearly the equation of a straight line. This completes our proof that
the geodesic in a plane is a straight line, even though it is mathematically not so
apparent when we use polar coordinates.
12.3 Metric for weak gravitational ﬁeld
We have ﬁnished developing the mathematical machinery necessary for formu-lating general relativity. Now we are ready to get into a discussion of the physicsof general relativity. Since it is a complex and difﬁcult subject, we shall proceedcautiously. Suppose we consider the motion of a non-relativistic particle in a
weak gravitational ﬁeld. It will become clear soon what we quantitatively mean
by the adjective ‘weak’ applied to the gravitational ﬁeld. If the gravitationalﬁeld is sufﬁciently weak, we can certainly treat the motion of the particle by

<<<PAGE 394>>>

374 Elements of tensors and general relativity
using the Newtonian theory of gravity. We can, however, use general relativity
also to solve this problem, even though that might be like using a sledgehammerto crack a nut. Both the Newtonian theory and general relativity should give the
same result in the regime where both are valid. We introduce some ﬁrst concepts
of general relativity by discussing how it can be applied to study the motion ofa non-relativistic particle in a weak gravitational ﬁeld for which the Newtoniantheory is adequate.
We have pointed out in §10.2 (see Table 10.1 ) that the motion of a particle
in a gravitational ﬁeld is obtained in general relativity by using the fact that themotion has to be along a geodesic. We also saw in §12.2.5 that the geodesic
between two spacetime points AandBis the path along which the path length
s=/integraltext
B
Adsis an extremum, dsbeing given by (12.7). So the path of a particle
in the four-dimensional spacetime between the two points Aand Bcan be
obtained in general relativity by making san extremum. On the other hand,
classical mechanics tells us that we can solve the motion by applying Hamilton’s
principle that the action I=/integraltextB
ALd t has to be an extremum between Aand
B,w h e r e Lis the Lagrangian (see, for example, Goldstein ,1980, Chapter 2;
Landau and Lifshitz, 1976, §2). For the motion of a non-relativistic particle
in a weak gravitational ﬁeld, both classical mechanics and general relativityshould give correct results, and the results should be identical. In other words,
the extremum of s=/integraltext
B
Adsand the extremum of I=/integraltextB
ALd t should give the
same path. This is possible only if dsfor a weak gravitational ﬁeld in general
relativity is essentially the same thing as Ld t in classical mechanics (except for
any additive or multiplicative constants). We know that the Lagrangian Lfor a
particle moving in a gravitational potential /Phi1is given by
L=1
2mv2−m/Phi1
(see, for example, Goldstein ,1980, §1–4; Landau and Lifshitz ,1976, §5). Hence
the non-relativistic action can be taken to be
INR=/integraldisplayB
A/bracketleftbigg1
2mv2−m/Phi1/bracketrightbigg
dt−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adt. (12.57)
The last term has a constant value −mc2(tB−tA)and would not contribute in
the calculation of the extremum. As we proceed further, it will be clear why weare including this term. We shall now try to ﬁgure out how to write dsin this
situation such that the extremum of/integraltext
B
Adsgives the same result as the extremum
ofINRgiven by (12.57) .
Before considering the case for a weak gravitational ﬁeld, let us ﬁrst look
at the case of zero gravitational ﬁeld. In the absence of a gravitational ﬁeld,
general relativity reduces to special relativity. We write the spacetime coordi-
nates as x0=ct,x1,x2,x3in view of the fact that their differentials make up
a contravariant vector and we should use superscripts. If dsis the separation

<<<PAGE 395>>>

12.3 Metric for weak gravitational ﬁeld 375
between two nearby spacetime events, we know that ds2, which is often written
as−c2dτ2, can be written in the special relativistic situation in the form
ds2=−c2dτ2=−(dx0)2+(dx1)2+(dx2)2+(dx3)2. (12.58)
We can write this as
ds2=−c2dτ2=ηikdxidxk, (12.59)
where the special relativistic metric ηikis given by
ηik=⎛
⎜⎜⎝−1000
0100
0010
0001⎞
⎟⎟⎠. (12.60)
One can easily check that a geodesic has to be a straight line in this spacetime
(which is ﬂat). A straight line in the special relativistic spacetime corresponds
to the world-line of a uniformly moving particle. Thus, if the geodesics givethe paths which particles follow, we come to the conclusion that particles moveuniformly in the absence of a gravitational ﬁeld.
It is clear that the extremum of/integraltext
B
Adτ, with dτgiven by (12.58) , would give
the geodesic in the special relativistic case (which is a straight line). Let us nowmultiply/integraltext
B
Adτby−mc2and argue that the resulting quantity
I/Phi1=0=−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adτ (12.61)
should be the action for a free particle (i.e. a particle in zero gravitational ﬁeld)in classical mechanics. If (12.61) indeed gives the classical action, then it would
follow that a geodesic is a path along which the action is also an extremum
and the path followed by the particle according to classical mechanics would
then be a geodesic in spacetime. Suppose we consider a moving particle whichis at spacetime points ( x
0,x1,x2,x3)a n d( x0+dx0,x1+dx1,x2+dx2,
x3+dx3) at the beginning and the end of a short interval. The velocity of the
particle is given by
v2=(dx1)2+(dx2)2+(dx3)2
dt2=c2(dx1)2+(dx2)2+(dx3)2
(dx0)2,(12.62)
since dx0=cdt. It then follows from (12.58) that
dτ=dx0
c/radicalBigg
1−v2
c2=dt/radicalBigg
1−v2
c2. (12.63)
On substituting this in (12.61) ,w eh a v e
I/Phi1=0=−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adt/radicalBigg
1−v2
c2. (12.64)

<<<PAGE 396>>>

376 Elements of tensors and general relativity
Ifv2/lessmuchc2, then we can make a Taylor series expansion of the square root,
which would give
I/Phi1=0≈−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adt+/integraldisplayB
A1
2mv2dt.
This is the same as INRgiven by (12.57) after setting /Phi1=0. Thus the non-
relativistic limit of (12.61) gives the usual non-relativistic action for a free
particle. So, if we take (12.61) as our action, we shall get the correct path in the
non-relativistic situation, which would be a geodesic in spacetime. Although we
are here discussing the motion of a non-relativistic particle, it may be mentioned
that(12.61) is the correct expression for the action of a free particle even when
the particle moves relativistically (see Landau and Lifshitz, 1975, §8).
When a weak gravitational ﬁeld is present, we need to add a part due to
gravitational interaction in (12.61) .L e tu st a k e
I=−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adτ−/integraldisplayB
Am/Phi1dt
which, by virtue of (12.63) , becomes
I=−/integraldisplayB
Adt⎡
⎣mc2/radicalBigg
1−v2
c2+m/Phi1⎤⎦. (12.65)
It is trivial to check that the non-relativistic limit ( v
2/lessmuchc2)o f(12.65) is(12.57) .
The form of (12.65) clariﬁes the quantitative meaning of a weak gravitational
ﬁeld. The extra term in the action due to the gravitational ﬁeld should be small
compared to the rest of the action. It follows from (12.65) that the condition for
a weak gravitational ﬁeld is
/Phi1/lessmuchc2. (12.66)
In§1.5 we pointed out that the condition for the Newtonian theory of gravity to
be adequate is that fdeﬁned by (1.11) is small compared to 1. It is easy to see
that this is effectively the same condition as (12.66) .W h e n(12.66) is satisﬁed,
(12.65) must be approximately equivalent to
I≈−mc2/integraldisplayB
Adt/radicalBigg
1−v2
c2+2/Phi1
c2.
This can be written as
I≈−mc/integraldisplayB
A/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg
1+2/Phi1
c2/parenrightbigg
c2dt2−v2dt2.

<<<PAGE 397>>>

12.3 Metric for weak gravitational ﬁeld 377
On making use of (12.62) , this becomes
I≈−mc/integraldisplayB
A/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg
1+2/Phi1
c2/parenrightbigg
(dx0)2−(dx1)2−(dx2)2−(dx3)2.(12.67)
If we take the metric of the four-dimensional spacetime to be
ds2=−c2dτ2=−/parenleftbigg
1+2/Phi1
c2/parenrightbigg
(dx0)2+(dx1)2+(dx2)2+(dx3)2,
(12.68)
then the geodesics in this spacetime will coincide with the paths we would get
by making the action given by (12.67) an extremum. Since (12.67) in turn
reduces to (12.57) in the non-relativistic situation with a weak gravitational
ﬁeld, we conclude that a particle moving non-relativistically in a weak gravita-tional ﬁeld, of which the motion can be found by making (12.57) an extremum,
should follow a geodesic in the spacetime described by (12.68) . This suggests
that(12.68) is the metric of spacetime with a weak gravitational ﬁeld, where /Phi1
is the classical gravitational potential. We can write (12.68) as
ds
2=gikdxidxk, (12.69)
where the metric tensor gikin the presence of a weak gravitational ﬁeld is
given by
gik=⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎝−/bracketleftBig
1+2/Phi1
c2/bracketrightBig
000
01 0 0
00 1 0
00 0 1⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎠. (12.70)
It is obvious that the general relativistic metric tensor (12.70) reduces to the
special relativistic metric tensor (12.60) in the absence of the gravitational ﬁeld.
It is instructive to work out the geodesic equation (12.51) for the metric
tensor given by (12.70) and to show that it is the same as the classical equation
for non-relativistic motion in a weak gravitational ﬁeld. In the following dis-
cussion, we shall use the superscript αto indicate indices 1, 2 or 3, but not 0.
For non-relativistic motion, the change dxαin the particle’s position during an
interval dthas to be much smaller than dx0=cdt. Hence the dominant terms
in(12.51) are
d2xm
ds2=−/Gamma1m
00dx0
dsdx0
ds, (12.71)
where there is no summation now. To proceed further, we have to calculate the
Christoffel symbol /Gamma1m
00, which involves derivatives of the metric tensor as seen
in(12.31) . If the gravitational potential /Phi1is independent of time, then the only
non-zero derivative of the metric tensor (12.70) is

<<<PAGE 398>>>

378 Elements of tensors and general relativity
∂g00
∂xα=−2
c2∂/Phi1
∂xα.
On using this, we ﬁnd from (12.31) that
/Gamma1α
00=1
c2∂/Phi1
∂xα, (12.72)
if we neglect terms quadratic in the small quantity /Phi1. Substituting this in (12.71)
and making use of the fact ds=icdτ,w eg e t
d2xα
dτ2=−1
c2∂/Phi1
∂xαdx0
dτdx0
dτ. (12.73)
It follows from (12.62) and(12.68) that
cdτ=dx0/radicalBigg
1+2/Phi1
c2−v2
c2. (12.74)
For non-relativistic motions in a weak gravitational ﬁeld for which we neglect
quadratics of /Phi1, we need to substitute
dx0
dτ=c
in(12.73) and take dτ=dt.T h e n(12.73) gives
d2xα
dt2=−∂/Phi1
∂xα,
which is the classical equation of motion. This completes our proof that generalrelativity and ordinary classical mechanics would give the same result if (12.68)
is the metric for a weak gravitational ﬁeld.
12.4 Formulation of general relativity
After discussing how general relativity can be used to study a weak gravitational
ﬁeld, we are now ready to present the complete formulation of general relativity.
As pointed out in §10.2, the central equation of general relativity is Einstein’s
equation telling us how the curvature of spacetime is related to the density ofmass-energy present in spacetime. In §12.2.4 we have introduced several tensors
associated with the curvature of space. It is the Einstein tensor G
ikdeﬁned
in(12.44) which turns out to be a particularly convenient tensor in the basic
formulation of the theory. Suppose we are able to ﬁnd a suitable second-ranktensor describing the mass-energy density. Then making G
ikproportional to this
tensor would give us an equation that would imply that the curvature of space-time is caused by mass-energy. Since the divergence of G
ikis zero according
to(12.45) , the divergence of the tensor giving the mass-energy density also

<<<PAGE 399>>>

12.4 Formulation of general relativity 379
has to be zero for the sake of consistency. The job before us now is to ﬁnd
a divergenceless second-rank tensor which describes the mass-energy density.This tensor is called the energy-momentum tensor . We shall now show that a
convenient tensor of this kind exists.
12.4.1 The energy-momentum tensor
For the time being, let us forget about relativity and show that the classicalhydrodynamic equations can be put in a form such that the divergence of asecond-rank tensor is zero. Then we shall consider how to generalize this tensor
to general relativity and thereby obtain the energy-momentum tensor. As in
the previous section, let us write x
0forctandx1,x2,x3for the three spatial
coordinates. The Roman indices i,j, . . . will run over the values 0, 1, 2, 3,
whereas the Greek indices α,β, ...w i l l r u n o v e r o n l y 1 , 2 , 3 . W e h a v e p o i n t e d
out in §12.2.1 that the generalized velocity transforms as a contravariant vector.
So we shall write the velocity components with indices at the top indicative ofcontravariant tensors. It is easy to see that the continuity equation (8.3) can be
written in the form
∂S
i
∂xi=0, (12.75)
where Siis a 4-vector with components (ρc,ρv1,ρv2,ρv3) and the index i
repeated twice implies that we are summing over 0, 1, 2, 3. We have
∂
∂t(ρvα)=vα∂ρ
∂t+ρ∂vα
∂t.
Let us now substitute for ∂ρ/∂ tfrom the continuity equation (8.3) and for
∂vα/∂tfrom the Euler equation (8.9) after setting the external force Fto zero.
This gives
∂
∂t(ρvα)=−vα∂
∂xβ(ρvβ)−ρvβ∂vα
∂xβ−∂P
∂xα,
where a Greek index αorβrepeated twice signiﬁes summation over only the
spatial components 1, 2, 3. It is easy to see that the above equation can be writtenin the form
∂
∂t(ρvα)+∂Tαβ
∂xβ=0, (12.76)
where
Tαβ=Pδαβ+ρvαvβ. (12.77)

<<<PAGE 400>>>

380 Elements of tensors and general relativity
We can now combine (12.75) and(12.76) in the compact form
∂(TNR)ik
∂xk=0, (12.78)
where (TNR)ikis the non-relativistic four-dimensional energy-momentum
tensor of which the various components are given by
(TNR)00=ρc2,(TNR)0α=(TNR)α0=ρcvα,(TNR)αβ=Tαβ.(12.79)
It should be noted that we have not invoked relativity in obtaining (12.78) .
Writing x0forcthas been merely a matter of notation. The equation (12.78)
combines the equations of continuity and motion of classical hydrodynamics,
showing that we can have a divergenceless second-rank tensor (TNR)ikin the
non-relativistic situation. We now have to generalize (TNR)ikto obtain the fully
relativistic energy-momentum tensor.
Let us ﬁrst consider how we generalize the concept of velocity in general
relativity. Suppose a particle has positions xiandxi+dxibefore and after an
inﬁnitesimal interval. The difference dxiis a 4-vector and the quotient obtained
by dividing it by a scalar will be a 4-vector as well. As in (12.58) and(12.68) ,
we introduce the time-like interval dτdeﬁned through
ds2=−c2dτ2=gikdxidxk. (12.80)
From discussions in the previous section, it should be clear that dτ→dtfor
non-relativistic motion in a weak gravitational ﬁeld. Since dτas introduced in
(12.80) must be a scalar, dxidivided by dτshould give us a 4-vector. We now
deﬁne the relativistic velocity 4-vector as
ui=1
cdxi
dτ. (12.81)
In the non-relativistic limit, this clearly reduces to
ui→/parenleftbigg
1,v1
c,v2
c,v3
c/parenrightbigg
. (12.82)
One interesting property of the velocity 4-vector is that
uiui=− 1. (12.83)
This can be easily proved if we use (12.14) to obtain uifrom uiand then use
(12.80) –(12.81). We now deﬁne the energy-momentum tensor
Tik=ρc2uiuk+P(gik+uiuk). (12.84)
We leave it as an exercise for the reader to verify that this reduces in the non-
relativistic limit to the non-relativistic tensor (TNR)ikas given by (12.79) .Y o u
need to assume that P/lessmuchρc2for a non-relativistic ﬂuid. The quantities like ρ
andPare deﬁned with respect to the rest frame of the ﬂuid.

<<<PAGE 401>>>

12.4 Formulation of general relativity 381
Since Tikis a proper relativistic second-rank tensor and reduces to the
non-relativistic expression in the appropriate limit, we take it to be the rela-
tivistic generalization of the energy-momentum tensor. Now we can generalizetheequation (12.78) also. We need to replace the ordinary derivative by the
covariant derivative apart from replacing (
TNR)ikbyTik.T h i sg i v e s
DTik
Dxk=0. (12.85)
This completes our task of ﬁnding a properly relativistic divergenceless second-rank tensor, which can be presumed to act as the source of curvature ofspacetime.
Before leaving the discussion of the energy-momentum tensor, let us con-
sider one important special case of this tensor. We consider a ﬂuid at rest. Thenthe spatial components of the 4-velocity must be zero, i.e.
u
i=(u0,0,0,0). (12.86)
It then follows from (12.83) that
u0u0=− 1. (12.87)
On lowering the index kin(12.84) by the usual procedure (12.14) ,w eh a v e
Ti
k=ρc2uiuk+P(δi
k+uiuk).
On making use of (12.86) and(12.87) ,t h i sg i v e s
Ti
k=⎛
⎜⎜⎝−ρc2000
0 P 00
00 P 0
00 0 P⎞
⎟⎟⎠. (12.88)
We pointed out in §10.3 that the Robertson–Walker metric (10.19) corresponds
to a co-moving coordinate system in which the material of the Universe is
assumed to be at rest. So the energy-momentum tensor of the Universe is given
by(12.88) when we use the co-moving coordinate system. We shall use this
result when we develop relativistic cosmology in §14.1.
12.4.2 Einstein’s equation
Since Gikdeﬁned in (12.44) andTikdeﬁned in (12.84) are both divergenceless
tensors, one being a measure of the curvature of spacetime and the other beinga measure of energy-momentum density, it is tempting to write
G
ik=κTik, (12.89)
where κis a constant. This equation would imply that the curvature of spacetime
is produced by the energy-momentum density, which is a basic requirement of

<<<PAGE 402>>>

382 Elements of tensors and general relativity
general relativity. It should be emphasized that we have not ‘derived’ (12.89) ,
but have given a string of arguments that such an equation may be expected.
Since the divergences of both sides are zero, there would not be any mathemati-
cal inconsistency when we take a divergence of (12.89) . If we want the curvature
of spacetime to be produced by mass-energy, then an equation like (12.89)
would be a natural possibility. Whether (12.89) is a really correct equation can
be determined only by checking if results derived from (12.89) are conﬁrmed
by experiments. We shall discuss some experimental conﬁrmations of general
relativity in the next chapter.
To complete our discussion, we need to determine the constant κ. If we can
determine the value of κin a special case, then that would be the true value of
κin all situations if it is a universal constant. We have discussed in §12.3 how
general relativity can be formulated in the case of a weak gravitational ﬁeld.We shall now determine κby applying (12.89) to a weak gravitational ﬁeld and
comparing it with the Newtonian theory of gravity.
Using (12.44) we can write (12.89) in the form
R
i
k−1
2δi
kR=κTi
k. (12.90)
We now carry on a contraction between the indices iandk, keeping in mind that
δi
i=4 because of the four dimensions of spacetime, allowing ito have values
0, 1, 2, 3. This gives
−R=κT,
where T=Ti
i. On substituting −κTforRin(12.90) ,w eh a v e
Ri
k=κ/parenleftbigg
Ti
k−1
2δi
kT/parenrightbigg
.
We shall now consider the following particular component of this equation
R0
0=κ/parenleftbigg
T0
0−1
2δ0
0T/parenrightbigg
. (12.91)
Let us apply (12.91) to the case of a weak gravitational ﬁeld produced by a
distribution of matter at rest in our coordinate system. The expression for theenergy-momentum tensor for matter at rest is given by (12.88) .I fP/lessmuchρc
2,t h e n
T≈T0
0=−ρc2.
On substituting this in (12.91) ,w eg e t
R0
0=−1
2κρc2. (12.92)

<<<PAGE 403>>>

12.4 Formulation of general relativity 383
Our job now is to ﬁnd the expression for R0
0from the metric (12.68) for the
weak gravitational ﬁeld. It follows from (12.41) that
R00=Ri
0i0=∂/Gamma1i
00
∂xi−∂/Gamma1i
0i
∂x0, (12.93)
if we neglect the quadratic terms in Christoffel symbols for a weak gravitational
ﬁeld. Since we are considering matter to be at rest, the ﬁeld should be indepen-dent of time and any derivative with respect to x
0=ctshould give zero. Then
(12.93) reduces to
R00=∂/Gamma1α
00
∂xα,
where αrepeated twice implies summation over 1, 2, 3 as usual. The Christoffel
symbol /Gamma1α
00for a weak gravitational ﬁeld was already determined in (12.72) .O n
substituting this,
R00=∂
∂xα/parenleftbigg1
c2∂/Phi1
∂xα/parenrightbigg
=1
c2∇2/Phi1.
To get R0
0, we merely have to multiply R00byg00≈− 1, since terms quadratic
in/Phi1are neglected. It then follows from (12.92) that
∇2/Phi1=κc4
2ρ. (12.94)
The Newtonian theory of gravity leads to the gravitational Poisson equation
∇2/Phi1=4πGρ.
Comparing this with (12.94) , we ﬁnally conclude that
κ=8πG
c4. (12.95)
On substituting the value of κin(12.89) ,w eh a v e
Gik=8πG
c4Tik. (12.96)
This is the famous Einstein equation and tells how matter-energy acts as a
source of the curvature of spacetime ( Einstein, 1916).
The compact tensorial notation makes Einstein’s equation (12.96) appear
deceptively simple. Although it is one of the most beautiful equations of math-
ematical physics, it also happens to be one of the most difﬁcult equations to
handle. Since particles move along geodesics and we need a knowledge ofthe metric tensor to determine the geodesics, most of the practical problemsin general relativity require the determination of the metric tensor for a given
matter-energy distribution. The connection between the metric tensor g
ikand
the Einstein tensor Gikfollows from (12.31) ,(12.41) and(12.44) . If we know
the energy-momentum tensor Tikin a particular situation, Einstein’s equation

<<<PAGE 404>>>

384 Elements of tensors and general relativity
(12.96) at once gives us the Einstein tensor Gik. But determining the metric
tensor gikafter that is not an easy job. There are very few cases of practical
importance where one can determine the metric tensor that would satisfy Ein-
stein’s equation. We shall consider some applications of general relativity in the
next two chapters, where we shall present some solutions of Einstein’s equation.
Exercises
12.1 Fully work out all the components of the Christoffel symbol, the
Riemann tensor and the Ricci tensor as well as the scalar curvature for the
following metrics
ds2=dr2+r2dθ2,
ds2=a2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2),
ds2=a2(dχ2+sinh2χdη2).
12.2 Show that the two covariant derivatives in general do not commute. For
a contravariant vector Ai, show especially that
/parenleftbiggD
DxkD
Dxl−D
DxlD
Dxk/parenrightbigg
Ai=− Ri
mlkAm.
12.3 From the tensor Ri
klmdeﬁned in (12.37), construct the tensor
Riklm=ginRn
klm
and show that
Riklm=1
2/parenleftbigg∂2gim
∂xk∂xl+∂2gkl
∂xi∂xm−∂2gil
∂xk∂xm−∂2gkm
∂xi∂xl/parenrightbigg
+gnp(/Gamma1n
kl/Gamma1p
im−/Gamma1n
km/Gamma1p
il)
from which you can demonstrate the following symmetry properties
Riklm=− Rkilm,Riklm=− Rikml,Riklm=Rlmik.
We need to show that gimRn
ilmappearing in (12.47) has to be equal to Rn
lin
order to complete the proof that the Einstein tensor is divergenceless. You arenow asked to prove this by using the symmetry properties just obtained. [Hint:You have to write
g
imRn
ilm=gimgnkRkilm
and then use some symmetry properties of Rkilm.]

<<<PAGE 405>>>

Exercises 385
12.4 Suppose xi(s)and xi(s)+δxi(s)are the points on two inﬁnitesi-
mally separated geodesics, where sis a parameter measured along either of
these geodesics. Show that δxi, which measures the separation between the
geodesics, satisﬁes
D2
Ds2δxi=− Ri
klmδxldxk
dsdxm
ds,
where D/Ds=(dxi/ds)D/Dxiis the covariant derivative along the arc-
length of either geodesic.
12.5 Prove that the equator on a spherical surface (which is a great circle) is a
geodesic, but any other circle of constant latitude parallel to the equator is not
a geodesic.
12.6 The special relativistic metric is
ds2=−c2dt2+dx2+dy2+dz2.
Consider a frame rotating uniformly around the zaxis with respect to this frame
such that
t/prime=t,z/prime=z,x/prime=xcos/Omega1t+ysin/Omega1t,y/prime=−xsin/Omega1t+ycos/Omega1t.
Find out the metrics gikandgikin the rotating frame and explicitly verify that
gikgkm=δi
m.
12.7 The metric
ds2=−/parenleftbigg
1+2/Phi1
c2/parenrightbigg
c2dt2+dx2+dy2+dz2
can describe the motion of a non-relativistic particle in a weak gravitational
ﬁeld (where /Phi1is the non-relativistic gravitational potential due to some density
distribution ρ). Calculate the Einstein tensor Gxxfor this metric and verify if
the corresponding component of Einstein’s equation is satisﬁed. If not, how doyou account for it?

<<<PAGE 406>>>



<<<PAGE 407>>>

13
Some applications of
general relativity
13.1 Time and length measurements
While the formulation of general relativity presented in §12.4 may appear
somewhat formal, a physical theory ultimately has to make contact with the
results of measurements. Before considering applications of general relativity,we need to understand how the results of time and length measurements can be
expressed in terms of the quantities appearing in the mathematical theory.
We keep following the notation that Roman indices i,j, . . . will run over
the values 0, 1, 2, 3, whereas the Greek indices α,β, . . . will run over only 1,
2, 3. Writing the time part of the metric separately, we can write the spacetimemetric in the form
ds
2=g00(dx0)2+2g0αdx0dxα+gαβdxαdxβ, (13.1)
where x0is the time-like coordinate. The metric tensor component g0αgives
rise to cross-terms between the time and space coordinates in (13.1). In our ele-
mentary treatment of general relativity, we shall restrict ourselves to examples
in which g0α=0. The mathematical theory becomes much more complicated if
g0αis not equal to zero, which happens when rotation is present in a system (see
Exercise 12.6). For example, the metric around a rotating black hole (known asthe Kerr metric) has non-zero g
0α. We shall not discuss such cases in this book.
Ifg0α=0, then (13.1) reduces to
ds2=g00(dx0)2+gαβdxαdxβ. (13.2)
Suppose some observer is at position xαat time x0and at the position xα+
dxαat time x0+dx0. In the special relativistic situation, it is easy to show
387

<<<PAGE 408>>>

388 Some applications of general relativity
that the physical time interval dτmeasured by the observer’s clock is related
todsby
ds2=−c2dτ2, (13.3)
where ds2is given by the special relativistic metric (12.59) and(12.60) .E v e n
in a general relativistic situation, we can always introduce an inertial frame in
a local region of spacetime where special relativity holds. We thus expect thatthe physical time dτmeasured by the observer’s clock should satisfy the same
relation (13.3) in general relativity also. We now consider an observer at rest
such that the position x
αdoes not change. It then follows from (13.2) and(13.3)
that the physical time measured by the observer’s clock is given by
dτ=1
c√−g00dx0. (13.4)
This is our ﬁrst important relation. If an observer is at rest in a coordinate frame
a n da ni n t e r v a li s dx0in the time-like coordinate x0, then the actual physical
time interval measured by a clock is given by multiplying dx0by√−g00/c.
We now discuss how we can ﬁnd the physical distance between the neigh-
bouring points xαandxα+dxα. Suppose a light signal is sent from the ﬁrst
point to the second point, where it is reﬂected back towards the ﬁrst point
immediately. The physical time interval between the moment when the lightsignal leaves the ﬁrst point and the moment when the light signal comes backthere should be equal to 2 dl/c,w h e r edl is the physical distance between
the two neighbouring points, if we assume that the light signal propagates atspeed c. If two events are connected by a light signal, we know that in special
relativity we have
ds
2=0. (13.5)
The same consideration should hold in general relativity as well, since we can
always introduce inertial frames in local regions. It follows from (13.2) and
(13.5) that
dx0=/radicalBigg
−gαβdxαdxβ
g00. (13.6)
Let us clarify the signiﬁcance of this. A light signal starting from the ﬁrst point
xαatx0−dx0should reach the second point xα+dxαatx0. If the light signal
is immediately reﬂected back from the second point, it will again reach backto the ﬁrst point at x
0+dx0. Thus the moment when the light signal leaves
the ﬁrst point and the moment when the light signal comes back there differ
by 2 dx0, with dx0given by (13.6). To get the physical time interval, we have

<<<PAGE 409>>>

13.2 Gravitational redshift 389
to multiply this by√−g00/c, as suggested in (13.4). On equating this physical
time interval to 2 dl/c,w eﬁ n d
dl=/radicalBig
gαβdxαdxβ. (13.7)
This second important relation gives the physical length between the neighbour-
ing points xαandxα+dxα. The length of a curve between two distant points
can be obtained by integrating the length element given by (13.7), provided all
the components of gαβare independent of time. If gαβchanges with time during
the propagation of the light signal from one point to another distant point, thenwe can meaningfully talk only about length elements dlalong the path and
not the length of the whole path. For the Robertson–Walker metric introducedin(10.19) , the metric tensor evolves with time due to the time dependence of
a(t). Hence one has to take special care to treat the propagation of light in the
expanding Universe or to talk about distances to faraway galaxies, as we shallsee in §14.3 and§14.4.
The discussion of the previous paragraph also leads to the concept of
simultaneity. An observer at the ﬁrst point x
αsees the light signal leaving at
x0−dx0and returning back at x0+dx0. Since the median value of the time-
like coordinate between these two moments is x0, this observer would expect
the light signal to reach the second point at time x0in his clock. We have already
pointed out that the signal reaches the second point xα+dxαwhen the time-
like coordinate at the second point has the value x0. This means that x0at the
ﬁrst point is simultaneous with x0at the second point. Extending this argument,
events taking place at different spatial points are simultaneous if the time-like
coordinate has the same value x0for these events. The coordinate x0is often
called the world time . We need to consider the world time to ﬁgure out whether
different events are simultaneous, whereas the physical time can be obtained
from the world time by using (13.4).S i n c e g00will in general have different
values at different spatial points, it is clear that clocks will run at different ratesat different spatial points.
13.2 Gravitational redshift
We consider a constant gravitational ﬁeld where the coordinates can be chosen
in such a way that the metric tensor components are independent of time.
Suppose a periodic signal is sent from point Ato point B. Let a pulse be emitted
atAat world time x0
eand reach Bat world time x0
r, the propagation time being
x0
r−x0
e. Suppose the next pulse is emitted at Aat world time x0
e+T0.F o ra
constant gravitational ﬁeld, the propagation time of this pulse to Bwill be the
same as the propagation time of the ﬁrst pulse. Hence the second pulse willreach Bat the world time (x
0
e+T0)+(x0
r−x0
e)=x0
r+T0. This means that

<<<PAGE 410>>>

390 Some applications of general relativity
observers at Aand Bwould both record the same world time difference T0
between the two pulses. Using (13.4) to relate the world time to the physical
time, we conclude that the physical period TAinferred by observer Aand the
physical period TBinferred by observer Bshould be related by
TA
TB=/radicalBigg
−(g00)A
−(g00)B=ωB
ωA, (13.8)
where ωAandωBare the frequencies of some periodic signal measured at Aand
Brespectively. This is the general expression showing how the frequency of a
signal changes on propagating from one point in a gravitational ﬁeld to another.
We shall now consider some simpliﬁcations for weak gravitational ﬁelds.
For a weak gravitational ﬁeld, we can use (12.70) so that
√−g00=/radicalbigg
1+2/Phi1
c2≈1+/Phi1
c2.
On using this, (13.8) gives
ωB
ωA=1+/Phi1A
c2
1+/Phi1B
c2, (13.9)
where /Phi1A,/Phi1Bare Newtonian gravitational potentials at A,B. For a weak
gravitational ﬁeld, (13.9) can further be written as
ωB=ωA/parenleftbigg
1+/Phi1A−/Phi1B
c2/parenrightbigg
. (13.10)
Suppose the point Bis further away than Afrom the central region of the
gravitational ﬁeld. It is easy to check that the potential difference /Phi1A−/Phi1B
should be negative, making ωB<ω A. As a periodic signal makes its way out
of a gravitational ﬁeld, the frequency will decrease. For light coming out of agravitational ﬁeld, the spectrum should be shifted towards the red. This is thefamous gravitational redshift predicted by general relativity. Pound and Rebka
(1960) were able to verify the gravitational shift of wavelength by a brilliant
terrestrial experiment, in which γ-rays from a source kept at the top of a tower
were allowed to travel to the bottom where they were absorbed and analysed.
13.3 The Schwarzschild metric
We pointed out in §12.4.2 that Einstein’s equation (12.96) , which is the central
equation of general relativity, is very difﬁcult to solve and complete solutions
are known only for a few cases of practical importance. The simplest gravi-
tational problem one can think of is to ﬁnd the gravitational ﬁeld due to an
isolated point mass M. Soon after Einstein’s formulation of general relativity,
Schwarzschild (1916) obtained the exact solution of this problem.

<<<PAGE 411>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 391
Let us choose the position of the mass Mas the origin of our coordinate
system and use spherical coordinates. According to the Newtonian theory of
gravity, the gravitational potential at a distance ris given by
/Phi1=−GM
r. (13.11)
Far away from the mass point where the gravitational ﬁeld is weak, the metricshould be given by the expression (12.68) valid in the weak ﬁeld limit. Substi-
tuting for /Phi1from (13.11) and using spherical coordinates, we write
ds
2(r→∞)=−/parenleftbigg
1−2GM
c2r/parenrightbigg
c2dt2+dr2+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2).
(13.12)
Since there is no matter in space at points other than the point r=0, the energy-
momentum tensor given by (12.88) should be zero at all points except r=0.
Then, according to Einstein’s equation (12.96), the Einstein tensor also must be
zero at all points except r=0. Our job now is to ﬁnd a metric which tends to
(13.12) asr→∞ and for which the Einstein tensor is zero at all points except
r=0. The metric satisfying these requirements is the famous Schwarzschild
metric:
ds2=−/parenleftbigg
1−2GM
c2r/parenrightbigg
c2dt2+dr2
/parenleftbig
1−2GM/c2r/parenrightbig+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2).
(13.13)
Calculating the Einstein tensor for this metric involves a huge amount of alge-bra. The ﬁrst step in calculating the Einstein tensor is the calculation of theChristoffel symbols. As pointed out in §12.2.3, the Christoffel symbols have
40 components in four-dimensional spacetime. Some of these components turn
out to be zero. Still one has to take care of many non-zero components. It is
instructive to go through this tedious but straightforward algebra once in yourlifetime and to show that all components of the Einstein tensor for the metric(13.13) are zero at points other than r=0. When ris very large, 2 GM/c
2r
becomes small compared to 1. If we neglect this in the coefﬁcient of dr2in
(13.13) , we are led to (13.12) . One may wonder whether we ought to keep
2GM/c2rin the coefﬁcient of dt2, while neglecting it in the coefﬁcient of
dr2. It is not difﬁcult to justify this. Suppose a particle is at the point r,θ,φ
at time tand at the point r+dr,θ+dθ,φ+dφat time t+dt. If the particle
is moving non-relativistically, then we must have dr2/lessmuchc2dt2. Hence the term
involving dr2is itself small and a small term in its coefﬁcient is of second order
of smallness. When we neglect this term, we still have to keep the similar term
in the coefﬁcient of dt2.
It may be noted that the coefﬁcient of dr2in(13.13) diverges when rhas
the value
rS=2GM
c2. (13.14)

<<<PAGE 412>>>

392 Some applications of general relativity
This is called the Schwarzschild radius . We shall make some comments about
the signiﬁcance of the Schwarzschild radius in §13.3.3. We already pointed out
in§1.5 that the effect of general relativity can be neglected if fdeﬁned in
(1.11), which is equal to rS/r, is small compared to 1. This means that at radial
distances large compared to rSgeneral relativistic effects can be neglected.
This also follows from the fact that the metric at such large distances can be
approximated by (13.12) , which leads to the same results as what we would get
from the Newtonian theory of gravity (see §12.3).
We would expect the metric around a black hole to be given by (13.13) .
This is certainly true if the black hole is not rotating. In the Newtonian theoryof gravity, the gravitational ﬁeld due to a mass does not depend on whether the
mass is rotating or not. One of the intriguing results of general relativity is that a
rotating mass tries to drag bodies around it to rotate with it (Thirring and Lense ,
1918). Kerr (1963) discovered the exact metric for rotating black holes. It has
cross-terms between time and space coordinates, unlike the Schwarzschild met-
ric which does not have such cross-terms. These cross-terms are responsible for
the rotational dragging. We shall not discuss the Kerr metric in this elementary
book.
13.3.1 Particle motion in Schwarzschild geometry.
The perihelion precession
A particle will move along a geodesic in the Schwarzschild metric. One canuse the geodesic equation (12.51) to study the motions of particles. We shall,
however, present a discussion starting more from the basics.
Since the Schwarzschild metric is spherically symmetric, a particle moving
in this metric should always lie in a plane passing through the origin. We leaveit to the reader to ﬁnd good arguments to justify this. We can choose the plane ofmotion to be the equatorial plane in which θ=π/2a n ds i n θ=1. A standard
convention in general relativity is to choose units of length and time such that
candGturn out to be 1. Setting c=1a n d G=1, it follows from (13.13) that
the metric lying in the equatorial plane is given by
ds
2=−dτ2=−/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg
dt2+dr2
/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig+r2dφ2. (13.15)
If a particle moves from a spacetime point Ato a spacetime point B, then the
path length between them (which turns out to be the proper time measured in a
clock carried with the particle) is given by
/integraldisplayB
Adτ=/integraldisplayB
ALdλ, (13.16)

<<<PAGE 413>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 393
where λis a parameter measured along the path of the particle and Lis
given by
L=/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbt/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggdt
dλ/parenrightbigg2
−(dr/dλ)2
/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig−r2/parenleftbiggdφ
dλ/parenrightbigg2
. (13.17)
The basic idea of general relativity is that the particle should follow a geodesic
along which the integral given by (13.16) has to be an extremum. This require-
ment implies that Lgiven by (13.17) should satisfy the Lagrange equation
d
dλ/parenleftbigg∂L
∂(dqi/dλ)/parenrightbigg
−∂L
∂qi=0,
where qican be t,rorφ(see, for example, Mathews and Walker, 1979, §12–1).
It is seen from (13.17) thatLis independent of tandφ. This suggests that we
shall have the following two constants of motion
∂L
∂(dt/dλ)=/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig
dt
dλ
L=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbiggdt
dτ,
∂L
∂(dφ/dλ)=−r2dφ
dλ
L=−r2dφ
dτ,
since L=dτ/dλ. We denote these constants of motion by eand−l,i . e .
e=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbiggdt
dτ, (13.18)
l=r2dφ
dτ. (13.19)
Dividing (13.15) bydτ2and using these constants of motion, we get
e2
/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig−(dr/dτ)2
/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig−l2
r2=1.
On rearranging terms a little bit, this can be put in the form
e2−1
2=1
2/parenleftbiggdr
dτ/parenrightbigg2
+Veff(r), (13.20)
where
Veff(r)=−M
r+l2
2r2−Ml2
r3. (13.21)
It is to be noted that the problem is now reduced to a one-dimensional problem
ofras a function of τ, since the tandφcoordinates have been eliminated with
the help of the two constants of motion.

<<<PAGE 414>>>

394 Some applications of general relativity
To proceed further, it is now instructive to make some comparisons with
the problem of particle motion in an inverse-square law force ﬁeld in classical
mechanics. This problem is often referred to as the Kepler problem and has been
discussed by Goldstein (1980, §3–2, §3–3) and by Landau and Lifshitz (1976,
§14, §15). Readers are urged to refresh their memories about this problem,since we are going to use many analogies with this problem. The classicalKepler problem also has two constants of motion – the angular momentum and
the energy. Our constant of motion lgiven by (13.19) is clearly the general
relativistic generalization of the classical angular momentum. To interpret e
deﬁned by (13.18) , we consider the motion of a particle in the faraway regions
where the gravitational ﬁeld is weak. Then the relation between dtanddτcan
be obtained from (12.74) .O nu s i n g(12.74) and(13.11) , it readily follows from
(13.18) that
e≈1+/Phi1
c2+1
2v2
c2. (13.22)
Here we have not set cequal to 1 to make the physics clearer. It is obvious that
emultiplied by mc2would give the sum of the rest mass, potential and kinetic
energies in the non-relativistic limit. It follows from (13.22) that
e2−1
2≈/Phi1
c2+1
2v2
c2.
The right-hand side is essentially the total energy (sum of potential and kinetic
energies) used in classical mechanics calculations. We thus identify (e2−1)/2
as the relativistic generalization of the classical energy. Now it is easy to inter-pret (13.20) . The term (1/2)(dr /dτ)
2is like the kinetic energy. Then (13.20)
implies that (e2−1)/2, which is a constant and reduces to the classical energy
in the non-relativistic limit, has to be equal to the sum of the kinetic energy andan effective potential V
eff(r). The classical Kepler problem also gives rise to a
one-dimensional equation exactly similar to (13.20) , except that the effective
potential does not have the last term −Ml2/r3appearing in (13.21) (see, for
example, Goldstein ,1980, §3–3; Landau and Lifshitz, 1976, §15). It is this
last term −Ml2/r3which makes results of general relativity different from the
classical Kepler problem. When ris much larger than rS(which is equal to
2Min our units), this last term in (13.21) becomes negligible compared to the
previous term l2/2r2and the general relativistic effects disappear. It is easy to
check that, if we had used the metric (13.12) in our calculations rather than
(13.13) , then this last term would not be there in (13.21) .
The values of rat which Veff(r)has extrema can be obtained from
dVeff
dr=0,

<<<PAGE 415>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 395
Fig. 13.1 Plots of Veff(r)given by (13.21) for the cases (i) l2=16M2and (ii) l2=
10M2. The dashed horizontal lines indicate possible values of (e2−1)/2.
which gives
r=l2
2M⎡
⎣1±/radicalBigg
1−12/parenleftbiggM
l/parenrightbigg2⎤⎦. (13.23)
Ifl
2>12M2,t h e n Veff(r)has extrema for two real values of rgiven by (13.23) .
On the other hand, if l2<12M2, then there is no extremum for any real value
ofr.Figures 13.1(a) and 13.1(b) respectively show plots of Veff(r)for one case
with l2>12M2and one case with l2<12M2.I nFigure 13.1 (a), a possible

<<<PAGE 416>>>

396 Some applications of general relativity
value of (e2−1)/2 is indicated by a horizontal dashed line, which cuts the curve
Veff(r)at two points r1andr2.S i n c e(dr /dτ)2in(13.20) is always positive,
we easily see that (13.20) can be satisﬁed only if rlies between r1andr2.
We must have r=r1andr=r2as the two turning points within which the
orbit of the particle should be conﬁned. In the case of Figure 13.1(b), it is not
possible for the orbit to be conﬁned from the lower side. This implies that a
particle with l2<12M2should keep falling inward till it hits the central mass.
What does this signify? If we throw a particle with zero angular momentumtowards a gravitating mass, the particle will fall into the gravitating mass. Ifthe gravitating mass is a point, then in the Newtonian theory of gravity evena very small angular momentum can make sure that the particle does not fall
into the gravitating mass. We see in general relativity that the particle has to
have an angular momentum with amplitude larger than 2√
3Min order not to
fall into the central mass. There is one other important point to be made. When
l2>12M2andVeff(r)has two extremum points, it is possible for a particle
to have a circular orbit if it is located at the minimum of Veff(r). The limiting
circular orbit is obtained when l2=12M2. On substituting this in (13.23) ,w e
ﬁnd
r=6M=3rS (13.24)
as the lowest value of rabove which a circular orbit is possible. It is not possible
for a particle to go around a black hole in a circular orbit of radius less than 3 rS.
The circular orbit of radius 3 rSis called the last stable orbit .
The determination of the orbit
Finally we now want to calculate the orbit of the particle, which should be inthe form of a functional relation between randφ. It follows from (13.20) that
dr
dτ=±/radicalbig
e2−1−2Veff(r). (13.25)
From (13.19) we have
dφ
dτ=l
r2.
On dividing (13.25) by this and then squaring, we get
/parenleftbiggl
r2dr
dφ/parenrightbigg2
=e2−1−2Veff(r). (13.26)
To proceed further, we make the substitution
r=1
u, (13.27)

<<<PAGE 417>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 397
which is a standard procedure followed in the classical Kepler problem also.
Then
dr
dφ=−1
u2du
dφ
so that (13.26) becomes
l2/parenleftbiggdu
dφ/parenrightbigg2
=e2−1−2Veff(u). (13.28)
Differentiating both sides with respect to φ,w eg e t
2l2du
dφd2u
dφ2=− 2dVeff
dudu
dφ. (13.29)
We cancel 2 du/dφfrom both the sides and then write (13.21) in the form
Veff(u)=− Mu+1
2l2u2−Ml2u3
to calculate dVeff/du.T h i sg i v e s
d2u
dφ2+u=1
p+3Mu2, (13.30)
where
p=l2
M. (13.31)
The orbit as a relation between uandφcan be obtained by solving the orbit
equation (13.30) .
The last term in (13.30) comes from the last term in (13.21) .W eh a v e
already identiﬁed this term as the contribution of general relativity. If this lastterm were not present in the orbit equation (13.30), then it would be the equation
of an ellipse, as we ﬁnd in the classical Kepler problem. Let us try to solve(13.30) for a situation where the general relativistic effect is small and the last
term in (13.30) can be treated as a small perturbation compared to the other
terms. The zeroth order solution of (13.30) in the absence of this last term
would be
u
0=1
p(1+/epsilon1cosφ). (13.32)
This is the equation of an ellipse with eccentricity /epsilon1. Let us now try a solution
of the form
u=u0+u1, (13.33)

<<<PAGE 418>>>

398 Some applications of general relativity
where u0is given by (13.32) . On substituting this in (13.30) and approximating
the small perturbation term as 3 Mu2≈3Mu2
0,w eg e t
d2u1
dφ2+u1=3Mu20.
On substituting for u0from (13.32) ,w eg e t
d2u1
dφ2+u1=3M
p2(1+2/epsilon1cosφ+/epsilon12cos2φ). (13.34)
The term 2 /epsilon1cosφin the right-hand side acts like a resonant forcing term, since
it varies with φthe same way as u0. As the effect of this term is going to be
much more signiﬁcant than that of the other two terms in the right-hand side of
(13.34) , we can neglect these other two terms. When we keep only the 2 /epsilon1cosφ
term in the right-hand side of (13.34) , its solution can be written down as
u1=3M/epsilon1
p2φsinφ, (13.35)
which can be veriﬁed by substituting in (13.34) .F r o m(13.32) ,(13.33) and
(13.35) ,w eh a v e
u=1
p/bracketleftbigg
1+/epsilon1cosφ+3M/epsilon1
pφsinφ/bracketrightbigg
.
When 3 Mφ/pis small compared to 1, this can be written as
u=1
p/bracketleftbigg
1+/epsilon1cos/braceleftbigg
φ/parenleftbigg
1−3M
p/parenrightbigg/bracerightbigg/bracketrightbigg
. (13.36)
If the particle followed an exact elliptical path as given by (13.32) , then the
value of uwould be repeated when φchanges by 2π . It follows from (13.36)
thatuwould repeat when φchanges by 2 π+δφ,w h e r e
δφ=2π3M
p=6πM2
l2
on using (13.31) . Clearly δφis the angle by which the perihelion of the particle
precesses during one revolution. If one puts back Gandcwhich were set to 1
in our analysis, then the expression for the perihelion precession is given by
δφ=6π/parenleftbiggGM
cl/parenrightbigg2
. (13.37)
For the planet Mercury, the perihelion precession rate turns out to be 43/prime/prime
per century (Exercise 13.4). This provided one of the famous tests of generalrelativity.

<<<PAGE 419>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 399
13.3.2 Motion of massless particles. The bending of light
A photon or a massless particle moving with speed cfollows a special geodesic
for which
ds2=0.
A geodesic with this property is called a null geodesic. For such a massless
particle moving in the equatorial plane, (13.15) becomes
/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg
dt2−dr2
/parenleftBig
1−2M
r/parenrightBig−r2dφ2=0. (13.38)
Even for a massless particle, we expect the energy and the angular momentum
to be conserved because of the symmetry with respect to tandφ.H o w e v e r , e
andlas deﬁned in (13.18) and(13.19) tend to be inﬁnite, since dτ→0 along
the trajectory of the particle as its mass goes to zero. But the ratio
e
l=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg1
r2dt
dφ(13.39)
would remain ﬁnite and constant even when the mass tends to zero. In the case
of a particle with mass, we had used the proper time τ(which would be the time
measured by a clock moving with the particle) as a label to mark the trajectoryof the particle. For the massless particle, dτ=0a n dτ can no longer be used
to label the trajectory. So we introduced an afﬁne parameter λwhich increases
along the trajectory of the massless particle in such a way that
e=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbiggdt
dλ(13.40)
remains constant. Then
l=r2dφ
dλ(13.41)
also has to be a constant to make the ratio given in (13.39) a constant. Thus, for
a massless particle, we deﬁne eandlwith the help of the afﬁne parameter λ
rather than the proper time τas done in (13.18) and(13.19) .
Dividing (13.38) bydλ2,w eg e t
e2−(dr/dλ)2
1−2M/r=l2
r2
on using (13.40) and(13.41) .F r o mt h i s
e2
l2−1
l2/parenleftbiggdr
dλ/parenrightbigg2
=1
r2/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg
,

<<<PAGE 420>>>

400 Some applications of general relativity
Fig. 13.2 A plot of the effective potential Qeff(r)for a massless particle given by
(13.43). The dashed horizontal line indicates a possible value of 1 /b2.
which can be written as
1
b2=1
l2/parenleftbiggdr
dλ/parenrightbigg2
+Qeff(r), (13.42)
where b=l/eis clearly a constant of motion and
Qeff(r)=1
r2/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg
, (13.43)
which is plotted in Figure 13.2 , has a maximum at r=3Mwith a value
(27M2)−1.Figure 13.2 also shows a dashed horizontal line indicating a possible
value of 1 /b2less than (27M2)−1. It easily follows from (13.42) thatrhas
to be restricted to a lower limit r1if the trajectory is on the right side of the
Qeff(r)curve. In other words, a massless particle coming from inﬁnity would
not approach any closer than r1.H o w e v e r ,i fw eh a v eb <3√
3M,m a k i n g1 /b2
larger than (27M2)−1, then the horizontal line corresponding to 1 /b2would
be above the maximum of Qeff(r)and a massless particle coming from inﬁnity
would fall into the gravitating mass M.
To understand the signiﬁcance of the important result that a massless par-
ticle coming from inﬁnity with b<3√
3Mwould be captured by the mass M,
let us try to ﬁgure out the physical meaning of b.A t rmuch larger than the
Schwarzschild radius 2 M, it follows from (13.40) and(13.41) that
b≈r2dφ
dt. (13.44)

<<<PAGE 421>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 401
Fig. 13.3 A massless particle
approaching the central mass M
from a large distance with an
impact parameter h.
We now consider a massless particle approaching the central mass Mfrom a
large distance with the impact parameter has shown in Figure 13.3.T h e xaxis
is chosen in such a way that the particle moves in the negative xdirection. If the
polar angle φis measured with respect to the xaxis, then we have
tanφ=h
x,
which on differentiation with respect to tgives
sec2φdφ
dt=−h
x2dx
dt.
Here−dx/dtis the speed of the particle, which is c=1 in our units. Hence
dφ
dt=h
(xsecφ)2=h
r2.
Comparing it with (13.44) , we at once see that
b=h,
which means that the parameter bis nothing but the impact parameter with
which the massless particle approaches the mass M. When this impact parame-
ter is less than 3√
3M, the massless particle or the photon gets captured by the
central mass M.
The orbit of light
If the massless particle has an impact parameter much larger than 3√
3M,t h e n
its trajectory will be slightly bent. To calculate this bending, we ﬁrst have to
derive the orbit equation. From (13.42) ,w eg e t
dr
dλ=±l/radicalbigg
1
b2−Qeff(r).
Substituting for lfrom (13.41) ,w eh a v e
dr
dφ=±r2/radicalbigg
1
b2−Qeff(r),

<<<PAGE 422>>>

402 Some applications of general relativity
so that
/parenleftbigg1
r2dr
dφ/parenrightbigg2
=1
b2−Qeff(r), (13.45)
which can be compared with (13.26) . We proceed to solve it in exactly the same
way we solved (13.26) . By introducing the variable u=1/rand using (13.43)
to write
Qeff(u)=u2−2Mu3,
we put (13.45) in the form
/parenleftbiggdu
dφ/parenrightbigg2
=1
b2−u2+2Mu3.
Differentiating with respect to φand cancelling 2 du/dφfrom both sides,
we ﬁnally get the orbit equation
d2u
dφ2+u=3Mu2, (13.46)
which has to be solved to ﬁnd uas a function of φgiving the orbit.
It is easy to check that the term 3 Mu2on the right-hand side of (13.46)
is the general relativistic effect. When this term is small, we can solve (13.46)
by following the same perturbative approach which we followed to solve the
orbit equation (13.30) for particles with non-zero mass. When the 3 Mu2term
is neglected, we can write the zeroth order solution as
u0=cosφ
R, (13.47)
where Ris the distance of the closest approach and φis deﬁned in such a way
that we have φ=0 at the point of closest approach. Again writing uin the form
(13.33) ,w eﬁ n dt h a tu 1should satisfy the equation
d2u1
dφ2+u1=3Mu2
0=3M
R2cos2φ,
of which a solution is
u1=M
R2(1+sin2φ). (13.48)
Then the full solution can be written down by adding (13.47) and(13.48) ,i . e .
u=cosφ
R+M
R2(1+sin2φ). (13.49)
Since we have chosen φ=0 at the point of closest approach, the incoming and
the outgoing directions of the massless particle would have been −π/ 2a n dπ/ 2
respectively if the particle travelled in a straight line. This will be clear from

<<<PAGE 423>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 403
p/2 –p/2
R
M
(p+Df)/2 –(p+Df)/2
Fig. 13.4 The trajectory of light bent by an angle /Delta1φwhile passing by the side of the
mass M. The angle φis measured with respect to the vertical direction such that φ=0
at the point of closest approach.
Figure 13.4 . If the particle undergoes a deﬂection /Delta1φ, then the incoming and
outgoing directions are
φ=∓/parenleftbiggπ
2+/Delta1φ
2/parenrightbigg
.
Then we have
cosφ=− sin/Delta1φ
2≈−/Delta1φ
2
on assuming /Delta1φto be small. When the massless particle initially starts from
inﬁnity or ﬁnally reaches inﬁnity, we have u≈0a n ds i n φ≈1. Hence (13.49)
gives
0≈−/Delta1φ
2R+M
R2(1+1),
from which we ﬁnally have
/Delta1φ=4M
R.
On putting back Gandc, this becomes
/Delta1φ=4GM
c2R. (13.50)
If a light ray passes by the side of a mass Msuch that the closest distance of
approach is R, then the light ray is bent by the amount /Delta1φgiven by the famous
relation (13.50) .
If we substitute the mass and radius of the Sun for Mand Rin(13.50) ,
then/Delta1φturns out to be 1 .75/prime/prime. This means that light from a star at the edge of
the solar disk will be bent in such a way that the star will appear to be shifted
outward from the centre of the solar disk by 1 .75/prime/prime. We of course cannot see stars

<<<PAGE 424>>>

404 Some applications of general relativity
Fig. 13.5 An illustration of gravitational lensing by the mass Mlocated symmetrically
between the source Sand the observer O.
at the edge of the solar disk under normal circumstances. Such stars, however, may
become visible at the time of the total solar eclipse. Comparing their positions
around the eclipsed Sun with their usual positions, one can determine whethera shift has taken place. Eddington and his colleagues carried out this exerciseduring an eclipse in 1919 and announced the discovery of the bending of light in
conformity with general relativity ( Dyson, Eddington and Davidson, 1920).
Gravitational lensing
There is one very important application of the gravitational bending of light in
extragalactic astronomy. It is the phenomenon of gravitational lensing. Suppose
there is a massive object Mexactly between a source Sand an observer Oas
shown in Figure 13.5 . Light rays from the source Spassing by Mon different
sides will be deﬂected by the angle /Delta1φ. The observer will then see the source S
in the form of a ring. Such a ring is known as an Einstein ring . A few examples
of nearly perfect Einstein rings are known. Figure 13.6 shows an almost com-
plete Einstein ring. We expect to see a perfect ring only if the lensing-producingmass Mis located symmetrically on the line of sight between SandO.I na
less symmetric situation, we would see arcs of the ring rather than the whole
ring. Many images of extragalactic sources in the forms of extended arcs are
known, suggesting that gravitational lensing is a quite common phenomenon inthe extragalactic world.
Let us also comment on another kind of gravitational lensing. As we have
discussed in §9.2.2, the rotation curves of spiral galaxies suggest the presence
of dark matter associated with these galaxies. One possibility is that the darkmatter exists in the form of massive compact objects (from something like alarge planet to something having a few solar masses) in the halo of the galaxy.
Suppose one such object in the halo of our Galaxy comes between us and a
star in a nearby galaxy. As gravitational lensing would amplify the light fromthe star, the star would appear brighter as long as the compact object remainsbetween us and the star. Since such an event would be very rare and one cannot
predict when a particular star is likely to be lensed, the best way of detecting
such lensing events is to monitor a rich ﬁeld of extragalactic stars for a long timeto see if the brightness of any star is temporarily enhanced. Events of this kindin which stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud temporarily appeared brighter

<<<PAGE 425>>>

13.3 The Schwarzschild metric 405
04 55 51.5
A
B51.0
50.550.049.549.048.548.047.547.0
11 31 56.55 56.50 56.45
RIGHT ASCENSION (J2000)DECLINATION (J2000)
56.40 56.35 56.30 56.25
Fig. 13.6 A nearly complete Einstein ring MG 1131+0456 imaged at the radio fre-
quency 15 GHz by the VLA (Very Large Array). From Chen and Hewitt (1993).
(c/circlecopyrtAmerican Astronomical Society. Reproduced with permission from Astronomical
Journal.)
typically by 1 magnitude for a few days were ﬁrst reported simultaneously
by two groups (Alcock et al. ,1993; Aubourg et al. ,1993). From a study of
such events, it seems that a part of the dark matter associated with our Galaxy,but probably not the whole of it, is in the form of compact objects in the
galactic halo.
13.3.3 Singularity and horizon
It should be clear from the expression (13.13) of the Schwarzschild metric that
gttbecomes inﬁnite at r=0a n d grrbecomes inﬁnite at the Schwarzschild
radius rSgiven by (13.14) . This is the case when we use ( t,r,θ,φ ) coordinates.
One can think of making transformations to other coordinate systems. It is found
that some component of the metric tensor always has to become inﬁnite at r=0
in any coordinate system, whereas it is possible to ﬁnd coordinate systemsin which the metric tensor remains well deﬁned at the Schwarzschild radius
r=r
S. We believe that the singularity at r=0 is a real essential singularity.
On the other hand, the metric becomes singular at r=rSonly in certain coor-
dinate systems. This is, therefore, a coordinate singularity and not an essential

<<<PAGE 426>>>

406 Some applications of general relativity
singularity. One particularly convenient coordinate system in which there is no
singularity at r=rSwas discovered by Kruskal (1960).
Apart from a black hole, any other self-gravitating system (even a neutron
star) would have a physical radius larger than the Schwarzschild radius rS.I n
such a situation, the free space where the Schwarzschild metric holds will notinclude r=r
S. Only in the case of a black hole, do we need to worry about the
physical signiﬁcance of the radius r=rS. An observer falling in a black hole
will not feel anything unusual when crossing the Schwarzschild radius r=rS.
Let us consider an observer falling radially in a black hole starting from rest atinﬁnity. It easily follows from (13.18) and(13.19) thate=1a n d l=0i nt h i s
case. From (13.20) and(13.21) ,w et h e nh a v e
1
2/parenleftbiggdr
dτ/parenrightbigg2
−M
r=0,
which leads to
√rd r=−√
2Mdτ. (13.51)
It should be kept in mind that dτis the time interval measured by the clock
carried with the falling observer. Suppose we take τ=0 when the falling
observer is at r=r0.T h e n (13.51) can be integrated to give
2
3(r3/2−r3/2
0)=−√
2Mτ. (13.52)
It is easy to see that the falling observer will reach the central singularity r=0
in a ﬁnite time measured by his own clock.
Since the falling observer passes through the Schwarzschild radius r=rS
without feeling anything special there, does it mean that the Schwarzschildradius has no particular physical signiﬁcance? The physical signiﬁcance of theSchwarzschild radius becomes clear as soon as we consider an observer whois trying to come out rather than an observer who is falling in. Not only an
observer, but no signal including light can escape outside from r<r
S. Hence
the surface r=rSis called the horizon of the black hole. A signal from the
inside of the horizon can never come out, although things from the outside can
fall through the horizon. The result that a light signal can escape outward only
if it starts from r>rScan be shown by extending the analysis presented in
§13.3.2. The reader is asked to do this calculation in Exercise 13.5.
Instead of considering the proper time τmeasured by the clock of the
observer falling in the black hole, if we consider the world time t,t h e nw e
get a surprising result. Since we are considering e=1, it follows from (13.18)
that
dt
dτ=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg−1
. (13.53)

<<<PAGE 427>>>

13.4 Linearized theory of gravity 407
Then
dt
dr=dt
dτdτ
dr=−/parenleftbigg2M
r/parenrightbigg−1/2/parenleftbigg
1−2M
r/parenrightbigg−1
(13.54)
on using (13.51) and(13.53) . The solution of (13.54) is
t=t0+2M/bracketleftbigg
−2
3/parenleftBigr
2M/parenrightBig3/2
−2/parenleftBigr
2M/parenrightBig1/2
+log/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(r/2M)
1/2+1
(r/2M)1/2−1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/bracketrightbigg
,
(13.55)
which can be veriﬁed by substituting (13.55) into (13.54) . It follows from
(13.55) thattgoes to inﬁnity when r=2M. In other words, an inﬁnite amount
of world time has to lapse before the falling observer reaches the horizon. To
understand the signiﬁcance of this result, let us consider another observer at
rest far away from the black hole. The proper time and the world time of
this faraway observer will be approximately the same. We have also arguedin§13.1 that events taking place in different locations at the same world time
are simultaneous. It then follows that, according to the faraway observer, thefalling observer will take inﬁnite time to reach the horizon at the Schwarzschildradius. It would appear to the faraway observer that the falling observer isforever hovering around the horizon, although the falling observer reaches
r=0 in a ﬁnite time according to his clock. To understand exactly how the
falling observer appears to the faraway observer, it is necessary to analyse thepropagation of light signals from the falling observer to the faraway observer.We shall not get into those details here.
13.4 Linearized theory of gravity
We pointed out in §10.2 that one of the implications of an action-at-a-distance
theory is that the interaction has to propagate at an inﬁnite speed. Our hope isthat this problem would be rectiﬁed in a ﬁeld theory. It is indeed a consequenceof general relativity that gravitational interaction propagates at speed c.W e
now demonstrate this for a region where the gravitational ﬁeld is weak so thatthe metric differs only slightly from the special relativistic metric η
ikgiven by
(12.60) . We write
gik=ηik+hik (13.56)
and assume that
|hik|/lessmuch 1. (13.57)
As a consequence of (13.57) , we shall throw away terms quadratic or of higher
order in hijcompared to the ﬁrst order terms. General relativity is basically a
nonlinear ﬁeld theory. On throwing away terms quadratic in hij, it reduces to a

<<<PAGE 428>>>

408 Some applications of general relativity
linear theory and will be seen to have many similarities with the electromagnetic
theory.
We want to ﬁnd out what happens to Einstein’s equation (12.96) when we
have a metric tensor of the form (13.56) . For this purpose, we need to calculate
the Einstein tensor Gijarising out of the metric tensor (13.56) . The ﬁrst step is
to calculate the Christoffel symbols by using (12.31) . On substituting (13.56)
into (12.31) ,w eg e t
/Gamma1m
ik=1
2ηml/parenleftbigg∂hli
∂xk+∂hlk
∂xi−∂hik
∂xl/parenrightbigg
(13.58)
if we throw away the terms quadratic in hij. The next step is to calculate the
Ricci curvature tensor Rkmby using (12.41) . Since it follows from (13.58) that
the Christoffel symbols are linear in hij, we can throw away terms quadratic in
the Christoffel symbols in (12.41) and then substitute from (13.58) , which gives
Rik=∂/Gamma1l
ik
∂xl−∂/Gamma1l
il
∂xk=1
2ηlm/parenleftbigg∂2hkm
∂xi∂xl−∂2hik
∂xl∂xm−∂2hlm
∂xi∂xk+∂hil
∂xk∂xm/parenrightbigg
.
(13.59)
We now use the fact that ηlmhkm=hl
kand
ηlm∂2
∂xl∂xm=−1
c2∂2
∂t2+∇2=/square2.
Then (13.59) becomes
Rik=1
2/parenleftBigg
∂2hl
k
∂xi∂xl−/square2hik−∂2h
∂xi∂xk+∂hm
i
∂xk∂xm/parenrightBigg
. (13.60)
It now follows that the scalar curvature is given by
R=ηikRik=/parenleftbigg∂2hkm
∂xk∂xm−/square2h/parenrightbigg
. (13.61)
Substituting (13.60) and(13.61) in(12.44) , the Einstein tensor is given by
Gik=1
2/parenleftBigg
∂2hl
k
∂xi∂xl+∂hm
i
∂xk∂xm−/square2hik−∂2h
∂xi∂xk−ηik∂2hlm
∂xl∂xm+ηik/square2h/parenrightBigg
.
(13.62)
This is the expression of the Einstein tensor for the metric (13.56) if we throw
away the quadratic and higher powers of hik. This looks like a complicated
expression which becomes somewhat simpliﬁed if we introduce the variable
hik=hik−1
2ηikh, (13.63)
from which it readily follows that
hik=hik−1
2ηikh (13.64)

<<<PAGE 429>>>

13.4 Linearized theory of gravity 409
on making use of the fact that ηi
i=4. Substituting (13.64) in(13.62) ,w eg e t
Gik=1
2/parenleftBigg
∂2hl
k
∂xi∂xl+∂hm
i
∂xk∂xm−ηik∂2hlm
∂xl∂xm−/square2hik/parenrightBigg
. (13.65)
The expression (13.65) for the Einstein tensor is still rather complicated.
However, if we could choose a coordinate system in which the divergence of hik
is zero, then the ﬁrst three terms on the right-hand side of (13.65) will become
zero and the expression of the Einstein tensor will become very simple. We now
show that any coordinate system can be slightly adjusted to make the divergence
ofhikzero. Let us consider introducing a new coordinate system in which
x/primei=xi+ξi. (13.66)
The introduction of such a new coordinate system is called a gauge transfor-
mation in general relativity. From (12.5), it follows that the metric tensor gik
should get transformed in the new coordinate system to
g/prime
ik=glm∂xl
∂x/primei∂xm
∂x/primek=glm/parenleftbigg
δl
i−∂ξl
∂x/primei/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
δm
k−∂ξm
∂x/primek/parenrightbigg
(13.67)
on using (13.66) . We shall see soon that ξiwill be of order hikin our analysis.
So we can throw away terms quadratic in them and replace ∂ξl/∂x/primeiby∂ξl/∂xi.
Then (13.67) becomes
g/prime
ik=gik−∂ξk
∂xi−∂ξi
∂xk. (13.68)
Using (13.56) and writing g/prime
ikin the same way as gik,w eg e t
h/prime
ik=hik−∂ξk
∂xi−∂ξi
∂xk, (13.69)
if we require ηikto be the same in both coordinate systems. Note that hikitself
does not transform like a tensor. If hikorhiktransformed like tensors, then
their divergences would transform like vectors, and it will not be possible to
make this divergence zero in a frame when it is non-zero in other frames. Our
aim now is to choose a coordinate system in which
∂h/prime
ik
∂x/prime
k=0, (13.70)
which is equivalent to
∂h/prime
ik
∂xk−1
2∂h/prime
∂xi=0

<<<PAGE 430>>>

410 Some applications of general relativity
by virtue of (13.63) . On substituting from (13.69) in this equation, we ﬁnd after
some easy algebra that
/square2ξi=∂hik
∂xk. (13.71)
Let us now try to understand the signiﬁcance of this result. Suppose we have a
coordinate system xiin which hikorhikare known. By solving (13.71) we ﬁnd
ξiand then transform to a new coordinate system in accordance with (13.66) .
We shall have (13.70) satisﬁed in that coordinate system. Thus, by a suitable
choice of gauge, we can ﬁnd a coordinate system in which the divergence of hik
vanishes. If we use such a coordinate system, then the Einstein tensor given by
(13.65) should have a simple form
Gik=−1
2/square2hik. (13.72)
On substituting (13.72) in Einstein’s equation (12.96) ,w eﬁ n d
−/square2hik=16πG
c4Tik, (13.73)
which is the inhomogeneous wave equation. This is an equation which appearsin electromagnetic theory and its solution is discussed in all standard textbooks
of advanced electromagnetic theory (see, for example, Panofsky and Phillips ,
1962, §14–2; Jackson, 2001, §6.4). We assume that readers know how tosolve the inhomogeneous wave equation and merely quote the ﬁnal result. The
solution of (13.73) is
hik(t,x)=4G
c4/integraldisplayTik(t−|x−x/prime|/c,x/prime)
|x−x/prime|d3x/prime, (13.74)
where xandx/primeare spatial coordinates of a ﬁeld point and a source point. It
is clear that Tikacts as the source for hik, which makes the metric different
from a ﬂat special relativistic metric. The solution (13.74) also implies that the
information from the source to the ﬁeld travels at speed c. Thus the gravitational
interaction is restricted to propagate at speed c, which we enlisted in §10.2 as a
requirement for a ﬁeld theory of gravity.
We have seen that the metric tensor for a weak gravitational ﬁeld is given by
(12.70) . We end our discussion of the linearized theory by showing that (13.74)
is consistent with (12.70) for the case of a mass distribution at rest. It follows
from (12.88) that
T00=ρc2
for a static mass distribution, whereas the other components of Tare zero. Then
it follows from (13.74) that
h00(x)=4G
c2/integraldisplayρ(x/prime)
|x−x/prime|d3x/prime, (13.75)

<<<PAGE 431>>>

13.5 Gravitational waves 411
where we have not indicated the time dependence, since we are considering
a static problem. All the other components of hikare zero. We know that the
gravitational potential in the Newtonian theory of gravity is given by
/Phi1(x)=−G/integraldisplayρ(x/prime)
|x−x/prime|d3x/prime.
Comparing this with (13.75) , we conclude that
h00(x)=−4/Phi1(x)
c2. (13.76)
It follows from (13.64) and(13.76) that
h00(x)=−2/Phi1(x)
c2,
which implies the metric (12.70) .
13.5 Gravitational waves
It is clear from (13.74) that a sudden change in the energy-momentum tensor
Tikwould give rise to a signal propagating away at speed c. We also note that
in a region of empty space (13.73) reduces to the wave equation
/square2hlm=0
suggesting the possibility of gravitational waves . We now work out some
properties of such waves.
It follows from (13.64) thathlmalso satisﬁes the wave equation
/square2hlm=0. (13.77)
We also have to keep in mind that we are using a coordinate system in which
hlmshould be divergence-free as in (13.70) .T h e n(13.63) implies
∂hlm
∂xm=1
2∂h
∂xl. (13.78)
We can choose the propagation direction as the x3direction without any loss of
generality. Since we are now considering a linearized theory, any arbitrary wavecan be treated as a superposition of the various Fourier modes. A Fourier mode
travelling in the x
3direction can be written as
hlm=Almeik(ct−x3). (13.79)
The symmetric tensor Almhas 10 components. Some of them have to be
related, as we can see on substituting (13.79) in(13.78) . For the four values
ofl=0,1,2,3,we get the following four conditions

<<<PAGE 432>>>

412 Some applications of general relativity
A00+A03=−1
2A,A10+A13=0,A20+A23=0,A30+A33=1
2A,
(13.80)
where Ais the trace
A=− A00+A11+A22+A33. (13.81)
Because of the four conditions (13.80) , only six components of Almare indepen-
dent. Let us take A11,A12,A13,A23,A33,A00as the independent components.
The other components can be expressed in terms of them with the help of
(13.80) and(13.81) . We need not concern ourselves with the exact expressions,
except to note that
A22=− A11, (13.82)
which follows from (13.80) and(13.81) . We now think of carrying out another
gauge transformation such that the divergence of hlmwill be zero in the new
frame also. Since the divergence of hlmis already zero in the frame we are
using, (13.71) reduces to
/square2ξl=0,
of which a solution is
ξl=ifleik(ct−x3). (13.83)
If we now make a coordinate transformation (13.66) withξlgiven by (13.83) ,
then whatever we have been discussing should be valid in the new coordinatesystem as well. It follows from (13.69) that
A
/prime
11=A11,A/prime12=A12,
A/prime13=A13−kf1,A/prime23=A23−kf2,
A/prime33=A33−2kf 3,A/prime00=A00+2kf 0.
It is obvious that flcan be chosen in such a way that A13,A23,A33,A00turn out
to be zero in the new frame. It follows from (13.80) thatA10,A20andA30also
must be zero. The only non-zero components left are A11=− A22,w h i c hw e
calla,a n d A12=A21, which we call b. This means that, in our chosen gauge,
(13.79) can be written as
hlm=eik(ct−x3)⎛
⎜⎜⎝00 00
0ab 0
0b−a0
00 00⎞
⎟⎟⎠. (13.84)
Since the amplitude of the wave involves only two independent variables aand
b, we can conclude that the gravitational wave has two possible polarizations.

<<<PAGE 433>>>

13.5 Gravitational waves 413
We now want to ﬁgure out the physical characteristics of the two possible
polarization modes of a gravitational wave. For this purpose, let us discuss
what happens when the gravitational wave impinges on a set of particles. If
a gravitational disturbance makes all the particles in a region, along with the
observer, move in exactly the same way, then it will be difﬁcult to ascertainthe presence of the gravitational disturbance. On the other hand, if the gravita-tional disturbance causes a relative motion amongst different particles, then this
relative motion can be used to detect the disturbance. We shall now study the
relative motions amongst particles induced by a gravitational wave. Let x
iand
xi+δxibe the spacetime coordinates of two nearby particles. They would both
satisfy the geodesic equation (12.51). By subtracting the one geodesic equation
from the other, one can show that the relative separation δxiwould satisfy
D2
Dτ2δxi=− Ri
klmδxldxk
dτdxm
dτ. (13.85)
This is called the geodesic deviation equation , which readers were asked to
derive in Exercise 12.4 . For slow motions in a region of weak gravity, we have
(12.74) , which implies that
dx0
dτ≈c,
whereas the other spatial components are essentially the components of veloc-ity which are much smaller. Hence the spatial components of (13.85) can be
written as
d
2
dt2δxα=− Rα
0β0δxβc2. (13.86)
Remember that the Greek indices like αandβrun over only values 1, 2, 3,
corresponding to the spatial components. Here we are interested in ﬁnding theseparation between the two particles by considering them at the same instant oftime. So we take δx
0=0, which is used in obtaining (13.86) . It now follows
from (12.37) that
Rα
0β0=∂/Gamma1α
00
∂xβ−∂/Gamma1α
0β
∂x0
on neglecting the terms quadratic in Christoffel symbols in our linearized ana-
lysis. Let us consider particles lying on the wavefront of the gravitational wave,
which is assumed to propagate in the x3direction. Then δxβin(13.86) has to
lie in the (x1,x2)plane, which means that βcan have values 1 or 2. It should
be clear that differentiation with respect to xβgives zero and we can write
Rα
0β0=−∂/Gamma1α
0β
∂x0. (13.87)

<<<PAGE 434>>>

414 Some applications of general relativity
The expression for the Christoffel symbol for the weak gravitational ﬁeld is
given by (13.58) . Keeping in mind that h0β=0 according to (13.84) ,w eﬁ n d
from (13.58) that
/Gamma1α
0β=1
2∂hα
β
∂x0. (13.88)
On using (13.87) and(13.88) , we obtain from (13.86) that
d2
dt2δxα=1
2∂2hαβ
∂t2δxβ. (13.89)
This is ﬁnally the equation giving the relative motion amongst particles lying
on the wavefront of a gravitational wave.
The obvious solution of (13.89) is
δxα=δxα,0+1
2hαβδxβ. (13.90)
Let us consider the ﬁrst polarization mode of the gravitational wave for whichb=0i n (13.84) . On substituting from (13.84) into (13.90) with b=0, we get
δx
1=δx1,0/bracketleftbigg
1+1
2aeikct/bracketrightbigg
,
δx2=δx2,0/bracketleftbigg
1−1
2aeikct/bracketrightbigg
, (13.91)
if we take x3=0 on the wavefront where the particles are located. Let us
consider a ring of particles in the (x1,x2)plane. It is clear from (11.90) that
the particles on the x1axis move outward when the particles on the x2axis
move inward. This means that the ring of particles would oscillate as shownin the upper row of Figure 13.7. Next we consider the other polarization mode
for which we take a=0i n(13.84) . Again, on substituting from (13.84) into
(13.90) ,w eg e t
δx
1=δx1,0+1
2beikctδx2,0,
δx2=δx2,0+1
2beikctδx1,0. (13.92)
The lower row of Figure 13.7 indicates how the ring of particles will oscillate
in this case.
Apart from making the physical nature of the two polarization modes
clear, Figure 13.7 suggests how gravitational waves may be detected. Sup-
pose we have a gravitational wave with the ﬁrst kind of polarization fallingperpendicularly on a Michelson interferometer (see, for example, Born and
Wolf ,1980, §7.5.4), of which the arms are along x
1andx2directions. When
one arm expands, the other arm contracts, causing a shift in the fringes. Aperiodically oscillating shift in the fringes will be the signal that a gravitational

<<<PAGE 435>>>

13.5 Gravitational waves 415
Fig. 13.7 A sketch indicating how a ring of particles will oscillate with time when
gravitational waves of two kinds of polarization fall perpendicularly on the ring. The
two rows correspond to the two polarizations.
wave is falling on the Michelson interferometer. It follows from (13.91) that
the displacements of the arms will have the amplitude δxα,0a. Apart from
being proportional to a, which is a measure of the strength of the wave, the
amplitude is also proportional to the length of the arm. Other things being equal,
a larger Michelson interferometer should have a larger displacement, causing
a bigger fringe shift. If we want to detect a very faint signal, the Michelson
interferometer has to be of a gigantic size.
There are several gravitational wave detection experiments under way. All
of them essentially are huge Michelson interferometers with arm lengths of
the order of kilometres. The most ambitious of these experiments is the Laser
Interferometer Gravity-wave Observatory (LIGO) in the USA. At the time ofwriting this book, there is not yet any report of a positive detection. Only veryviolent motions involving large masses are expected to produce gravitational
waves of sufﬁcient intensity in faraway systems that would have a chance of
being detected on the Earth by our present-day technologies. For example, asupernova in our Galaxy is likely to produce gravitational waves which shouldbe detectable by the present generation of gravitational wave experiments.
Although we do not yet have an indisputable direct detection of gravita-
tional waves, we pointed out in §5.5.1 that the binary pulsar provides indirect
proof of the existence of gravitational waves. The continuous decrease in theorbital period implies a steady rate of energy loss, which agrees very well with
the theoretical estimate of energy loss due to gravitational waves and provides
another strong conﬁrmation of general relativity. Anybody familiar with electro-magnetic theory would know that an analysis of electromagnetic wave emission

<<<PAGE 436>>>

416 Some applications of general relativity
is much more complicated than an analysis of its properties. The same holds for
the gravitational wave in general relativity. We have discussed the polarizationcharacteristics and other properties of gravitational waves. But a calculation of
gravitational wave emission by a system like the binary pulsar is a much more
complicated problem and is beyond the scope of this elementary book.
Exercises
13.1 In a certain spacetime geometry, the metric is
ds2=−(1−Ar2)dt2+(1−Ar2)dr2+r2(dθ2+sin2θdφ2).
(a) Calculate the proper distance along a radial line from the centre
r=0 to a coordinate radius r=R. (b) Calculate the area of the sphere of
coordinate radius r=R. (c) Calculate the 3-volume bounded inside the sphere
of coordinate radius r=R. (d) Calculate the 4-volume of the four-dimensional
tube bounded by a sphere of coordinate radius Rand two t=constant planes
separated by T.
13.2 Show that the Schwarzschild metric (13.13) satisﬁes all the components
of Einstein’s equation in vacuum at all points other than r=0.
13.3 If the general relativistic correction term in the analysis of particle
motion in Schwarzschild geometry is neglected, show by substituting (13.32)
in(13.28) that the eccentricity of the orbit is given by
/epsilon1=/radicalBigg
1+(e2−1)l2
M2
and ﬁgure out the condition for the orbit to be elliptical. If the orbit is elliptical,
show that the semimajor axis is given by
a=l2
M(1−/epsilon12)
and we have
e2−1
2=−M
2a.
What is the signiﬁcance of this last result?
13.4 (a) Calculate the perihelion precession in arc seconds per century for
Mercury (semimajor axis =5.79×107km, eccentricity =0.206, period of
revolution =88.0 days). (b) Evaluate the maximum deﬂection of light by the
Sun in seconds of arc.

<<<PAGE 437>>>

Exercises 417
13.5 Consider a light signal being emitted at a position r=risatisfying
2M<ri<3Min Schwarzschild geometry, making an angle αwith respect
to the radial direction. Show that the light signal will be able to escape to
inﬁnity only if the following condition (in units G=1,c=1) is satisﬁed:
sinα<3√
3M
ri/parenleftbigg
1−2M
ri/parenrightbigg1/2
.
Note that light can escape from the Schwarzschild radius r=2Monly if it is
emitted in the radially outward direction. [Hint: First argue that
tanα=/parenleftbigg
1−2M
ri/parenrightbigg1/2
ri/parenleftbiggdφ
dr/parenrightbigg
i,
where (dφ/dr)iis the initial value of dφ/dralong the light path when the
light signal starts at ri. Then you have to relate αtob=l/eby making use
of(13.38). Finally use the idea that a signal starting from the left side of the
Qeff(r)curve in Figure 13.2 will be able to escape only if 1 /b2has a value
higher than the maximum of the curve.]
13.6 Far away from a spherical star the gravitational ﬁeld is weak and the
linear theory should hold. (a) Find hik(i.e. the difference of the metric from a
ﬂat metric) at a far point in a suitable gauge. (b) Show that there is no gauge
transformation which will cast this hikin a transverse traceless form (like the
form in (13.84)).
13.7 A source of gravitational radiation is turned on for a ﬁnite time after
which it no longer emits. A distant observer detects the radiation by watchingthe motion of two free particles initially at rest. Show that after the passage of
the wave the observer ﬁnds the particles back in their original positions and at
rest with respect to each other (to linear order in amplitude).

<<<PAGE 438>>>



<<<PAGE 439>>>

14
Relativistic cosmology
14.1 The basic equations
We have seen in Chapter 10 that certain aspects of spacetime dynamics of the
Universe can be studied without a detailed technical knowledge of general rela-
tivity. However, some important topics in cosmology – especially those dealing
with the analysis of high redshift observations – require general relativity for a
proper understanding. After giving an introduction to general relativity in theprevious two chapters, we are now ready to apply it to cosmology.
As pointed out in §10.3, it is convenient to use the co-moving coordinates
in cosmology. If we neglect the motions which galaxies may have with respectto the expanding space, then a galaxy is at rest in this coordinate systemand space is supposed to expand uniformly, carrying the galaxies with it. If
matter is at rest in a coordinate system, then the energy-momentum tensor
Ti
k
in that system is given by (12.88) . We clearly expect this to be the energy-
momentum tensor of the Universe in the co-moving coordinates. Since we had
tacitly assumed the coordinate system to be Cartesian when putting the classical
hydrodynamic equations in the form (12.78) , one may wonder if (12.88) is the
expression of the energy-momentum tensor only in Cartesian coordinates. A
little reﬂection should convince the reader that we can use (12.81) to intro-
duce the generalized velocity in any coordinate system and (12.84) should
give the general expression of the energy-momentum tensor in any coordinatesystem, leading to (12.88) in the special case when matter is at rest. It is
easy to see that the energy-momentum tensor deﬁned by (12.84) in different
coordinate systems should transform according to the tensor transformation
law(12.5).
We now want to apply Einstein’s equation (12.96) to the Universe, which
we write in the form
G
i
k=8πG
c4Ti
k. (14.1)
419

<<<PAGE 440>>>

420 Relativistic cosmology
Since we already know that Ti
kis given by (12.88) , we only need to obtain the
Einstein tensor Gi
kof the Universe. For this we have to start from the expression
of the metric. The metric of the Universe in the co-moving coordinates is
the Robertson–Walker metric given by (10.19) or(10.20) . Our job now is to
calculate the Einstein tensor for this metric. This involves a large amount of
straightforward algebra, since we ﬁrst have to calculate the various Christoffel
symbols by using (12.31) and then we have to calculate the Ricci tensor Rikby
using (12.41) . It will be instructive for the reader to go through this algebra. We
give the ﬁnal result:
Rtt=− 3¨a
a,Rαβ=/parenleftbigg¨a
a+2˙a2
a2+2kc2
a2/parenrightbigggαβ
c2, (14.2)
where the Greek indices αorβcan have values 1, 2, 3, which we take to be
r,θ,φ in the present case. It follows from (14.2) that the scalar curvature is
given by
R=Ri
i=6
c2/parenleftbigg¨a
a+˙a2
a2+kc2
a2/parenrightbigg
. (14.3)
By substituting (14.2) and(14.3) in(12.44) , we ﬁnally get
Gt
t=−3
c2/parenleftbigg˙a2
a2+kc2
a2/parenrightbigg
,Grr=Gθ
θ=Gφ
φ=−1
c2/parenleftbigg
2¨a
a+˙a2
a2+kc2
a2/parenrightbigg
,
(14.4)
whereas all the off-diagonal elements of the Einstein tensor are zero. Note that
we have to raise an index in accordance with (12.18) and use (12.16) in these
calculations. Finally we have to substitute (12.88) and(14.4) in(14.1).T h e tt
component gives
˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=8πG
3ρ, (14.5)
whereas the other three diagonal components give the identical equation
2¨a
a+˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=−8πG
c2P. (14.6)
The above two equations are the basic equations giving the dynamics ofspacetime.
From considerations of Newtonian cosmology in §10.4, we could write
down the Friedmann equation (10.27), which is identical with (14.5).A sw e
pointed out earlier, it is an astounding coincidence that we get exactly the sameequation from a full general relativistic analysis and from very simple consider-ations of Newtonian cosmology (with some ad hoc assumptions). We now need

<<<PAGE 441>>>

14.2 The cosmological constant and its signiﬁcance 421
to ﬁgure out the signiﬁcance of the other equation (14.6) . On differentiating
(14.5) with respect to t,w eg e t
2˙a¨a
a−2˙a3
a2−2kc2˙a
a2=8πG
3˙ρa. (14.7)
Assuming the expansion of the Universe to be adiabatic, the ﬁrst law of thermo-
dynamics dQ=dU+Pd V suggests
d
dt(ρc2a3)+Pd
dt(a3)=0, (14.8)
from which
c2(˙ρa+3ρ˙a)=− 3P˙a.
Multiplying this by 8π G/3c2,w eg e t
8πG
3˙ρa+3˙a8πG
3ρ=−8πG
c2P˙a.
We now substitute from (14.7) in the ﬁrst term of this equation and substitute
from (14.5) for(8πG/3)ρ in the second term. One or two steps of algebra then
lead to (14.6).T h i sm e a n st h a t (14.6) can be obtained from (14.5) and(14.8).
We can, therefore, regard (14.5) and(14.8) as our basic equations rather than
regarding (14.5) and(14.6) as the basic equations.
We have already pointed out in §10.5 that (14.8) would lead to (10.37)
ifPis given by (10.36) . For a Universe ﬁlled with matter and radiation,
(10.37) becomes (10.50) . In other words, the expression (10.50) for the density
is equivalent to (14.8) for a Universe ﬁlled with matter and radiation. We
are thus ﬁnally led to the conclusion that (14.5) and (10.50) constitute our
basic equations. We have already discussed the solutions of these equationsin§10.6 and §10.7 for the cases of the matter-dominated and the radiation-
dominated Universe, corresponding respectively to the later and earlier epochsin the thermal history of the Universe. So we need not discuss again how the
Universe expands with time. There was one important topic which could not be
discussed satisfactorily within the framework of Newtonian cosmology. It is thepropagation of light. We merely quoted (10.24) as an explanation of the redshift
without proving it. We shall now study the propagation of light systematically
and prove (10.24) . Before taking up this subject in §14.3, we make a digression
in§14.2 to a topic which suddenly seems to be taking centre stage in cosmology
research in the last few years.
14.2 The cosmological constant and its signiﬁcance
It is possible to put an extra term in Einstein’s equation, which would make it
Gik=8πG
c4Tik−/Lambda1
c2gik. (14.9)

<<<PAGE 442>>>

422 Relativistic cosmology
It follows from (12.27) thatgikis also a divergenceless tensor like GikorTik.
So, on taking the divergence of (14.9), each term will give zero if /Lambda1is a constant.
It is thus mathematically consistent to add the last term in (14.9). The constant
/Lambda1is called the cosmological constant because of the role it plays in cosmology
as we shall see below.
If Einstein’s equation is extended to (14.9) by including the cosmological
constant term, then (14.5) and(14.6) also get modiﬁed to
˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=8πG
3ρ+/Lambda1
3, (14.10)
2¨a
a+˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=−8πG
c2P+/Lambda1. (14.11)
On subtracting (14.10) from (14.11) ,w eg e t
¨a
a=−4πG
3/parenleftbigg
ρ+3P
c2/parenrightbigg
+/Lambda1
3. (14.12)
If/Lambda1=0, it is clear from (14.12) that a static solution in which adoes not
change with time is not possible.
Einstein (1917) ﬁrst applied general relativity to cosmology at a time when
the expansion of the Universe had not yet been discovered by Hubble (1929).
Einstein (1917) wanted to construct a static solution of the Universe which is
possible only with a non-zero /Lambda1. Assuming P/lessmuchρc2, if the density has the
value
ρ0=/Lambda1
4πG, (14.13)
it is easily seen from (14.12) that we get a static solution. One, however, ﬁnds
that this static solution is unstable (Exercise 14.3). In other words, if this static
Universe is disturbed from its initial static state, it will run away from this
static state. After the expansion of the Universe was reported ( Hubble, 1929),
Einstein is said to have remarked that introducing the cosmological constant
was the ‘biggest blunder’ of his life. Thereafter, the cosmological constant was
almost banished from the literature of astrophysically motivated cosmology forseveral decades. Standard textbooks of cosmology would either ignore it or at
most devote a small section to the cosmological constant as an odd curiosity.
Some intriguing recent observations which will be discussed in §14.5,h o w e v e r ,
suggest that the cosmological constant may after all be non-zero. This is oneof the most dramatic new developments in cosmology, leading to renewed
interest in the cosmological constant. Here we present a brief discussion of how
cosmological solutions get modiﬁed on including the cosmological constant.
Substituting for ρfrom (10.50) in(14.10) ,w eg e t
˙a
2
a2+kc2
a2=8πG
3/bracketleftbigg
ρM,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig3
+ρR,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig4
+ρ/Lambda1/bracketrightbigg
, (14.14)

<<<PAGE 443>>>

14.2 The cosmological constant and its signiﬁcance 423
where we have written
ρ/Lambda1=/Lambda1
8πG. (14.15)
It follows from (10.28) that we can write
8πG
3=H2
0
ρc,0. (14.16)
Then (14.14) can be put in the form
˙a2
a2+kc2
a2=H2
0/bracketleftbigg
/Omega1M,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig3
+/Omega1R,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig4
+/Omega1/Lambda1,0/bracketrightbigg
, (14.17)
where
/Omega1M,0=ρM,0
ρc,0,/Omega1 R,0=ρR,0
ρc,0,/Omega1/Lambda1,0=ρ/Lambda1
ρc,0(14.18)
give the fractional contributions at the present time of matter, radiation and the
cosmological constant to the critical density. It should be clear from (14.14)
that the effect of the cosmological constant is like a ﬂuid whose density ρ/Lambda1
does not change with the expansion of the Universe. It follows from (10.37)
that we should have w=− 1 for such a ﬂuid, suggesting a negative pressure
P=−ρc2on the basis of (10.36) . This strange ﬂuid-like entity with a negative
pressure is often referred to as the dark energy.
We know that the contribution of radiation density has been negligible ever
since the Universe became matter-dominated. We shall discuss some observa-
tions in §14.5 which additionally suggest that the Universe is nearly ﬂat. If
we neglect the radiation density and the curvature terms, then (14.17) can be
written as
˙a2
a2=H2
0/bracketleftbigg
/Omega1M,0/parenleftBiga0
a/parenrightBig3
+/Omega1/Lambda1,0/bracketrightbigg
. (14.19)
It is possible to write down an analytical solution of this equation, which is
a
a0=/parenleftbigg/Omega1M,0
/Omega1/Lambda1,0/parenrightbigg1/3
sinh2/3/parenleftbigg3
2/radicalbig
/Omega1/Lambda1,0H0t/parenrightbigg
. (14.20)
This can be veriﬁed by substituting this solution (14.20) into (14.19) .I ti s
instructive to consider the early time and the late time limits of the solution(14.20) , which are
a
a0≈/parenleftbigg3
2/Omega11/2
M,0H0t/parenrightbigg2/3
if/radicalbig
/Omega1/Lambda1,0H0t/lessmuch1, (14.21)
a
a0≈/parenleftbigg/Omega1M,0
4/Omega1/Lambda1,0/parenrightbigg1/3
e√
/Omega1/Lambda1,0H0tif/radicalbig
/Omega1/Lambda1,0H0t/greatermuch1. (14.22)

<<<PAGE 444>>>

424 Relativistic cosmology3 2.5 2 1.5
0 0.5 1 1.5
ΩΛ,0H0ta⁄a0
1/3 1/6
1ΩM,0ΩΛ,0·
Fig. 14.1 A plot showing how the expansion rate ˙aof a ﬂat Universe ( k=0) with
matter and a non-zero cosmological constant /Lambda1changes with time.
To understand the signiﬁcance of these limiting solutions, we look at (14.19) .
Since the matter density falls off as a−3, it becomes less important with time as
the Universe expands, whereas the term involving the cosmological constant /Lambda1
grows in relative importance. The solution (14.21) at early times is the matter-
dominated Universe solution in the limit of early times, which was obtained
earlier in (10.60) . The fact that /Omega1/Lambda1,0cancels out of the equation justiﬁes our
assertion at the end of §10.6.2 that, even if /Lambda1is non-zero, we do not make
too much error in many calculations involving earlier times if we use the
cosmological solution with /Lambda1=0. The values of /Omega1M,0and/Omega1/Lambda1,0to be presented
in§14.5 suggest that the present epoch of the Universe may actually be the
epoch when the cosmological solution is making the transition from (14.21) to
(14.22) . The solution (14.22) for late times is essentially what we would get on
neglecting the matter density term in (14.19) and keeping only the cosmological
constant term. This exponential part of (14.22) follows directly from (14.10) if
we neglect the curvature and the density terms, noting that
/radicalbig
/Omega1/Lambda1,0H0=/radicalbigg
/Lambda1
3(14.23)
by virtue of (14.15) ,(14.16) and (14.18) . It is clear from (14.22) that the
cosmological constant is of the nature of a cosmic repulsion which makes theUniverse expand exponentially when it is the dominant term over density and
curvature. The different behaviours at early and late times can be understood byconsidering how ˙achanges with time. Figure 14.1 s h o w sap l o to f ˙aobtained
from the solution (14.20) plotted against the time t. At early times, the matter
density is dominant and pulls back on the expanding Universe, making theexpansion rate ˙adecrease with time. On the other hand, when the /Lambda1term
dominates at late times, the Universe accelerates, making ˙aincrease with time.

<<<PAGE 445>>>

14.3 Propagation of light in the expanding Universe 425
The observations to be discussed in §14.5 suggest that at the present time the
Universe may be making a transition from the matter-dominated era to the /Lambda1-
dominated era.
14.3 Propagation of light in the expanding Universe
We have already pointed out in §13.3.2 that a light signal travels along a null
geodesic, i.e. a special geodesic along which ds2=0. We now want to consider
the propagation of a light signal from a distant galaxy to us. Let us take our
position to be the origin of our coordinate system and let the position of thedistant galaxy be at the radial co-moving coordinate r=S(χ), the metric of
the Universe being the Robertson–Walker metric given by (10.19) or(10.20) .
Remember that S(χ)has to be χ,s i nχor sinh χcorresponding to the values
0,+1o r−1o fk . From considerations of symmetry, we expect the light signal to
propagate in the negative radial direction to reach us from the distant galaxy so
thatdθ=dφ=0 along the path of light propagation. Putting further ds
2=0,
we conclude from (10.20) that the light signal propagation is given by
−c2dt2+a(t)2dχ2=0.
If we now replace tby the coordinate ηdeﬁned through (10.33) ,t h e nw eh a v e
a(t)2[−dη2+dχ2]=0, (14.24)
from which
dχ=±dη.
As the light signal propagates towards us, the radial coordinate χdecreases with
the increasing time. So we choose the minus sign and write the solution
χ=η0−η, (14.25)
where η0is the constant of integration. To understand the signiﬁcance of this
constant of integration, note that (14.25) gives the position χof the light signal
at time η.S i n c e χ=0 at the time η=η0, we easily see that η0is the time when
the light signal reaches us.
We now consider a monochromatic light wave starting from the galaxy at
χ. Let the two successive crests of the sinusoidal light wave leave the galaxy at
timesηandη+/Delta1η. Suppose these successive crests reach us at η0andη0+
/Delta1η0. For the second crest, it follows from (14.25) that
χ=(η0+/Delta1η0)−(η−/Delta1η).
Let us subtract from this (14.25) which is satisﬁed by the ﬁrst crest. Then
we get
/Delta1η0=/Delta1η. (14.26)

<<<PAGE 446>>>

426 Relativistic cosmology
In other words, if we were to use the time-like coordinate ηto measure time,
then the period of the wave would be the same when it was emitted and when
it was received. But ηdoes not give the physical time. For a stationary observer
somewhere in the Universe, we have
ds2=−c2dτ2=−c2dt2
from (10.18) . Thus the proper time τat which the observer’s clock runs coin-
cides with t. Suppose /Delta1tand/Delta1t0are the periods measured by physical clocks
when the light was emitted and when the light was received, the scale factors
of the Universe being aanda0respectively at those times. It then follows from
(10.33) that
c/Delta1t=a/Delta1η, c/Delta1t0=a0/Delta1η0,
from which
/Delta1t0
/Delta1t=a0
a(14.27)
on making use of (14.26) . Since an observer in any location in the Universe
would think that light propagates at speed c,(14.27) obviously suggests (10.24) .
The signiﬁcance of (10.24) is that light propagating in the expanding Universe
gets stretched proportionately so that the wavelength of light expands the same
way as the scale factor. The frequency of a photon should fall as a−1.
We can now prove a very important result which we have been using
throughout our discussion of cosmology. Blackbody radiation ﬁlling theexpanding Universe continues to remain blackbody radiation even when thereis no interaction with matter. We consider radiation within the frequency rangeνtoν+dνwhen the scale factor is a. If this radiation is initially blackbody
radiation, then the energy U
νdνin unit volume is given by the Planck distribu-
tion (2.1). After the Universe has expanded to scale factor a/prime, the theory of light
propagation suggests that the frequencies will change to
ν→ν/prime=νa
a/prime,ν+dν→ν/prime+dν/prime=(ν+dν)a
a/prime.
The radiation initially lying between frequencies ν,ν+dνwould now lie
between frequencies ν/prime,ν/prime+dν/primeand the radiation initially occupying unit
volume would now occupy a volume (a/prime/a)3, having lost some energy in the
work done for expansion. Exactly like what we have done at the beginning of§10.5, we can write down the dU+Pd V =0 relation for this radiation, which
will lead to something like (10.37) withw=1/3. In other words, we must have

<<<PAGE 447>>>

14.3 Propagation of light in the expanding Universe 427
U/prime
ν/primedν/prime=Uνdν/parenleftBiga
a/prime/parenrightBig4
,
where U/prime
ν/primedν/primeis the energy in unit volume lying in the frequency range from ν/prime
toν/prime+dν/primewhen the Universe has expanded to scale factor a/prime. If we substitute
ν=ν/prime(a/prime/a)along with T=T/prime(a/prime/a)in the expression of Uνas given by
(2.1), it is straightforward to see that U/prime
ν/primewill have the same functional depen-
dence on ν/primethat Uνhad on ν. This completes our proof that the radiation
continues to remain blackbody radiation in the expanding Universe with the
temperature falling as T∝a−1.
It is clear that light arriving from a galaxy at a certain location r=S(χ)
would show a certain redshift z. We now try to ﬁnd a functional relationship
between randz, which will be very useful in §14.4 where we shall consider
various observational tests of cosmology. What we have discussed so far in this
section holds whether the cosmological constant /Lambda1is zero or non-zero. Now
we shall consider the case of a matter-dominated Universe with /Lambda1=0, since it
is possible to derive an elegant analytical expression relating rwith zonly in
this case and it is useful to discuss this case before we get into a more generaldiscussion with non-zero /Lambda1.
Let us ﬁrst consider a matter-dominated /Lambda1=0 Universe with positive
curvature, i.e. k=+ 1. This case was discussed in §10.6.1 with the solution
given by (10.56) which, in conjunction with (10.24) ,g i v e s
1
1+z=/Omega1M,0
2(/Omega1 M,0−1)(1−cosη).
From this, we get
cosη=/Omega1M,0(z−1)+2
/Omega1M,0(1+z). (14.28)
Applying the rule sin2η+cos2η=1, we then ﬁnd
sinη=2/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0−1/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0z+1
/Omega1M,0(1+z). (14.29)
The light signal reaches us at time η0, which means that z=0w h e nη =η0.
Then (14.28) and(14.29) imply
cosη0=2−/Omega1M,0
/Omega1M,0,sinη0=2/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0−1
/Omega1M,0. (14.30)
In the k=+ 1 case we are considering, we have r=sinχ.T h e n (14.25) implies
r=sin(η 0−η)=sinη0cosη−sinηcosη0.

<<<PAGE 448>>>

428 Relativistic cosmology
Substituting from (14.28) ,(14.29) and(14.30) ,w eg e t
r=2/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0−1[/Omega1 M,0(z−1)+2−/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0z+1(2−/Omega1M,0)]
/Omega12
M,0(1+z).(14.31)
From (10.31) , we can write
/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0−1=c
a0H0.
Substituting this in (14.31) , we ﬁnally get
r=2/Omega1M,0z+(2/Omega1 M,0−4)(/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0z+1−1)
a0H0/Omega12
M,0(1+z)/c. (14.32)
If one carries out a similar calculation for the k=− 1 case starting from the
solution (10.58) and taking r=sinhχ, then also one ends up with exactly
the same relation (14.32) between randz(Exercise 14.5). Hence we can take
(14.32) as the general relation between randzfor a matter-dominated Universe
with zero /Lambda1. This relation (14.32) is known as Mattig’s formula (Mattig ,1958).
When /Lambda1is non-zero, it is not possible to derive such a nice analytical
relation between randz. The relation between randzhas to be expressed
in the form of an integral in that case, as we shall see in §14.4.2.
14.4 Important cosmological tests
One of the most important observational laws in cosmology is Hubble’s law
(9.13). This law was established from the study of galaxies having z/lessmuch1a n dw e
ﬁnd that the linear relationship between distance and recession velocity holdsat redshifts small compared to 1. An important question is whether we wouldtheoretically expect any departures from this linear relationship at redshifts
z≈1. The ﬁrst hurdle before us is to pose the question properly. As pointed out
in§9.3, only in the case of low redshifts can we interpret the redshifts in terms
of recession velocities given by (9.12). Even the concept of distance involves
complex issues when we consider faraway objects in the Universe. We pointedout in §13.1 that, when the metric tensor is a function of time as in the case of
the Robertson–Walker metric, only length elements (given by (13.7)) and not
ﬁnite lengths have proper meaning. So we ﬁrst have to restate Hubble’s lawin terms of quantities which have precise meanings even when z≈1, before
we can talk about departures from linearity. After restating Hubble’s law in
terms of suitable quantities, we shall see that the departures from linearity can
give us clues about the values of important cosmological parameters like /Omega1
M,0
and/Omega1/Lambda1,0.

<<<PAGE 449>>>

14.4 Important cosmological tests 429
We shall ﬁrst present our analysis for the case /Lambda1=0 where all the calcula-
tions can be done analytically. Then we shall discuss the case /Lambda1/negationslash=0w h i c hi s
more complicated.
14.4.1 Results for the case /Lambda1=0
To simplify our life, let us assume that all galaxies have the same intrinsic
brightness and the same size. Then a galaxy at a certain radial co-moving
coordinate r, which would correspond to a certain redshift z, will appear to
have a certain deﬁnite apparent luminosity and apparent size. We thus expectthe apparent luminosity and the apparent size to be functions of the redshift z.
We can compare the theoretically derived functional relationships with observa-tional data to put constraints on the parameters in the theoretical model. Sincenot all galaxies have the same intrinsic luminosity and intrinsic size, we expectthe observational data points to show some scatter around the theoretically cal-
culated functional relationships. However, an analysis involving a large number
of galaxies should have a good statistical signiﬁcance and should allow us toconstrain the theoretical model.
The Hubble test
Consider a galaxy at position r. When light from this galaxy reaches us, the light
passes through a spherical surface on which we lie and of which the galaxy is thecentre. We ﬁrst have to ﬁnd the area of this spherical surface. By extending thediscussion of length measurement presented in §13.1, we can easily conclude
that an element of area on the spherical surface is a(t)
2r2sinθdθdφif the
metric of the Universe is given by (10.19) . An integration of this over the entire
spherical surface gives 4π a(t)2r2. Since we are considering light falling on this
surface at the present time, we have to take a(t)to be the present value a0of the
scale factor. If Lis the intrinsic luminosity of the galaxy (i.e. the rate of energy
emission per unit time), then we may think that the ﬂux received by us shouldbe given by
F=L
4πa2
0r2. (14.33)
But this is not yet the ﬁnal correct answer. A photon which originally had energy
hc/λat the time of emission undergoes redshift and has energy hc/λ(1+z)
when it reaches us. So we need to divide (14.33) by the factor 1 +zto get
the ﬂux corrected for photon redshifts. Another cause for concern is the time
dilation given by (14.27) . So the energy which was emitted by the galaxy in
time/Delta1treaches us in time /Delta1t0=/Delta1t(1+z). This would further reduce the
ﬂux by another factor of 1 +z. The correct expression of ﬂux is then given by

<<<PAGE 450>>>

430 Relativistic cosmology
F=L
4πa2
0r2(1+z)2(14.34)
rather than (14.33) .
We can write (14.34) in the form
F=L
4πd2
L, (14.35)
where
dL=a0r(1+z) (14.36)
is called the luminosity distance . This is an observationally measurable quantity.
Once you measure the apparent luminosity, you can get dLfrom (14.35) by
assuming an average intrinsic luminosity Lfor all galaxies. When measuring
the apparent luminosity, there is one other factor about which one has to be
careful. Suppose you are measuring the apparent luminosity with the help of
the energy ﬂux reaching you in the optical band of the spectrum. For a galaxyat a signiﬁcant redshift z, the original photons which were emitted in the optical
band may now be redshifted to the infrared, whereas the photons which were
originally emitted in the ultraviolet may now appear in the optical band and be
detected by you. If the galaxy is intrinsically less luminous in the ultravioletcompared to the optical band, then this shifting of photon wavelengths maymake it appear dimmer if you are measuring only the photons in the optical
band. Assuming a standard shape for the typical galactic spectrum, one can cor-
rect for this. This is called the K correction . Whenever we talk about luminosity
distance, it should be assumed that we are talking about K corrected luminositydistance.
Substituting for rfrom (14.32) in(14.36) ,w eg e t
H
0dL=c
/Omega12
M,0[2/Omega1 M,0z+(2/Omega1 M,0−4)(/radicalbig
/Omega1M,0z+1−1)]. (14.37)
This is the functional relationship between dLandz, telling us what would be
the redshift zof a galaxy which is located at luminosity distance dL. To see that
Hubble’s law follows from it at low redshifts, we consider /Omega1M,0z<1. Then we
can expand the square root by applying the binomial theorem. On keeping terms
tillz2, it follows from (14.37) after a little algebra that
H0dL≈c/bracketleftbigg
z+1
4(2−/Omega1M,0)z2/bracketrightbigg
. (14.38)
At low redshifts where we can neglect the z2term, we have a linear relation
which is a restatement of Hubble’s law in terms of the measurable quantities
dLandz. Theoretical considerations tell us that there should be a departure
from the linear law at higher redshifts (unless /Omega1M,0=2) and the amount of
departure should depend on /Omega1M,0.Figure 14.2 shows theoretical plots showing

<<<PAGE 451>>>

14.4 Important cosmological tests 431
Fig. 14.2 The relation between the luminosity distance dLand the redshift zof galaxies
having the same intrinsic luminosity, for different values of /Omega1M,0, with /Lambda1=0.
the relation between dLandzfor various values of /Omega1M,0, as obtained from
(14.37) .
It may now seem that it would be straightforward to estimate /Omega1M,0.W e
have to determine the luminosity distances dLof many galaxies having different
redshifts z. Then we have to check if the observational data points lie close to
one of the curves in Figure 14.2 . We shall present some recent observational
data in §14.5. Here let us just mention that the observational data seem not to
ﬁt any of the curves in Figure 14.2 . In other words, a theoretical model with
/Lambda1=0 does not provide a good ﬁt to the observational data, urging astronomers
to bring back the cosmological constant again to centre stage in cosmology.
The angular size test
Suppose a galaxy at redshift zhas linear size D. The galaxy will make up an arc
of a circle passing through the galaxy with us at the centre. The angular size /Delta1θ
of the galaxy as seen by us can be obtained by equating /Delta1θ/2π to the ratio of D
to the circumference of this circle. From the metric (10.19) , it is easy to argue
that the circumference should be equal to 2π a(t)r. Since we are considering the
circle to pass through the galaxy, the appropriate value of a(t)will be the scale
factor awhen light started from the galaxy. This is equal to a0/(1+z)so that
the circumference is 2π a0r/(1+z). It is now easy to see that the angular size
is given by

<<<PAGE 452>>>

432 Relativistic cosmology
Fig. 14.3 The relation between the angular size /Delta1θand the redshift zof galaxies having
the same intrinsic size, for different values of /Omega1M,0, with /Lambda1=0.
/Delta1θ=D(1+z)
a0r. (14.39)
We can write this as
/Delta1θ=D
dA, (14.40)
where
dA=a0r
1+z(14.41)
is called the angular size distance .
If we substitute for rfrom (14.32) in(14.39) , it is easy to see that a0cancels
out and we get an expression of /Delta1θas a function of z.Figure 14.3 shows
/Delta1θa saf u n c t i o no f zfor different /Omega1M,0. This provides another possible test
for the determination of /Omega1M,0. If we measure the angular sizes /Delta1θof many
galaxies having different z, then we can try to ﬁt the observational data with the
theoretical curves in Figure 14.3, thereby allowing us to estimate /Omega1M,0.
The surface brightness test
Assuming that all galaxies have the same intrinsic surface brightness, we now
ask the question as to what would be the apparent surface brightness of a galaxyat redshift z. The apparent surface brightness as seen by us is given by the
quotient of the total ﬂux received by us from the galaxy and the angular area of
the galaxy as seen by us. Since the total ﬂux received by us goes as ∝d
−2
Land
the angular area goes as ∝d−2
A, we expect that the surface brightness should
go as

<<<PAGE 453>>>

14.4 Important cosmological tests 433
S∝d2
A
d2
L.
From (14.36) and(14.41) , we then conclude
S∝1
(1+z)4. (14.42)
This is a model-independent relation, which should hold if our basic ideas of
the expanding Universe are correct and if galaxies are standard candles (i.e. ifintrinsic brightnesses of galaxies systematically do not change with time and
hence with redshift). In §2.2.2 we derived the constancy of speciﬁc intensity in
a region free of matter, which implies that the surface brightness of an object
should be independent of distance. This result certainly has to be modiﬁed whenwe consider general relativistic effects in an expanding Universe. In different
portions of the book, we have mainly discussed the application of the radiative
transfer equation (2.12) to interiors of stars or to interstellar medium within
a galaxy – situations where the general relativistic effect given by (14.42)
is utterly negligible. However, when we venture into the extragalactic world,
(14.42) indicates that more distant galaxies should be dimmer. This also allows
us to get around the Olbers paradox discussed in §6.1.1. Because of the inverse
fourth law dependence seen in (14.42) , the dimming of faraway galaxies is
a rather drastic effect at high redshifts. Even a galaxy at a redshift of z=1
would appear 16 times dimmer. If we want to study galaxies at redshift z≈6
as discussed in §11.8.1, we need very long exposure times due to the extremely
low value of the apparent surface brightness.
14.4.2 Results for the case /Lambda1/negationslash=0
Some of the results for the /Lambda1=0 case get carried over to the /Lambda1/negationslash=0 case. For
example, we deﬁne the luminosity distance dLand the angular size distance dA
through (14.35) and(14.40) respectively even when the cosmological constant
is non-zero (taking Fas the observed ﬂux and /Delta1θas the observed angular size).
The expressions for dLanddAwill also still be given by (14.36) and (14.41)
respectively. However, rwill no longer be related to the redshift zby(14.32)
and hence a relation like (14.37) , based on (14.32) , will no longer hold. Before
discussing how we relate rtozwhen /Lambda1/negationslash=0, we point out that the surface
brightness would still fall as (1+z)−4in accordance with (14.42) .
When the cosmological constant /Lambda1is non-zero, it is not possible to write
down an analytical expression relating rwith z. The relation between them has
to be expressed in the form of an integral, which we now derive. Remember that
r=S(χ), (14.43)

<<<PAGE 454>>>

434 Relativistic cosmology
where S(χ) has to be equal to sin χ,s i n hχorχ, depending on whether k
appearing in the Friedmann equation (10.27) is+1,−1o r0 .S i n c e(14.24) and
(14.25) describing the propagation of light are valid even when /Lambda1/negationslash=0, we note
from (14.25) that the position χof a distant source of light is equal to the lapse
in the time-like variable ηbetween the emission of light by this source and its
reception by us. From (10.33) , it follows that
η0−η=c/integraldisplaytr
tedt
a(t), (14.44)
where teandtrare the values of time twhen the light was emitted and when it
was received. Using (14.25) , we can put (14.44) in the form
χ
c=/integraldisplay0
zdz/prime
adt
dada
dz/prime, (14.45)
where the limits of the integration over the redshift denoted by z/primearezand 0
corresponding to the emission and the reception of the light signal. From the
relation (10.24) between the redshift and the scale factor a, it follows that
da
dz/prime=−a2
a0.
Substituting this in (14.45) ,w eg e t
χ
c=1
a0/integraldisplayz
0dz/prime
(˙a/a). (14.46)
For(˙a/a)in(14.46) we now have to substitute a general expression with
non-zero /Lambda1.W eu s e(14.17) , in which we neglect the term involving /Omega1R,0
which is very small compared to the other terms when the Universe is matter-dominated. By making use of (10.24) , we write (14.17) in the form
˙a
2
a2=H2
0/bracketleftBig
/Omega1M,0(1+z)3+/Omega1/Lambda1,0/bracketrightBig
+κH2
0(1+z)2, (14.47)
where we have written κH2
0for−kc2/a2
0so that
|κ|=c2
a2
0H2
0. (14.48)
Since (14.47) is valid in our present epoch when z=0a n d ˙a/a=H0, it easily
follows from (14.47) that
κ=1−/Omega1M,0−/Omega1/Lambda1,0. (14.49)
We can use (14.49) to determine κwhen/Omega1M,0and/Omega1/Lambda1,0are given. From (14.46)
and(14.47) ,w eh a v e
χ=c
a0H0/integraldisplayz
0[/Omega1M,0(1+z/prime)3+/Omega1/Lambda1,0+κ(1+z/prime)2]−1/2dz/prime. (14.50)

<<<PAGE 455>>>

14.5 Cosmological parameters from observational data 435
From (14.36) ,(14.43) and(14.50) ,w eg e t
dL=a0(1+z)S/parenleftbiggc
a0H0/integraldisplayz
0[/Omega1M,0(1+z/prime)3+/Omega1/Lambda1,0+κ(1+z/prime)2]−1/2dz/prime/parenrightbigg
.
If we use (14.48) to eliminate a0which is not directly observable, then we
ﬁnally get
dL=(1+z)c
H0√|κ|S/parenleftbigg/radicalbig
|κ|/integraldisplayz
0[/Omega1M,0(1+z/prime)3+/Omega1/Lambda1,0+κ(1+z/prime)2]−1/2dz/prime/parenrightbigg
.
(14.51)
For given values of /Omega1M,0and/Omega1/Lambda1,0, we can evaluate (14.51) numerically to
determine H0dLas a function of redshift z. Observationally we can measure
the redshifts zof a large number of galaxies and then determine their dL
from their observed apparent brightnesses by using (14.35) . By comparing the
observational data with the theoretical results, we can hope to determine the
values of /Omega1M,0and/Omega1/Lambda1,0. We shall discuss the outcome of this exercise in
the next section.
14.5 Cosmological parameters from observational data
Data of distant supernovae
As we pointed out in §4.7, Type Ia supernovae are believed to be caused by
matter accreting onto a white dwarf having mass close to the Chandrasekhar
mass. So we expect the maximum luminosity of a Type Ia supernova to have
the same value everywhere and at all times. Hence such a supernova can beused as a standard candle. With the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), it has beenpossible to resolve and study Type Ia supernovae in distant galaxies. Once we
measure the maximum apparent luminosity of the supernova when it is bright-
est, we can use (14.35) to calculate the luminosity distance d
Lif we know the
maximum absolute luminosity. From a knowledge of the redshift zof the galaxy
in which the supernova took place, we get the zcorresponding to this luminosity
distance dL. Hence, in a plot of dLagainst z, each supernova will contribute one
data point.
Sometimes, instead of dL, one plots the equivalent quantity m−Mwhich
is the difference between the apparent and absolute magnitudes of the Type Ia
supernova (when it was brightest). By substituting dLfordin(1.8), we can
easily ﬁnd how dLis related to m−M. In a plot of m−Magainst zin which
the supernova data are represented by points, we can also put theoretical curves
calculated from (14.51) for different combinations of /Omega1M,0and/Omega1/Lambda1,0, to ﬁnd out
which curve ﬁts the observational data best. High- zsupernova data from HST
were analysed by two independent groups who carried out this exercise ( Riess
et al., 1998; Perlmutter et al., 1999). Figure 14.4 shows the result. The top panel

<<<PAGE 456>>>

436 Relativistic cosmology
.01–1–.5.51–1–.50.51343638404244
0
.1
redshift zΔ(m–M) Δ(m–M) (m–M)Δm15
1
Fig. 14.4 The apparent luminosities of distant supernovae against redshifts z, along
with theoretical curves for different combinations of the cosmological parameters. The
cosmological parameters used for the different curves are: (i) solid line for /Omega1M,0=0,
/Omega1/Lambda1,0=0; (ii) long dashes for /Omega1M,0=1,/Omega1/Lambda1,0=0; (iii) short dashes for /Omega1M,0=0,
/Omega1/Lambda1,0=1; (iv) dotted line for /Omega1M,0=0.3,/Omega1/Lambda1,0=0.7. The lower two panels plot the
deviation of m−Mfrom the solid line for /Omega1M,0=0,/Omega1/Lambda1,0=0, showing the data of
two groups separately: ﬁlled squares for the data of Riess et al. (1998) and open squares
for the data of Perlmutter et al. (1999). From Leibundgut (2001). ( c/circlecopyrtAnnual Reviews
Inc. Reproduced with permission from Annual Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics .)
shows data of both the groups along with some theoretical curves, the curve
corresponding to the empty Universe ( /Omega1M,0=0,/Omega1/Lambda1,0=0) being indicated by
the solid line. To make things clearer, the two bottom panels show the data of the
two groups separately, with the vertical axis giving the differential /Delta1(m−M)

<<<PAGE 457>>>

14.5 Cosmological parameters from observational data 437
with respect to the solid line for the empty Universe. It appears that the dotted
line corresponding to /Omega1M,0=0.3a n d/Omega1 /Lambda1,0=0.7 is the best theoretical ﬁt to
the observational data. This value of /Omega1M,0agrees with what observers estimated
from dynamical mass determinations of clusters of galaxies, as given by (10.42) .
However, the possibility that /Omega1/Lambda1,0may be non-zero sent a shock wave through
the entire astrophysics community of the world, since it was generally believedfor several decades that the cosmological constant /Lambda1is zero.
Data of temperature anisotropies in CMBR
We now turn to a different kind of data. In §11.7.1 we discussed primary
anisotropies in CMBR, as measured by the mission WMAP. The measuredtemperature variation as a function of the galactic coordinates is shown inFigure 11.3 . Let us consider the temperature variation /Delta1T/Tin a direction
ψ. The temperature variation /Delta1T/Tin a nearby direction ψ+θis expected
to be very similar if θis sufﬁciently small, but will not be correlated with the
temperature variation in direction ψifθis large. The angular correlation of the
CMBR anisotropy is clearly given by
C(θ)=/angbracketleftbigg/Delta1T
T(ψ)/Delta1T
T(ψ+θ)/angbracketrightbigg
, (14.52)
where the averaging is supposed to have been done for all possible values of ψ
and possible values of θaround them. Since this correlation function C(θ)is
a function of θ, we can expand it in Legendre polynomials (see, for example,
Mathews and Walker, 1979, §7–1; Jackson, 1999, §3.2), i.e.
C(θ)=/summationdisplay
l(2l+1)
4πClPl(cosθ), (14.53)
where Clis the coefﬁcient of the l-th Legendre polynomial. Figure 14.5 plots
Cla saf u n c t i o no f l. It is clear that there is a maximum around l≈250. To
understand the signiﬁcance of the maximum, note that Pl(cosθ)haslnodes
between 0 and π.W h e n lis large, the ﬁrst node is approximately located at
/Delta1θ≈π/l.Av a l u eo f l≈250 would give a value of /Delta1θsomewhat less than
1◦. This is the typical angular scale of the temperature anisotropies in CMBR.
We now come to the question of what determines this angular scale.
Let us consider an object of linear size Don the last scattering surface from
where the CMBR photons come and which, as we pointed out in §11.7,i sa t
redshift zdec≈1100. We now ﬁgure out the angular size /Delta1θwhich this object
of size Dwill produce in the sky. The relation between Dand/Delta1θis given by
(14.39) . Since we are considering the possibility of /Lambda1not being zero, we should
substitute for rfrom (14.43) and(14.50) . To have a rough idea of how things
go, let us substitute for rfrom (14.32) appropriate for the /Lambda1=0 case, since this
will allow us to make some estimates analytically and a non-zero /Lambda1does not

<<<PAGE 458>>>

438 Relativistic cosmology
Fig. 14.5 The values of the coefﬁcients Clin the Legendre polynomial expansion of the
angular correlation C(θ)of temperature anisotropies in the CMBR. Data for l<800
come from WMAP, whereas data for higher lcome from other experiments. The top of
the ﬁgure indicates angular sizes corresponding to different values of l. Adapted from
Bennett et al. (2003).
introduce too much error when calculating quantities relevant for early epochs.
When z/greatermuch1, it follows from (14.32) that
r→2c
a0H0/Omega1M,0.
Substituting this for r, we obtain from (14.39) that
/Delta1θ≈/Omega1M,0
2.Dz
cH−1
0.
On substituting for H0from (9.17), this becomes
/Delta1θ≈34.4/prime/prime(/Omega1M,0h)/parenleftbiggDz
1M p c/parenrightbigg
. (14.54)
By putting zdec≈1100 in (14.54) , we can determine the linear size Dof an
object on the last scattering surface which would subtend an angle slightly lessthan 1
◦in the sky.
As we pointed out in §11.9, only perturbations larger than the Jeans length
grow. So we may expect the Jeans length to give sizes of the typical perturba-
tions on the last scattering surface. According to (11.40) , the Jeans length was
of the order of the horizon size cttill the decoupling of matter and radiation
atzdec≈1100. We now estimate the angle /Delta1θwhich the horizon on the last
scattering surface would subtend to us today. We can use (10.60) to get the time
when the decoupling took place, which turns out to be of order
tdec≈H−1
0/Omega1−1/2
M,0z−3/2
dec. (14.55)

<<<PAGE 459>>>

14.5 Cosmological parameters from observational data 439
We would get the horizon by multiplying this by c. On substituting ctdecforD
in(14.54) ,w eg e t
/Delta1θ≈0.87◦/Omega11/2
M,0/parenleftBigzdec
1100/parenrightBig−1/2
. (14.56)
If we take /Omega1M,0of order 1, then (14.56) gives an angular size comparable to
the angular scale of anisotropies in the WMAP data. This suggests that the
irregularities that we see on the last scattering surface correspond to the Jeanslength, which was of the same order as the horizon till that time. It follows from(14.56) that a larger value of /Omega1
M,0would make /Delta1θlarger, causing the peak in
Figure 14.5 to shift leftward. The position of the peak would thus give the value
of/Omega1M,0.
When we assume /Lambda1/negationslash=0, the analysis becomes much more complicated
and has to be done numerically. We shall not present that analysis here. The
more complicated analysis with /Lambda1/negationslash=0 suggests that the position of the peak in
Figure 14.5 depends on /Omega1/Lambda1,0+/Omega1M,0. The observed position of the peak turns
out to be consistent with
/Omega1/Lambda1,0+/Omega1M,0=1. (14.57)
If/Omega1/Lambda1,0+/Omega1M,0were larger, then the peak would have shifted more towards
the left.
The combined constraints
Figure 14.6 indicates the likely values of /Omega1/Lambda1,0and/Omega1M,0. The straight line
corresponds to /Omega1/Lambda1,0+/Omega1M,0=1 concluded from the WMAP data of temper-
ature anisotropies of CMBR. On the other hand, the ellipses indicate the best
possible combinations of /Omega1/Lambda1,0and/Omega1M,0which ﬁt the data of distant super-
novae. Constraints arising out of these two different sets of observational data
are simultaneously satisﬁed if the values of our basic cosmological parameters
are around
/Omega1/Lambda1,0≈0.7,/Omega1 M,0≈0.3. (14.58)
At the present time, these seem to be the values of these parameters acceptedby most cosmologists. As we already pointed out, another independent conﬁr-mation of the above value of /Omega1
M,0comes from the virial mass estimates of
clusters of galaxies. Two important conclusions follow from the values quoted
in(14.58) . Firstly, it follows from (14.49) thatκ≈0, which means that our
Universe must be nearly ﬂat with very little curvature. Secondly, since /Omega1/Lambda1,0
and/Omega1M,0are of comparable values at the present time, it follows from (14.17)
that the matter density was more dominant in the past when awas smaller than
a0, whereas the cosmological constant term will be more dominant in the future.
It thus seems that we live in a ﬂat Universe which is at present in the process of
making a transition from a matter-dominated epoch to a /Lambda1-dominated epoch.

<<<PAGE 460>>>

440 Relativistic cosmology
Fig. 14.6 Constraints on /Omega1/Lambda1,0and/Omega1M,0jointly coming from the temperature
anisotropies of the CMBR (the straight line corresponding to /Omega1/Lambda1,0+/Omega1M,0=1) and
the data of distant Type Ia supernovae (the ellipses within which the values would lie at
particular conﬁdence levels). Adapted from Riess et al. (2004).
Exercises
14.1 Find the scalar curvature for the following three-dimensional metrics
ds2=a2[dχ2+sin2χ(dθ2+sin2θdφ2)],
ds2=a2[dχ2+sinh2χ(dθ2+sin2θdφ2)].
14.2 Calculate all the components of the Ricci tensor Rikfor the Robertson–
Walker metric and verify (14.2) .
14.3 Consider the static solution of the Universe when the cosmological
constant /Lambda1is assumed to be non-zero and the pressure is considered negligible
(i.e. take P=0). Let a0be the value of the scale factor acorresponding
to this static solution. Assume that the scale factor is suddenly changed to
a0+a1. Show that a1will grow exponentially, implying that the static solution
is unstable.
14.4 (a) Consider a free particle moving with respect to the co-moving coordi-
nates in the Robertson–Walker metric without interacting with other particles.
Without any loss of generality, we can choose the origin on the particle path

<<<PAGE 461>>>

Exercises 441
such that χchanges along the path, but not θorφ. By considering the
extremum of/integraltext
ds, show that a2(dχ/dτ)will be a constant of motion. Argue
from this that the physical velocity of the particle (with respect to the co-
moving frame) will decrease with the expansion of the Universe as a−1.
(b) Now consider a type of particles ﬁlling the Universe. If they are
initially relativistic (κ BT/greatermuchmc2) and are in thermodynamic equilibrium,
we expect (11.7) to hold. If the particles then fall out of thermodynamic
equilibrium and eventually become non-relativistic with the expansion of theUniverse, show that (11.7) continues to hold if we assume Tto fall as a
−1.T h i s
essentially implies that the distribution of the particles continues to look like
Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac distributions with energy given by pc(which is
not true after the particles become non-relativistic). Discuss whether Tappear-
ing in the expressions of these distributions will have the usual signiﬁcance of
temperature. Should (11.8) also continue to hold after the particles become
non-relativistic? If not, then how will you calculate the contribution of theseparticles to the density of the Universe?
14.5 For the case k=− 1, derive the relation between the coordinate distance
rand the redshift zof a galaxy (assuming /Lambda1=0). Show that the relation is the
same as (14.32) derived for the k=+ 1 case.
14.6 If there are ngalaxies per unit co-moving volume of the Robertson–
Walker metric, ﬁnd the number of galaxies which will be found within solid
angle d/Omega1having redshifts in the range ztoz+dz.
14.7 Using the integral relation (14.51), numerically evaluate and graphically
plot the apparent luminosities of standard candles against their redshifts zfor
the following models: (i) /Omega1
M=1.0,/Omega1/Lambda1=0.0; (ii) /Omega1M=0.0,/Omega1/Lambda1=1.0; (iii)
/Omega1M=0.3,/Omega1/Lambda1=0.7.
14.8 Consider an angular function
C(θ)=/Gamma1e−(θ/θ 0)2.
This function can be expanded in Legendre polynomials Pl(cosθ)as in
(14.53). Show that the coefﬁcients Clin the expansion are given by
Cl=2π/integraldisplay+1
−1C(θ)Pl(cosθ)d(cosθ).
Develop a numerical code to calculate these coefﬁcients Cl. Run the code for
a few selected values of θ0and ﬁnd the corresponding values of lfor which Cl
is maximum (by plotting the values of Clagainst l).

<<<PAGE 462>>>



<<<PAGE 463>>>

Appendix A
Values of various quantities
A.1 Physical constants
Speed of light c= 3.00×108ms−1
Gravitational constant G= 6.67×10−11m3kg−1s−2
Planck constant h= 6.63×10−34Js
Boltzmann constant κB= 1.38×10−23JK−1
Permeability of free space μ0= 1.26×10−6Hm−1
Permittivity of free space /epsilon10= 8.85×10−12Fm−1
Charge of electron e=− 1.60×10−19C
Mass of electron me= 9.11×10−31kg
Mass of hydrogen atom mH= 1.67×10−27kg
Stefan–Boltzmann constant σ= 5.67×10−8Wm−2K−4
Constant in Wien’s law λmT= 2.90×10−3mK
Standard atmospheric pressure = 1.01×105Nm−2
1 electron volt eV= 1.60×10−19J
1 angstrom ˚A= 10−10m
1 calorie = 4.19 J
A.2 Astronomical constants
1 astronomical unit AU = 1.50×1011m
1 parsec pc = 3.09×1016m
1 year yr = 3.16×107s
Mass of Sun M⊙= 1.99×1030kg
Radius of Sun R⊙= 6.96×108m
Luminosity of Sun L⊙= 3.84×1026W
Mass of Earth M⊕= 5.98×1024kg
Radius of Earth R⊕= 6.37×106m
443

<<<PAGE 464>>>



<<<PAGE 465>>>

Appendix B
Astrophysics and the Nobel Prize
The Nobel Prize was not awarded to astrophysicists in the early decades of the twentieth
century. The most impact-making astrophysicists of that period such as Eddington andHubble did not win Nobel Prizes. From the middle of the twentieth century, several
Nobel Prizes have been given for important discoveries in astrophysics. We list those
Nobel Prizes below. It should, however, be emphasized that this list of Nobel laureatesshould notbe considered to be some kind of list of greatest astrophysicists of our time. A
few of the Nobel Prizes were given for serendipitous discoveries which had tremendousimpact. On the other hand, some astrophysicists who are regarded amongst the greatestand most impact-making by common consent have not been honoured with the Nobel
Prize. A reader of this book may be interested in making up a list of astrophysicists
who, according to his/her opinion, should have been awarded the Nobel Prize.
1967 H. A. Bethe Contributions to the theory of nuclear
reactions, especially discoveries concerning
energy production in stars
1970 H. Alfv ´en Discoveries in magnetohydrodynamics
1974 M. Ryle Observations and inventions of aperture-
synthesis technique in radio astrophysics
A. Hewish Discovery of pulsars
1978 A. A. Penzias and Discovery of cosmic microwave background
R. W. Wilson radiation
1983 S. Chandrasekhar Theoretical studies of the structure and
evolution of stars
W. A. Fowler Theoretical and experimental studies of nuclear
reactions of importance in the formation ofchemical elements in the Universe
1993 R. A. Hulse and Discovery of a new type of pulsar
J. H. Taylor
2002 R. Davis and Detection of cosmic neutrinos
M. Koshiba
R. Giacconi Discovery of cosmic X-ray sources
2006 J. C. Mather and Discovery of the blackbody form and
G. F. Smoot anisotropy of cosmic microwave background
radiation
445

<<<PAGE 466>>>

446 B Astrophysics and the Nobel Prize
The following is a list of Nobel laureates who had made important contributions in
astrophysics, although they won Nobel Prizes for their works in other areas of physics.
1921 A. Einstein
1938 E. Fermi1952 E. M. Purcell
1964 C. H. Townes
1980 J. W. Cronin

<<<PAGE 467>>>

Suggestions for further reading
The reader of this book is assumed to have a background of physics appropriate for
the advanced undergraduate or the beginning graduate level. Knowledge is assumed of
all the standard branches of physics which are usually covered at that level – classicalmechanics, electromagnetic theory, special relativity, optics, thermal physics, statistical
mechanics, quantum mechanics, atomic physics, nuclear physics and the standard math-
ematical tools often known collectively as the methods of mathematical physics. Sincea reader of this book would be familiar with the standard textbooks on these different
branches of physics and would have his/her own favourites, I do not make an attempt of
listing textbooks of basic physics.
After giving some general references covering the whole of astrophysics, I provide
references on the material covered in different chapters. The main aim of the referencesfor different chapters is to help those readers of this book who want to go beyond whatis covered here. No attempt at completeness is made here. It is not possible for an
individual to be acquainted with everything written on all the topics covered in this
book. I have mainly included those references which I myself have found useful and
which are of the nature of pedagogical works at the immediate next level beyond this
book, intentionally leaving out advanced monographs on specialized research topics.Some suitable references may not have been included merely due to the accident of
my not knowing about them. I apologize to those authors who may feel that something
written by them ought to have been referenced.
General references
There are several excellent elementary astronomy textbooks suitable for beginningundergraduate students where the authors assume very little knowledge of physics andnot even a knowledge of calculus, since elementary astronomy courses at this level
are popular in many undergraduate programmes. The pioneering classic astronomy text
at this level was written by Abell (1964), which has later been updated by Morrison,
Wolff and Fraknoi (1995). The other classic in this ﬁeld is by Shu (1982). Although
somewhat outdated by now, this amazing book manages to discuss many importantphysics aspects of basic astrophysics very clearly and at considerable depth with onlyhigh school mathematics. One of the more recent books is Gregory and Zeilik (1997).
At a more advanced level (assuming more background of physics and mathematics),
447

<<<PAGE 468>>>

448 Suggestions for further reading
an outstanding textbook suitable for senior undergraduates is Carroll and Ostlie (2006).
Although the descriptive and phenomenological topics are covered extremely well in
this book, the treatment of conceptual topics is not always so satisfactory or adequate.
The size of the book (more than 1300 pages) also makes it unsuitable for use in a one-semester astrophysics course.
After the elementary books mentioned above (there are many more elementary
astronomy texts!), one can mention the many excellent graduate textbooks dealingwith speciﬁc branches of astrophysics. However, there are not too many books which
attempt to bridge the gap between these two kinds of books, by presenting the whole of
astrophysics comprehensively in one volume assuming an advanced undergraduate or
elementary graduate level of physics. The very few books of this kind include Uns¨old
and Baschek (2001), Harwit (2006), Shore (2002) and Maoz (2007). Since these authors
more or less attempt the same thing which I attempt in this book, it is best that I do notcomment on these books and leave it for readers to judge how successful which author
has been. There is a two-volume introduction to astrophysics by Bowers and Deeming
(1984a, 1984b) as well as a three-volume introduction to theoretical astrophysics by
Padmanabhan (2000, 2001, 2002).
Apart from textbooks, one may mention other kinds of books which can be useful
for students of astrophysics. A classic handbook compiling all kinds of astrophysical
data was ﬁrst brought out by Allen (1955) and is now updated by Cox (2000). Lang
(1999) has collected many of the important astrophysical formulae in two volumes.
The excellent glossary of astronomical terms compiled by Hopkins (1980) has unfortu-
nately not been updated in many years. A collection of essays on several astrophysicaltopics by some of the world’s leading astrophysicists has been edited by Bahcall and
Ostriker (1997). One can question whether the title of the volume Unsolved Problems
in Astrophysics is justiﬁed and whether it discusses unsolved problems from all areas
of astrophysics which such a pretentious title would imply, but one cannot question thescholarship and authority of the essays included in this volume. At a more elementary
level, articles on different aspects of astrophysics published in Scientiﬁc American till
the mid-1970s were put together by Gingerich (1975). Several leading astrophysicists
have written about their research ﬁelds in non-technical language in this volume.
Chapter 1
Since books on different astrophysical systems will be mentioned in the references forthe various following chapters, here we only mention books which discuss how we
obtain astronomical data with the help of the appropriate instruments. Perhaps Kitchin
(2003), Roy and Clarke (2003) and L´ena (1988) are amongst the most outstanding
graduate level textbooks of this kind. There are also many books devoted speciﬁcallyto optical, radio or X-ray telescopes. The present author, as a theoretician, is not veryqualiﬁed to judge the relative merits and demerits of these books. So we do not attempt
to provide a detailed bibliography of observational astronomy.
Chapter 2
The standard graduate textbook on radiative processes in astrophysics is the superblywritten volume by Rybicki and Lightman (1979), which is justly regarded as a classic.

<<<PAGE 469>>>

Suggestions for further reading 449
Since this book mainly deals with well-established principles, it has not dated with time.
Other books covering this ﬁeld are Tucker (1975) and Shu (1991). Serious students
wishing to learn about radiative transfer in more detail should consult the famousmonograph by Chandrasekhar (1950). The standard work on stellar atmospheres is
Mihalas (1978).
Chapters 3–4
Since the study of stars has been the central theme in modern astrophysics for severaldecades, it is no wonder that there are many excellent books on stellar astrophysics.The classic volumes by Eddington (1930) and Chandrasekhar (1939), which played
very important roles in the historical development of astrophysics, are not suitablefor use as textbooks in modern courses on this subject. However, the other classicbySchwarzschild (1958) is still useful for pedagogical purposes, because the ﬁrst
two chapters of this book provide one of the clearest presentations of the basics ofstellar astrophysics, although the later chapters dealing with details of stellar models arecompletely outdated now. One of the ﬁrst books written after computers revolutionized
the study of stellar structure is Clayton (1968), which has been used as the standard
graduate textbook for many years. Amongst the more modern books on this subject,
Kippenhahn and Weigert (1994) and B¨ohm-Vitense (1989a, 1989b, 1992)a r ev e r y
clearly written and are highly recommended. The beautifully written volume by Tayler
(1994) introduces the subject at a more elementary level than the levels of the books
cited earlier.
We now come to books dealing with specialized aspects of stellar astrophysics.
Stix (2004) has written an excellent book on the Sun. Arnett (1996) discusses nuclear
reactions during the advanced stages of stellar evolution and the physics of supernovae.
The standard work on neutrino astrophysics is by Bahcall (1989).
Chapter 5
Shapiro and Teukolsky (1983) wrote the deﬁnitive graduate textbook on compact
objects resulting from the end states of stellar collapse. In spite of the fact that many
important developments have taken place in this ﬁeld afterwards, this book is still highly
recommended for the very clear discussion of the basics of both theory and observations.A more recent book on this subject is by Glendenning (2000). Although Longair (1994)
covers many topics, a large part of his book is devoted to topics related to advancedstellar evolution and stellar collapse.
Chapter 6
The standard graduate textbook on galactic astronomy by Binney and Merriﬁeld (1998)
is supposed to be a replacement of the earlier volume by Mihalas and Binney (1981).
In order to make room for the discussion of external galaxies, Binney and Merriﬁeld
(1998) condensed or deleted some topics pertaining to our Galaxy which were discussed
byMihalas and Binney (1981) at length. Mihalas and Binney (1981) may therefore be

<<<PAGE 470>>>

450 Suggestions for further reading
more useful than Binney and Merriﬁeld (1998) for learning about our Galaxy. Another
good book covering galaxies and interstellar matter is Schefﬂer and Els ¨asser (1988).
The superb elementary book by Tayler (1993) would provide a good starting point to
get into this subject.
There are several books dealing speciﬁcally with the interstellar matter. The famous
classic by Spitzer (1978) is rather compactly written and beginners may ﬁnd it a difﬁcult
book, although a perusal of this book can be a very rewarding experience. Osterbrock
and Ferland (2005) cover many aspects of the subject, although one of the important
components of interstellar matter – the H Icomponent – is not discussed in this book.
Other books dealing with the interstellar medium are Dyson and Williams (1997) and
Dopita and Sutherland (2003).
Chapter 7
Very surprisingly, there seems to be only one really satisfactory modern textbook on
the important subject of stellar dynamics. It is the monumental volume by Binney and
Tremaine (1987). Readers may want to look at a classic – an old review article by Oort
(1965). The dynamics of globular clusters is treated in a monograph by Spitzer (1987).
Chapter 8
Shu (1992) and Choudhuri (1998) are standard introductory texts on plasma astro-
physics. Serious students may want to look up the classic in this ﬁeld by Parker (1979).
The topic of relativistic particles in astrophysics is covered thoroughly by Longair
(1994). The applications of MHD to the Sun are discussed by Priest (1982). See Mestel
(1999) for a masterly discussion of the role of magnetic ﬁelds in stellar astronomy.
Chapter 9
Several of the references for Chapter 6 cover external galaxies as well. We espe-
cially recommend Binney and Merriﬁeld (1998). Another recent book on this rapidly
developing subject is Schneider (2006). We recommend Peterson (1997) and Krolik
(1999) as good introductions to the subject of active galaxies. Sarazin (1986) provides
a comprehensive coverage of galaxy clusters.
Chapters 10–11
The brilliant small volume by Weinberg (1977) is a masterpiece of popular science
and may be read proﬁtably before delving into the more technical tomes. Somehowcosmology has been a popular subject for textbook writers and there is probably no other
branch of astrophysics in which so many textbooks have been written and are still being
written. We certainly cannot provide a complete bibliography of cosmology books here.So we selectively mention a few books in which authors stress the astrophysical aspects.
After developing the necessary tools of general relativity, Narlikar (2002) gives a very

<<<PAGE 471>>>

Suggestions for further reading 451
clear introduction to the main themes of modern cosmology. In spite of the author’s bias
for the steady state theory, all the standard topics are covered satisfactorily. The volume
byPeebles (1993) is a work of great scholarship and insight, but it is not particularly
coherently written and beginners may get lost in this large book. Peacock (1999) covers
various physics and astronomy topics which one needs to master in order to become aprofessional cosmologist. We recommend Kolb and Turner (1990) for topics pertaining
to the early Universe.
Chapters 12–14
While general relativity also has been a favourite subject for textbook writers, the last
few chapters of Landau and Lifshitz (1975) still provide one of the most beautiful
and elegant introductions to this subject. Schutz (1985) and Hartle (2003)a r et w o
particularly user-friendly books in a subject generally regarded as difﬁcult and abstruse.One famous (and bulky) introductory textbook is by Misner, Thorne and Wheeler
(1973). But be cautioned that this book is not for you if you do not like very verbose
and wordy presentations! Weinberg (1972) also wrote a famous book in which his aim
was to develop general relativity without stressing the geometrical aspects of the theory.Readers desirous of learning the more formal aspects of general relativity may turn to
Wald (1984).

<<<PAGE 472>>>



<<<PAGE 473>>>

References
Each reference is cited in the portions of the book indicated within square brackets.
S. f. r. stands for Suggestions for further reading.
Aaronson, M. et al. 1982, Astrophys. J. 258, 64. [§9.5]
Aaronson, M. et al. 1986, Astrophys. J. 302, 536. [§9.2.2]
Abdurashitov, J. N. et al. 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4708. [§4.4.2]
Abell, G. O. 1958, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 3, 211. [§9.5]
Abell, G. O. 1964, The Exploration of the Universe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
[ S .f .r . ]
Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I. A. 1964, Handbook of Mathematical Functions .
National Bureau of Standards. Reprinted by Dover. [§11.2]
Ahmad, Q. R. et al. 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 11301. [§4.4.2, §11.5]
Alcock, C. et al. 1993, Nature, 365, 621. [§13.3.2]
Alfv ´en, H. 1942a, Ark. f. Mat. Astr. o. Fysik 29B, No. 2. [§8.5]
Alfv ´en, H. 1942b, Nature 150, 405. [Ex. 8.4]
Allen, C. W. 1955, Astrophysical Quantities. The Athlone Press. [S. f. r.]
Alpher, R. A. and Herman, R. C. 1948, Nature 162, 774. [§10.5]
Anselmann, P. et al. 1995, Phys. Lett. B342, 440. [§4.4.2]
Arnett, D. 1996, Supernovae and Nucleosynthesis . Princeton University Press. [S. f. r.]
Atkinson, R. d’E. and Houtermans, F. G. 1929, Zs. f. Phys. 54, 656. [§4.1]
Aubourg, E. et al. 1993, Nature 365, 623. [§13.3.2]
Axford, W. I., Leer, E. and Skadron, G. 1977, Proc. 15th International Cosmic Ray
Conf .11
, 132. [§8.10]
Baade, W. 1944, Astrophys. J. 100, 137. [§6.4]
Baade, W. 1954, T r a n s .I .A .U . 8, 397. [§6.1.2]
Baade, W. and Zwicky, F. 1934, Phys. Rev. 45, 138. [§5.4, §5.5]
Backer, D. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Heiles, C., Davis, M. M. and Goss, W. M. 1982, Nature
300, 615. [§5.5.2]
Bahcall, J. N. 1989, Neutrino Astrophysics. Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Bahcall, J. N. 1999, Current Science 77, 1487. [§4.4.2, Fig. 4.8]
Bahcall, J. N. and Ostriker, J. P. (Ed.) 1997, Unsolved Problems in Astrophysics .
Princeton University Press. [S. f. r.]
Bahcall, J. N. and Ulrich, R. K. 1988, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 297. [§4.4]
Becker, R. H. et al. 2001, Astron. J. 122, 2850. [§11.8.2]
Bell, A. R. 1978, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 182, 147 and 443. [§8.10]
453

<<<PAGE 474>>>

454 References
Bennett, C. L. et al. 2003, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148,1 .[ §11.7.1, Fig. 11.3, §14.5,
Fig. 14.5]
Bernoulli, D. 1738, Hydrodynamica.[ E x .8 . 1 ]
Bethe, H. 1939, Phys. Rev. 55, 434. [§4.3]
Bethe, H. and Critchﬁeld, C. H. 1938, Phys. Rev. 54, 248. [§4.3]
Biermann, L. 1948, Zs. f. Astrophys. 25, 135. [§3.2.4]
Binney, J. and Merriﬁeld, M. 1998, Galactic Astronomy. Princeton University Press.
[§6.1.2, §6.3.2, Fig. 6.8, Fig. 9.6,S .f .r . ]
Binney, J. and Tremaine, S. 1987, Galactic Dynamics. Princeton University Press. [ §7.3,
§7.4,S .f .r . ]
Blandford, R. D. and Ostriker, J. P. 1978, Astrophys. J. Lett. 221, L29. [§8.10]
Blandford, R. D. and Rees, M. J. 1974, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 169, 395. [§9.4.1]
Bless, R. C. and Savage, B. D. 1972, Astrophys. J. 171, 293. [Fig. 6.3]
B¨ohm-Vitense, E. 1989a, Stellar Astrophysics, Vol. 1: Basic Stellar Observations and
Data. Cambridge University Press. [ §3.5.1, Fig. 3.4,S .f .r . ]
B¨ohm-Vitense, E. 1989b, Stellar Astrophysics, Vol. 2: Stellar Atmospheres . Cambridge
University Press. [S. f. r.]
B¨ohm-Vitense, E. 1992, Stellar Astrophysics, Vol. 3: Stellar Structure and Evolution .
Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Boltzmann, L. 1872, Sitzungsber. Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Wien 66, 275. [§7.5]
Boltzmann, L. 1884, Wied. Annalen, 22, 291. [§2.4.1]
Bondi, H. 1952, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 112, 195. [§4.6]
Bondi,
H. and Gold, T. 1948, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 108, 252. [Ex. 10.5]
Born, M. and Wolf, E. 1980, Principles of Optics , 6th edn. Pergamon. [ §1.7.1, §13.5]
Bose, S. N. 1924, Zs. f. Phys. 26, 178. [§11.2]
Bosma, A. 1978, PhD Thesis. Kapteyn Institute, Groningen. [ Fig. 9.6]
Bowers, R. and Deeming, T. 1984a, Astrophysics I: Stars . Jones and Bartlett. [S. f. r.]
Bowers, R. and Deeming, T. 1984b, Astrophysics II: Interstellar Matter and Galaxies .
Jones and Bartlett. [S. f. r.]
Brunish, W. M. and Truran, J. W. 1982, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 49, 447. [ Fig. 3.2, Fig. 3.3]
Bunsen, R. and Kirchhoff, G. 1861, Untersuchungen ¨uber das Sonnenspecktrum und
die Spektren der Chemischen Elemente .[§1.2]
Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, G. R., Fowler, W. A. and Hoyle, F. 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys.
29, 547. [§4.3, §4.7]
Butcher, H. and Oemler, A. 1978, Astrophys. J. 219, 18. [§9.5]
Byram, E. T., Chubb, T. A. and Friedman, H. 1966, Science 152, 66. [§9.5]
Carroll, B. W. and Ostlie, D. A. 2006, An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics , 2nd
edn. Benjamin Cummings. [S. f. r.]
Chadwick, J. 1932, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 136, 692. [§5.4]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1931, Astrophys. J. 74, 81. [§1.5, §5.3]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1935, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 95, 207. [§5.3]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1939, An Introduction to the Study of Stellar Structure . University of
Chicago Press. Reprinted by Dover. [ §3.3,S .f .r . ]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1943, Astrophys. J. 97, 255. [§7.4]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1950, Radiative Transfer . Clarendon Press. Reprinted by Dover.
[§2.4,S .f .r . ]
Chandrasekhar
, S. 1952, Phil. Mag. (7) 43, 501. [§8.6]
Chandrasekhar, S. 1984, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56, 137. [ Fig. 5.2]
Chandrasekhar, S. and Breen, F. H. 1946, Astrophys. J. 104, 430. [§2.6.2]
Chen, G. H. and Hewitt, J. N. 1993, Astron. J. 106, 1719. [Fig. 13.6]

<<<PAGE 475>>>

References 455
Chevalier, R. A. 1992, Nature 355, 691. [Fig. 4.14 ]
Chitre, S. M. and Antia, H. M. 1999, Current Science 77, 1454. [Fig. 4.7]
Choudhuri, A. R. 1989, Solar Phys. 123, 217. [§8.6]
Choudhuri, A. R. 1998, The Physics of Fluids and Plasmas: An Introduction for Astro-
physicists. Cambridge University Press. [ §4.4.1, §4.6, §6.7, §7.5, §8.5, §8.7, §8.10,
§8.13, §9.5,S .f .r . ]
Christoffel, E. B. 1868, J. reine Angew. Math. 70, 46. [§12.2.3]
Clayton, D. D. 1968, Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis .
McGraw-Hill. [§2.6,S .f .r . ]
Colless, M. et al. 2001, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 328, 1039. [§9.6]
Compton, A. H. 1923, Phys. Rev. 21, 715. [§11.7.2]
Copernicus, N. 1543, De Revolutionibus Orbium Celestium. [§1.2]
Cowie, L. L. and Binney, J. 1977, Astrophys. J. 215, 723. [§9.5]
Cowsik, R. and McClelland, J. 1972, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 669. [§11.5]
Cox, A. N. 2000, Allen’s Astrophysical Quantities, 4th edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]
Cox, A. N. and Stewart, J. N. 1970, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 19, 243. [§2.6]
Curtis, H. D. 1921, Bull. Nat. Res. Council 2, 194. [§9.1]
Davis, L. and Greenstein, J. L. 1951, Astrophys. J. 114, 206. [§6.7]
Davis, M., Efstathiou, G., Frenk, C. S. and White, S. D. M. 1985, Astrophys. J. 292,
371. [§11.9]
Davis, R. Jr., Harmer, D. S. and Hoffman, K. C. 1968, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20,1205. [§4.4.2]
de
Lapparent, V ., Geller, M. J. and Huchra, J. P. 1986, Astrophys. J. Lett. 302,L 1 .[ §9.6,
Fig. 9.19]
de Vaucouleurs, G. 1948, Ann. Astrophys. 11, 247. [§9.2.1]
Dehnen, W. and Binney, J. J. 1998, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 298, 387. [Fig. 6.7,
Fig. 7.4]
Deshpande, A. A., Ramachandran, R. and Srinivasan, G. 1995, J. Astrophys. Astron. 16,
69. [Fig. 5.5]
Dirac, P. A. M. 1926, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 112, 661. [§11.2]
Dopita, M. and Sutherland, R. S. 2003, Astrophysics of the Diffuse Universe . Springer.
[ S .f .r . ]
Downs, G. S. 1981, Astrophys. J. 249, 687. [Fig. 5.4]
Dreher, J. W. and Feigelson, E. D. 1984, Nature 308, 43. [Fig. 9.10 ]
Dressler, A. 1980, Astrophys. J. 236, 351. [§9.2.1]
Dreyer, J. L. E. 1888, Mem. Roy. Astron. Soc. 49,1 . [§1.8]
Dyson, F. W., Eddington, A. S. and Davidson, C. 1920, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 220,
291. [§13.3.2]
Dyson, J. E. and Williams, D. A. 1997, The Physics of the Interstellar Medium, 2nd
edn. Taylor & Francis. [S. f. r.]
Eddington, A. S. 1916, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 77, 16. [§3.2.3]
Eddington, A. S. 1920, Observatory 43, 353. [§4.1]
Eddington, A. S. 1924, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 84, 104. [§3.6.1]
Eddington, A. S. 1926, The Internal Constitution of the Stars . Cambridge University
Press. [§2.4.2, §3.1, §3.2.3, §5.3, Ex. 5.5, S. f. r.]
Edge, D. O., Shakeshaft, J. R., McAdam, W. B., Baldwin, J. E. and Archer, S. 1959,
Mem. Roy. Astron. Soc. 68,37.[§1.8]
Einstein,
A. 1916, Ann. d. Phys. 49, 769. [ §10.1, §10.2, §12.4.2]
Einstein, A. 1917, Sitzungber. Preus. Akad. Wissen. , 142. [§10.4, §14.2]
Einstein, A. 1924, Sitzungber. Preus. Akad. Wissen. , 261. [§11.2]
Einstein, A. and de Sitter, W. 1932, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 18, 213. [§10.6]

<<<PAGE 476>>>

456 References
Emden, R. 1907, Gaskugeln. Teubner, Leipzig. [§5.3]
Euler, L. 1755, Hist. de l’Acad. de Berlin .[§8.2]
Euler, L. 1759, Novi Comm. Acad. Petrop. 14,1 . [§8.2]
Ewen, H. I. and Purcell, E. M. 1951, Nature 168, 356. [§6.5]
Faber, S. M. and Jackson, R. E. 1976, Astrophys. J. 204, 668. [§9.2.2]
Feast, M. and Whitelock, P. 1997, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 291, 683. [§6.2]
Felten, J. E., Gould, R. J., Stein, W. A. and Woolf, N. J. 1966, Astrophys. J. 146,
955. [§9.5]
Fermi, E. 1926, Rend. Lincei 3, 145. [§11.2]
Fermi, E. 1949, Phys. Rev. 75, 1169. [§8.10]
Field, G. B. 1965, Astrophys. J. 142, 531. [§6.8]
Field, G. B., Goldsmith, D. W. and Habing, H. J. 1969, Astrophys. J. 155, 149. [§6.8]
Fowler, R. H. 1926, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 87, 114. [§5.2]
Fowler, W. A. 1984, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56, 149. [§4.3]
Francis, P. J. et al. 1991, Astrophys. J. 373, 465. [Fig. 9.11 ]
Fraunhofer, J. 1817, Gilberts Ann. 56, 264. [§1.2]
Freedman, W. L. et al. 2001, Astrophys. J. 553, 47. [§9.3, Fig. 9.9]
Friedmann, A. 1924, Zs. f. Phys. 21, 326. [§10.4]
Gamow, G. 1928, Zs. f. Phys. 51, 204. [§4.1, §4.2]
Gamow, G. 1946, Phys. Rev. 70,572. [§4.3, §11.3]
Giacconi, R., Gursky, H., Paolini, F. R. and Rossi, B. B. 1962, Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 439.
[§1.7.3, §5.6]
Giacconi, R. et al. 1972, Astrophys. J. 178, 281. [§9.5]
Gilmore, G. and Reid, N. 1983, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 202, 1025. [§6.1.2]
Gingerich, O. (Ed.) 1975, New Frontiers in Astronomy. W. H. Freeman and Company.
[S. f. r.]
Glendenning, N. K. 2000, Compact Stars: Nuclear Physics, Particle Physics and
General Relativity, 2nd edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]
Gold, T. 1968, Nature 218, 731. [§5.5]
Goldreich, P. and Julian, W. H. 1969, Astrophys. J. 157, 869. [§5.5]
Goldstein, H. 1980, Classical Mechanics , 2nd edn. Addison-Wesley. [ §7.5, §12.3,
§12.2.1, §13.3.1]
Gough, D. O. 1978, Proc. Workshop on Solar Rotation , Univ. of Catania, p. 255. [§4.8]
Gregory, S. A. and Zeilik, M. 1997, Introductory Astronomy and Astrophysics.
Saunders. [S. f. r.]
Gunn, J. E. and Gott, J. R. 1972, Astrophys. J. 176,1 . [§9.5]
Gunn, J. E. and Peterson, B. A. 1965, Astrophys. J. 142, 1633. [§11.8.2]
Guth, A. H. 1981, Phys. Rev. D23, 347. [§11.6.1]
Hale, G. E. 1908, Astrophys. J. 28, 315. [§4.8]
Hale, G. E., Ellerman, F., Nicholson, S. B. and Joy, A. H. 1919, Astrophys. J. 49, 153.
[§4.8]
Halliday, D., Resnick, R. and Walker, J. 2001, Fundamentals of Physics , 6th edn. John
Wiley & Sons. [§9.3]
Hansen, C. J. and Kawaler, S. D. 1994, Stellar Interiors . Springer-Verlag. [ Fig. 3.2,
Fig. 3.3]
Hartle, J
. B. 2003, Gravity: An Introduction to Einstein’s General Relativity . Benjamin
Cummings. [S. f. r.]
Hartmann, D. and Burton, W. B. 1997, Atlas of Galactic Neutral Hydrogen. Cambridge
University Press. [ Fig. 6.8]
Harwit, M. 2006, Astrophysical Concepts, 4th edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]

<<<PAGE 477>>>

References 457
Hayashi, C. 1961, Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 13, 450. [§4.5]
Helmholtz, H. 1854, Lecture at Kant Commemoration, K ¨onigsberg. [§3.2.2]
Henriksen, M. J. and Mushotzky, R. F. 1986, Astrophys. J. 302, 287. [Fig. 9.18 ]
Henyey, L. G., Vardya, M. S. and Bodenheimer, P. L. 1965, Astrophys. J. 142,
841. [§3.3]
Herschel, W. 1785, Phil. Trans. 75, 213. [§6.1]
Hertzsprung, E. 1911, Potsdam Pub. 63.[§3.4]
Hess, V . F. 1912, Sitzungsber. Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Wien 121, 2001. [§6.7, §8.10]
Hewish, A. S., Bell, J., Pilkington, J. D. H., Scott, P. F. and Collins, R. A. 1968, Nature
217, 709. [§5.5]
Hewitt, A. and Burbidge, G. 1993, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 87, 451. [Fig. 11.4 ]
Hiltner, W. A. 1954, Astrophys. J. 120, 454. [§6.7]
Hirata, K. S. et al. 1990, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1297. [§4.4.2]
Homer Lane, J. 1869, Amer. J. Sci. 50, 57. [§5.3]
Hopkins, J. 1980, Glossary of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 2nd edn. University of
Chicago Press. [S. f. r.]
Hoyle, F. 1948, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 108, 372. [Ex. 10.5]
Hoyle, F. 1954, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 1, 121. [§4.3]
Hubble, E. P. 1922, Astrophys. J. 56, 162. [§6.1.2, §9.1, §9.3]
Hubble, E. P. 1929, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 15, 168. [ §9.3, §14.2]
Hubble, E. P. 1936, The Realm of the Nebulae. Y ale University Press. [§9.2.1]
Huchtmeier, W. K. 1975, Astron. Astrophys. 45, 259. [§9.2.2]
Hughes, D. H. et al. 1998, Nature 394, 241. [§11.8.1]
Hulse, R. A. and Taylor, J. H. 1975, Astrophys. J. Lett. 195, L51. [§1.6, §5.5.1]
Iben, I. 1965, Astrophys. J. 141, 993. [Fig. 3.2, Fig. 3.3]
Iben, I. 1967, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 5, 571. [§4.5]
Iben, I. 1974, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 12, 215. [§4.5]
Jackson, J. D. 1999, Classical Electrodynamics , 3rd edn. John Wiley & Sons. [§5.2,
§5.5, §8.10, §8.11, §13.4, §14.5]
Jaffe, W., Ford, H. C., Ferrarese, L., van den Bosch, F. and O’Connell, R. W. 1993,
Nature 364, 213. [§9.4.3, Fig. 9.14]
Jansky, K. G. 1933, Proc. IRE 21, 1387. [§1.7.2]
Jeans, J. H. 1902, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 199,1 .[ §6.8, §8.3, §11.9]
Jeans, J. H. 1922, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 82, 122. [§7.6]
Jennison, R. C. and Dasgupta, M. K. 1953, Nature 172, 996. [§9.4.1]
Johnson, H. L. and Morgan, W. W. 1953, Astrophys. J. 117, 313. [§1.4]
Johnson, H. L. and Sandage, A. R. 1956, Astrophys. J. 124, 379. [Fig. 3.8]
Joy, A. H. 1939, Astrophys. J. 89,356. [§6.2, Fig. 6.5]
Kant, I. 1755, Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels .[§9.1]
Kapteyn, J. C. 1922, Astrophys. J. 55, 302. [§6.1, §6.1.2]
Kapteyn, J. C. and van Rhijn, P. J. 1920, Astrophys. J. 52, 23. [§6.1, §6.1.2]
Kelvin, Lord 1861, Brit. Assoc. Repts., Part II , p. 27. [§3.2.2]
Kerr, R. P. 1963, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 237. [§13.3]
King, I. R. 1966, Astron. J. 71, 64. [Ex. 7.4]
Kippenhahn, R. and Weigert, A. 1990, Stellar Structure and Evolution . Springer-Verlag.
[§3.2.4, §3.3, §3.4, §4.5, Fig. 5.1,S .f .r . ]
Kirchhoff, G. 1860, Ann. d. Phys. u. Chemie 109, 275. [§2.2.4]
Kitchin, C. R. 2003, Astrophysical Techniques, 4th edn. Taylor & Francis. [S. f. r.]
Klebesadel, R. W., Strong, I. B. and Olson, R. A. 1973, Astrophys. J. 182, 85. [§9.7]

<<<PAGE 478>>>

458 References
Kolb, E. W. and Turner, M. S. 1990, The Early Universe. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company. [Fig. 11.1 ,§11.9,S .f .r . ]
Konar, S. and Choudhuri, A. R. 2004, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 348, 661. [§5.5.2]
Kramers, H. A. 1923, Phil. Mag. 46, 836. [§2.6]
Krolik, J. H. 1999, Active Galactic Nuclei . Princeton University Press. [S. f. r.]
Kruskal, M. D. 1960, Phys. Rev. 119, 1743. [§13.3.3]
Krymsky, G. F. 1977, Dokl. Acad. Nauk. U.S.S.R. 234, 1306. [§8.10]
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. 1975, The Classical Theory of Fields , 4th edn.
Pergamon. [S. f. r.]
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. 1976, Mechanics , 3rd edn. Pergamon. [§12.2.1, §12.3,
§13.3.1]
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. 1980, Statistical Physics , 3rd edn. Pergamon. [§7.5]
Lang, K. R. 1999, Astrophysical Formulae, Vols. I and II, 3rd edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]
Langmuir, I. 1928, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 14, 627. [§8.13.1]
Laplace, P. S. 1795, Le Systeme du Monde, Vol. II .[§1.5]
Leavitt, H. S. 1912, Harvard Coll. Obs. Circ. 173,1 . [§6.1.2]
Lee, B. W. and Weinberg, S. 1977, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 165. [§11.5]
Leibundgut, B. 2001, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 39, 67. [Fig. 14.4 ]
Leighton, R. B., Noyes, R. W. and Simon, G. W. 1962, Astrophys. J. 135, 474. [§4.4.1]
Lemaitre, G. 1927, Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles 47A, 49. [§10.5]
L´ena, P. 1988, Observational Astrophysics. Springer-Verlag. [S. f. r.]
Lin, C. C. and Shu, F. 1964, Astrophys. J. 140, 646. [§7.1]
Lindblad, B. 1927, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 87, 553. [§6.2]
Longair, M. S. 1992, High Ener gy Astrophysics, Vol. 1 , 2nd edn. Cambridge University
Press. [§8.12]
Longair, M. S. 1994, High Energy Astrophysics, Vol. 2 , 2nd edn. Cambridge University
Press. [Fig. 4.9, Fig. 4.10, Fig. 5.7, §8.10, §8.11,S .f .r . ]
Lynden-Bell, D. 1967, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 136, 101. [§7.3]
Malmquist, K. G. 1924, Medd. Lund Astron. Obs., Ser. II 32, 64. [§6.1.1]
Maoz, D. 2007, Astrophysics in a Nutshell. Princeton University Press. [S. f. r.]
Mather, J. C. et al. 1990, Astrophys. J. Lett. 354, L37. [§10.5, Fig. 10.4, §11.7.1]
Mathews, J. and Walker, R. L. 1979, Mathematical Methods of Physics , 2nd edn. W. A.
Benjamin. [ §12.2.5, §13.3.1, §14.5]
Mathewson, D. S. and Ford, V . L. 1970, Mem. Roy. Astron. Soc. 74, 139. [Fig. 6.13]
Mattig, W. 1958, Astron. Nachr. 284, 109. [§14.3]
Maunder, E. W. 1904, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 64, 747. [§4.8]
Maxwell, J. C. 1860, Phil. Mag. (4) 19, 19. [§2.3.1]
Maxwell, J. C. 1865, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 155, 459. [§8.4]
Mayor, M. and Queloz, D. 1995, Nature 378, 355. [§4.9]
McKee, C. F. and Ostriker, J. P. 1977, Astrophys. J. 218, 148. [§6.6.5]
Mestel, L. 1999, Stellar Magnetism. Oxford University Press. [S. f. r.]
Meyer, P. 1969, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 7,1 .[ Fig. 8.11]
Mihalas, D. 1978, Stellar Atmospheres , 2nd edn. Freeman. [ §2.3.1, §2.4, §2.6,S .f .r . ]
Mihalas, D. and Binney, J. 1981, Galactic Astronomy. Freeman. [Fig. 4.9 ,Fig. 4.10,
§6.1.1, §6.2,S .f .r . ]
Milne, E. A. and McCrea, W. H. 1934, Q. J. Maths. 5, 73. [§10.1]
Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S. and Wheeler, J. A. 1973, Gravitation. Freeman. [S. f. r.]
Mitchell, R. J., Culhane, J. L., Davison, P. J. N. and Ives, J. C. 1976, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc. 175, 29. [§9.5]

<<<PAGE 479>>>

References 459
Morrison, D., Wolff, S. and Fraknoi, A. 1995, Abell’s Exploration of the Universe ,7 t h
edn. Saunders. [S. f. r.]
Mouschovias, T. Ch. 1974, Astrophys. J. 192, 37. [§8.8]
Muller, C. A. and Oort, J. H. 1951, Nature 168, 357. [§6.5]
Nakajima, T., Oppenheimer, B. R., Kulkarni, S. R., Golimowski, D. A., Matthews, K.
and Durrance, S. T. 1995, Nature 378, 463. [§3.6.1]
Narlikar, J. V . 2002, Introduction to Cosmology , 3rd edn. Cambridge University Press.
[§11.9,S .f .r . ]
Oegerle, W. R. and Hoessel, J. G. 1991, Astrophys. J. 375, 15. [Fig. 9.5]
Olbers, H. W. M. 1826, Bode Jahrbuch 110. [§6.1.1]
Oort, J. H. 1927, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands 3, 275. [§6.2]
Oort, J. H. 1928, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands 4, 269. [§7.7, Fig. 7.5]
Oort, J. H. 1932, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands 6, 349. [§6.5, §7.6.1]
Oort, J. H. 1965, in Galactic Structure (ed. A. Blaauw and M. Schmidt), p. 455.
University of Chicago Press. [S. f. r.]
Oort, J. H., Kerr, F. T. and Westerhout, G. 1958, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 118, 379.
[§6.5, Fig. 6.10]
Oppenheimer, J. R. and V olkoff, G. M. 1939, Phys. Rev. 55, 374. [§5.4]
Osterbrock, D. E. 1978, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75, 540. [§9.4.4]
Osterbrock, D. E. and Ferland, J. G. 2005, Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and Active
Galactic Nuclei , 2nd edn. University Science Books. [S. f. r.]
Ostriker, J. P. and Tremaine, S. 1975, Astrophys. J. Lett. 202, L113. [§9.5]
Padmanabhan, T. 2000, Theoretical Astrophysics, Vol. I: Astrophysical Processes .
Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Padmanabhan, T. 2001, Theoretical Astrophysics, Vol. II: Stars and Stellar Systems.
Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Padmanabhan, T. 2002, Theoretical Astrophysics, Vol. III: Galaxies and Cosmology.
Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Panofsk
y, W. K. H. and Phillips, M. 1962, Classical Electricity and Magnetism , 2nd
edn. Addison-Wesley. [§2.6.1, §8.4, §8.11, §13.4]
Parker, E. N. 1955a, Astrophys. J. 121, 491. [§8.6]
Parker, E. N. 1955b, Astrophys. J. 122, 293. [§8.7]
Parker, E. N. 1957, J. Geophys. Res. 62, 509. [§8.9]
Parker, E. N. 1958, Astrophys. J. 128, 664. [§4.6]
Parker, E. N. 1966, Astrophys. J. 145, 811. [§8.8]
Parker, E. N. 1979, Cosmical Magnetic Fields. Oxford University Press. [S. f. r.]
Pathria, R. K. 1996, Statistical Mechanics . Butterworth-Heinemann. [§5.2, §7.5]
Peacock, J. A. 1999, Cosmological Physics . Cambridge University Press. [S. f. r.]
Pearson, T. J. et al. 1981, Nature 290, 365. [Fig. 9.12 ]
Peebles, P. J. E. 1966, Astrophys. J. 146, 542. [§11.3]
Peebles, P. J. E. 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology . Princeton University Press.
[§11.8.2,S .f .r . ]
Penzias, A. A. and Wilson, R. W. 1965, Astrophys. J. 142, 419. [§10.5]
Perlmutter, S. et al. 1999, Astrophys. J. 517, 565. [§14.5, Fig. 14.4]
Perryman, M. A. C. et al. 1995, Astron. Astrophys. 304, 69. [§3.5.1, §3.5.2, Fig. 3.5]
Peterson, B. M. 1997, An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei . Cambridge University
Press. [Fig. 11.4,S .f .r . ]
Petschek,
A. 1964, AAS-NASA Symp. on Solar Flares, NASA SP-50, p. 425. [§8.9]
Pierce, A. K., McMath, R. R., Goldberg, L. and Mohler, O. C. 1950, Astrophys. J. 112,
289. [Fig. 2.6]

<<<PAGE 480>>>

460 References
Planck, M. 1900, Verhand. Deutschen Physik. Gesell. 2, 237. [§2.2.1, §2.3.1]
Pogson, N. 1856, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 17, 12. [§1.4]
Popper, D. M. 1980, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 18, 115. [Fig. 3.4]
Pound, R. V . and Rebka, G. A. 1960, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 337. [§13.2]
Priest, E. R. 1982, Solar Magnetohydrodynamics . D. Reidel Publishing Company.
[S. f. r.]
Radhakrishnan, V ., Murray, J. D., Lockhart, P. and Whittle, R. P. J. 1972, Astrophys.
J. Suppl. 24, 15. [Fig. 6.11]
Reber, G. 1940, Astrophys. J. 91, 621. [§1.7.2]
Rees, M. J. 1966, Nature 211, 468. [§9.4.2]
Reif, F. 1965, Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics. McGraw-Hill. [§2.2.1,
§8.10, §11.2]
Rhoades, C. E. and Rufﬁni, R. 1974, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 324. [§5.4]
Richtmyer, F. K., Kennard, E. H. and Cooper, J. N. 1969, Introduction to Modern
Physics, 6th edn. McGraw-Hill. [§6.6]
Riemann, B. 1968, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G ¨ott.13, 133. [§12.2.4]
Riess, A. G. et al. 1998, Astron. J. 116, 1009. [§14.5, Fig. 14.4]
Riess, A. G. et al. 2004, Astrophys. J. 607, 665. [Fig. 14.6 ]
Roberts, M. S. and Whitehurst, R. N. 1975, Astrophys. J. 201, 327. [§9.2.2]
Robertson, H. P. 1935, Astrophys. J. 82, 248. [§10.3]
Rosseland, S. 1924, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 84,525. [§2.5]
Rots,
A. H. 1975, Astron. Astrophys. 45, 43. [Fig. 8.7]
Roy, A. E. and Clarke, C. 2003, Astronomy: Principles and Practice , 4th edn. Taylor &
Francis. [S. f. r.]
Rubin, V . C. and Ford, W. K. 1970, Astrophys. J. 159, L379. [§9.2.2]
Rubin, V . C., Ford, W. K. and Thonnard, N. 1978, Astrophys. J. Lett. 225, L107. [ §9.2.2,
Fig. 9.7]
Russell, H. N. 1913, Observatory 36, 324. [§3.4]
Russell, H. N. 1929, Astrophys. J. 70, 11. [§4.3]
Russell, H. N., Dugan, R. S. and Stewart, R. M. 1927, Astronomy, Vol. 2 .[§3.3]
Rybicki, G. B. and Lightman, A. P. 1979, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics. John
Wiley & Sons. [ §2.3.1, §2.6.1, §8.11, §8.12,S .f .r . ]
Saha, M. N. 1920, Phil. Mag. (6) 40, 472. [§2.3.1, §3.5.1]
Saha, M. N. 1921, Proc. Roy. Soc. A9 9 , 697. [§3.5.1]
Saha, M. N. and Srivastava, B. N. 1965, A Treatise on Heat , 5th edn. The Indian Press,
Allahabad. [§2.2.1, §2.4.1, §8.10, §10.5]
Salpeter, E. E. 1952, Astrophys. J. 115, 326. [§4.3]
Salpeter, E. E. 1955, Astrophys. J. 121, 161. [§6.8]
Salpeter, E. E. 1964, Astrophys. J. 140, 796. [§9.4.3]
Sandage, A. R. 1957, Astrophys. J. 125, 435. [Fig. 3.9]
Sarazin, C. L. 1986, Rev. Mod. Phys. 88,1 .[ Fig. 9.17,S .f .r . ]
Schechter
, P. 1976, Astrophys. J. 203, 297. [§9.2.1]
Schefﬂer, H. and Els ¨asser, H. 1988, Physics of the Galaxy and Interstellar Matter .
Springer-Verlag. [S. f. r.]
Schmidt, M. 1963, Nature 197, 1040. [§9.4.1]
Schneider, P. 2006, Extragalactic Astronomy and Cosmology . Springer. [S. f. r.]
Schuster, A. 1905, Astrophys. J. 21,1 .[§2.2.2]
Schutz, B. 1985, A First Course in General Relativity. Cambridge University Press.
[S. f. r.]
Schwarzschild, K. 1906, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G ¨ott., 41. [§3.2.4]

<<<PAGE 481>>>

References 461
Schwarzschild, K. 1907, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G ¨ott., 614. [§6.3.3]
Schwarzschild, K. 1914, Sitzungsber. Preus. Akad. Wiss. , 1183. [§2.2.2]
Schwarzschild, K. 1916, Sitzungsber. Preus. Akad. Wiss. , 189. [§13.3]
Schwarzschild, M. 1958, Structure and Evolution of the Stars . Princeton University
Press. Reprinted by Dover. [S. f. r.]
Seyfert, C. 1943, Astrophys. J. 97, 28. [§9.4.1]
Shakura, N. I. and Sunyaev, R. A. 1973, Astron. Astrophys. 24, 337. [§5.6]
Shapiro, S. L. and Teukolsky, S. A. 1983, Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron
Stars. John Wiley & Sons. [§5.1, §5.4, §5.5.1,S .f .r . ]
Shapley, H. 1918, Astrophys. J. 48, 154. [§6.1.2]
Shapley, H. 1919, Astrophys. J. 49, 311. [§6.1.2]
Shapley, H. 1921, Bull. Nat. Res. Council 2, 171. [§6.1.2, §9.1]
Shectman, S. A. et al. 1996, Astrophys. J. 470, 172. [§9.6, Fig. 9.19]
Shore, S. N. 2002, The Tapestry of Modern Astrophysics , Wiley-Interscience. [S. f. r.]
Shu, F. H. 1982, The Physical Universe. University Science Books. [Fig. 1.3, §7.1,
S. f. r.]
Shu, F. H. 1991, The Physics of Astrophysics, Vol. I: Radiation. University Science
Books. [S. f. r.]
Shu, F. H. 1992, The Physics of Astrophysics, Vol. II: Gas Dynamics . University Science
Books. [S. f. r.]
Slipher, V . M. 1914, Lowell Obs. Bull. 2, 62. [§9.3]
Smoot, G. F. et al. 1992, Astrophys. J. Lett. 396,L 1 .[ §11.7.1, Fig. 11.3]
Spitzer, L. 1978, Physical Processes in the Interstellar Medium .John Wiley & Sons.
[§6.7, §8.3,S .f .r . ]
Spitzer, L. 1987, Dynamical Evolution of Globular Clusters . Princeton University Press.
[ S .f .r . ]
Spitzer, L. and Baade, W. 1951, Astrophys. J. 113, 413. [§9.5]
Spitzer, L. and Jenkins, E. B. 1975, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 13, 133. [Fig. 2.9]
Spitzer, L. and Schwarzschild, M. 1951, Astrophys. J. 114, 385. [§7.6.2]
Stefan, J. 1879, Wien. Berichte 79, 391. [§2.4.1]
Stix, M. 2004, The Sun, 2nd edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]
Str¨omberg, G. 1924, Astrophys. J. 59, 228. [§7.6.2]
Str¨omgren, B. 1939, Astrophys. J. 89, 526. [§6.6.4]
Sunyaev, R. A. and Zeldovich, Ya. B. 1972, Comm. Astroph. Space Sci. 4, 173. [§11.7.2]
Sweet, P. A. 1958, Proc. IAU Symp. 6, 123. [§8.9]
Tayler, R. J. 1993, Galaxies: Structure and Evolution . Cambridge University Press.
[ S .f .r . ]
Tayler, R. J. 1994, The Stars: Their Structure and Evolution . Cambridge University
Press. [Fig. 2.8, §3.4, §3.5.2, Fig. 3.6 ,Fig. 4.5, §4.5,S .f .r . ]
Taylor, J. H., Manchester, R. N. and Lyne, A. G. 1993, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 88, 529.
[Fig. 5.5]
Thirring, H. and Lense, J. 1918, Phys. Z. 19, 156. [§13.3]
Thomson, J. J. 1906, Phil. Mag. 11, 769. [§2.6.1]
Tonks, L. and Langmuir, I. 1929, Phys. Rev. 33, 195. [§8.13 ,§8.13.1]
Toomre,
A. and Toomre, J. 1972, Astrophys. J. 178, 623. [§9.5]
Trumpler, R. J. 1930, Lick Obs. Bull. 14, 154. [§6.1.3]
Tucker, W. H. 1978, Radiation Processes in Astrophysics . The MIT Press. [S. f. r.]
Tully, R. B. and Fisher, J. R. 1977, Astron. Astrophys. 54, 661. [§9.2.2]
Uns¨old, A. and Baschek, B. 2001, The New Cosmos , 5th edn. Springer. [S. f. r.]
van de Hulst, H. C. 1945, Nederl. Tij. Natuurkunde 11, 201. [§6.5]

<<<PAGE 482>>>

462 References
van Paradijs, J. et al. 1997, Nature 386, 686. [§9.7]
Vitense, E. 1953, Zs. f. Astrophys. 32, 135. [§3.2.4]
V ogt, H. 1926, Astron. Nachr. 226, 301. [§3.3]
von Weizs ¨acker, C. F. 1937, Phys. Zs. 38, 176. [§4.3]
Wagoner, R. V . 1973, Astrophys. J. 179, 343. [§11.3, Fig. 11.2]
Wagoner, R. V ., Fowler, W. A. and Hoyle, F. 1967, Astrophys. J. 148,3 . [§11.3]
Wald, R. M. 1984, General Relativity. The University of Chicago Press. [S. f. r.]
Walker, A. G. 1936, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 42, 90. [§9.3]
Weinberg, S. 1972, Gravitation and Cosmology. John Wiley & Sons. [S. f. r.]
Weinberg, S. 1977, The First Three Minutes . Basic Books. [S. f. r.]
Weiss, N. O. 1981, J. Fluid Mech. 108, 247. [§8.6]
Wildt, R. 1939, Astrophys. J. 89, 295. [§2.6.2]
Williams, R. E. et al. 1996, Astron. J. 112, 1335. [§11.8.1, Fig. 11.5]
Wolfe, A. M., Turnshek, D. A., Lanzetta, K. M. and Lu, L. 1993, Astrophys. J. 404, 480.
[Fig. 11.6]
Yarwood, J. 1958, Atomic Physics. Oxford University Press. [ §4.2, §11.7.2]
York, D. G. et al. 2000, Astron. J. 120, 1579. [§9.6]
Zeldovich, Ya. B. and Novikov, I. D. 1964, Usp. Fiz. Nauk 84, 377. [§9.4.3]
Zwaan, C. 1985, Solar Phys. 100, 397. [ Fig. 4.16 ]
Zwick y
, F. 1933, Helv. Phys. Acta 6, 110. [§9.5]

<<<PAGE 483>>>

Index
21 cm line 175, 181–184, 266–269
2dF Survey 293
3C 273 21,278, 280–281
γ-ray burst (GRB) 295–296
/Lambda1,seecosmological constant
absolute bolometric magnitude 79,82–83
absolute magnitude 9
absolute visual magnitude 79,81–83
absorption coefﬁcient 23,28,31,48,53–54
absorption cross-section 53
absorption line, seespectral line
accelerated particles, seecosmic rays
accretion 112, 114, 145–149
accretion disk 145–149, 282–286
acoustic wave 104–105, 224, 226
action-at-a-distance 299
active galactic nucleus (AGN) 276–278,
283–286, 345–346
active galaxies 219, 276–286, 345–346
adapti v
e optics 17
afﬁne parameter 399
afterglow (of gamma-ray burst) 295
age of Universe 3,89,198, 203, 275, 321–322
AGN (active galactic nucleus) 276–278,
283–286, 345–346
Alfv ´en wave 258
Alfv ´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing 230–234
Almagest 4
ancient astronomy 4
Andromeda Galaxy (M31) 2,21,157–158,
261, 273, 287
angular size distance 432
angular size test 431–432
apparent magnitude 8–9
Aries constellation 6
Aristotle 5
astronomical unit (AU) 1asymmetric drift 213–215
AU (astronomical unit) 1
Bband 9
B−V9,78,80–83, 159
Balmer lines 78
Barnard’
s star 5
barred spiral galaxies 263–264
baryogenesis 340–341
bending of light 401–404
Bernoulli’s principle 257, 292
Bianchi identity 369, 371
Big Bang 314–315, 325–326, 331–334,
339–341
Big Bang nucleosynthesis 100–101, 326,
331–334, 337
binary pulsar 13,143–145, 415
binary stars 79–80, 110–112
binary X-ray sources 20,145–149
binding energy (of nuclei) 91–92
bipolar outﬂows (in star-forming
regions) 194
blackbody radiation 23–25, 30,33–34, 57,
148,314–315, 323, 342, 426–427
black hole 10
–11
as central engine of active galaxies
282–286, 346
as stellar end state 110, 128, 149
general relativistic issues 392, 406–407
observations 149, 284
bolometric magnitude 8
Boltzmann distribution law 32–33, 48,
179–180, 333
Boltzmann equation 207–209, 217–218
Bose–Einstein statistics 328
bosons 328–330, 353
bound-bound transitions 48
bound-free transitions 48–49
463

<<<PAGE 484>>>

464 Index
bremsstrahlung 187, 248, 253–254, 289–291,
344
broad-line region (BLR) 285
brown dwarfs 85,151
Butcher–Oemler effect 292–293
butterﬂy diagram 122–123
cD galaxy 287
celestial coordinates 5–8
celestial equator 6–7
celestial poles 6–7
celestial sphere 6–7
Cepheid variables 156, 164–165, 261,
271, 273
CfA Survey 293–295
Chandra X-ray Observatory 19
Chandrasekhar mass limit 10,85,101, 127
derivation 135–137, 151
Type Ia supernova production 117, 435
chemical equilibrium 327–330, 332
chemical potential 327–329
Christoffel symbol 364–366
closed Universe 311, 318– 319
clouds, seeinterstellar clouds
clusters
of galaxies 253, 264, 270, 286–293,
296, 343–344, 353, 439
CMBR (cosmic microwave background
radiation) 315–317, 330, 336, 341–344,
437–440
CNO cycle 99–101, 103
CO lines 185, 195–196
COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) 315,
342–343
cold dark matter 338, 351–353
colliding galaxies 287–288, 291–292
collisional excitation and de-excitation
179–180, 187
collisional relaxation (in stellar systems) 198,
201–203
collisional stellar dynamics 198, 204–207
collisionless Boltzmann equation 207–209,
217–218
collisionless stellar dynamics 198,207–217
colour –magnitude
diagram 81–82
Coma cluster 287, 289–292
co-moving coordinates 307–308
Compton effect 343–344
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory 21,295
conduction 67,113
constellations 6
contraction (of tensors) 359–360
contravariant vector 358–359
convection 67–70, 71,90,103–104
cooling ﬂow 291cooling function 191–192
Copernicus 4,5
corona 113–114, 243–244, 253
coronal gas (in interstellar space) 187, 191,
193
cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMBR) 315–317, 330, 336, 341–344,
437–440
cosmic rays 14,190–191 ,220
acceleration mechanism 243
–248
in external galaxies 266, 278, 296
radiation emission by 19,250–252
cosmological constant 309–310, 320,
421–425, 427–428, 433–440
cosmological parameters (values of)
density parameters 439–440
Hubble constant 275
cosmological principle 294, 304–306
cosmological redshift 271, 275–276, 308, 321,
426–427
cosmological tests 428–435
cosmology, seeUniverse
Big Bang 314–315, 325–326, 331–334,
339–341
CMBR 315–317, 330, 336, 341–344,
437– 440
early Uni
verse, seeearly Universe
Newtonian cosmology 298, 306–311, 420
nucleosynthesis 100–101, 326, 331–334,
337
relativistic cosmology 12,298, 304–309,
419–440
structure formation 349–353
time table 325–327
covariant derivative 364–365, 384
covariant vector 358–359
Cowsik–McClelland limit 337
Crab nebula 21,115, 140, 141
Crab pulsar 140, 141, 143
critical density (of the Universe) 310
current sheet 241
curvature 300, 303–304, 367–370
curve of growth 54–55
Cygnus A 21,276
Cygnus X-1 21,149
dark energy 423
dark matter
detection by gravitational lensing 404–405
from rotation
curves of spiral galaxies 269,
289
in clusters of galaxies 289
nature 334, 336–339
role in structure formation 351–353

<<<PAGE 485>>>

Index 465
de Vaucouleurs law 265, 296
death line (of pulsars) 145
declination 6–7
decoupling, seematter-radiation decoupling
degeneracy pressure 71,84–85, 117, 127–132,
139, 149
degenerate matter 71,127
density parameter 311, 324
density wave theory 199
deuterium abundance 334
differential rotation 120, 161, 236
diffraction 16,27
displacement current 228
Doppler shift 79,161, 164, 175–176,
266–267, 271, 276, 308
dynamical friction 206–207, 287
dynamo theory 123, 191, 237–239
early Universe
baryogenesis 340–341
Big Bang 314–315, 325–326, 331–334,
339–341
formation of
atoms 52,341–343
horizon problem 339–340
inﬂation 340
nucleosynthesis 100–101, 326, 331–334,
337
spacetime dynamics 320–324, 423–424
time table 325–327
eclipsing binaries 80
ecliptic 6–7
Eddington approximation 41–44, 58
Eddington luminosity 86,147–148, 283
effective radius (of elliptical galaxies) 265
Einstein coefﬁcients 178–183, 195
Einstein ring 404–405
Einstein tensor 370–371, 378, 381–384
Einstein–de Sitter model 318
Einstein’s equation 303–304, 306, 309,
381–384, 390,410, 419–422
elliptical g
alaxies 262–266, 270, 286, 287,
291–293
emission coefﬁcient 23,28,31
emission line, seespectral line
energy-momentum tensor 379–381,
419–420
epicycle theory 166–169, 215
equation of continuity 222, 225, 229
equation of state 70–71, 127, 130–132, 139
equatorial mounting 7
equivalence principle 300
equivalent width 54
ether 5
Euler equation 223, 225, 229–230Eulerian time derivative 221
extrasolar planets 123–124
Faber–Jackson relation 265, 270, 274
Faraday rotation 190
Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction
229
Fermi acceleration 245–248
Fermi gas 127–132 ,139, 328–330, 353
Fermi–Dirac statistics 71
,129, 139, 328
fermions, seeFermi gas
Fermi’s golden rule 48
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics 313, 421
ﬂuid mechanics 218, 220–223, 379–380
ﬂux freezing 230–234
free-free transitions 48–49
Friedmann equation 309, 420
galactic cannibalism 287
galactic coordinates 7–8, 160
galaxies
active galaxies 219, 276–286, 345–346
at high redshift 345–349
collisional relaxation 198, 203
distances to 2–3, 261, 273–274
elliptical galaxies 262–266, 270, 286, 287,
291–293
interstellar medium (ISM) 239– 241,
265–270, 291–292
large-scale
distribution (superclusters and
voids) 293–295
magnetic ﬁeld 239–241, 266
morphological classiﬁcation 262–265
rotation 265–269
size 2,263–264
spiral galaxies 157, 199, 262–270, 276,
286, 291–293
structure 197–199
surface brightness 27,432–433
galaxy clusters, seeclusters of galaxies
galaxy collisions 287–288, 291–292
galaxy formation 270, 349
Galaxy (our)
asymmetric drift 213–216
interstellar extinction and reddening
157–160, 194
interstellar medium (ISM), seeinterstellar
medium
magnetic ﬁeld 14,187–191, 243
orbits of stars 166– 173
rotation 160–165
shape and
size 2,153, 155–157
solar neighbourhood 169–173, 211–217
Galileo 4,16,120
GALLEX 108

<<<PAGE 486>>>

466 Index
gamma ray burst (GRB) 295–296
gauge transformation (in general relativity)
409
general relativity 10–12, 13,357
formulation 378–384
gravitational redshift 389–390
gravitational wave 13–14, 143, 411–415,
417
linearized theory 407–410
metric, seemetric
non-technical introduction 297–308
relativistic cosmology 419–435
singularity and horizon 405–407
time and length measurements 387–389
generalized coordinates 358
generalized force 358
generalized velocity 358
geodesic 301, 303–304, 371–373, 385
geodesic deviation equation 385, 413
gigaparsec (Gpc) 2–3
gigayear (Gyr) 3
glitches (of pulsars) 141–142
globular clusters 1
stellar dynamics of 198, 203
halo system of 155, 160–161 ,173–174
HRdiagrams
of86–89, 90
Gpc (gigaparsec) 2–3
granulation 104, 236
graphite 160, 181
gravitational lensing 404–405
gravitational redshift 389–390
gravitational wave 13–14, 143, 411–415, 417
GRB (gamma ray burst) 295–296
Great Bear 4
grey atmosphere 39–43, 58
guiding centre 170
Gunn–Peterson test 348–349
Gyr (gigayear) 3
HI clouds 180–183, 191–193
HII region 185–187, 191, 193
Hamiltonian dynamics 207–208
Hayashi region 109
heating function 191–192
helioseismology 104–105, 119–120
Henry Draper Catalogue 21
Henyey method 73
Hercules A 277
Hertzsprung–Russell (HR)
diagram 76,
80–89, 109–111
Hipparchus 4,7,8,168
Hipparcos astronomy satellite 79,80,164
homologous stellar models 74
horizonin cosmology 339–340, 438
of black hole 406–407
horizon problem 339–340
hot coronal gas 187, 191, 193
hot dark matter 338
HR (Hertzsprung–Russell) diagram 76,
80–89, 109–111
Hubble constant 271, 274–275, 307, 344
Hubble Deep Field 346–347
Hubble Key Project 274–275
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) 17,115, 116,
262–264, 284, 288, 345, 347, 435
Hubble test 429– 431
Hubble time 145
,275
Hubble’s law 271–273, 314, 428–430
hydrodynamic equations, seeﬂuid mechanics
hydrostatic equilibrium equation 63,113
ideal ﬂuid approximation 222
induced emission 48,52,54,178–180
induction equation 229, 230
inﬂation 340
infrared astronomy 20
Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) 20
inhomogeneous wave equation 410
initial mass function 194
interferometric technique 18
intergalactic medium (IGM) 346–349
International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) 20
interstellar clouds 176, 180–185, 191–194,
245–248
interstellar dust 51,158–160, 181, 184, 188
interstellar extinction 51,157–160
interstellar medium (ISM) 53,124, 158–160,
174–194, 254, 291–292
heating and
cooling functions 191–192
in spiral galaxies 265–270, 291–292
loss of 291–292
magnetic ﬁeld 187–191, 239–241
Oort limit 175, 212–213
phases 177–187, 191–193
star formation 20,124, 185, 173, 193–194,
223, 227, 266, 353
interstellar reddening 51,159–160
ionosphere 14,256–257
irregular galaxies 262
ISM, seeinterstellar medium
Jeans equations 210–211
Jeans instability 193, 223–227, 350–352
Jeans length 351–352, 438
Jeans theorem 217
jets277–286, 296
Jodrell B
ank radio telescope 18

<<<PAGE 487>>>

Index 467
K correction 430
K giants 213
Kamiokande 13,107, 118
Kapteyn Universe 153, 155
Keck telescope 16,17
Kelvin–Helmholtz hypothesis 65–66, 84,85,
89,91,101, 109
Kepler 115
Keplerian motion 147, 268
Kerr metric 361, 387, 392
kiloparsec (kpc) 2–3
King model 218
Kirchhoff’s law 31,52,177
kpc (kiloparsec) 2–3
Kramers’s law 49–50, 103
Kronecker δ360
Lagrange point 112
Lagrange’s equation 209, 371–372, 393
Lagrangian time derivative 221
Lane–Emden equation 133–136, 150
Langmuir oscillations 256
Large Magellanic Cloud 115, 404
Las Campanas Survey 293–295
last scattering surface 342,437
laststable
orbit (around black hole) 396
Lee–Weinberg limit 338
light curves (of supernovae) 117–118
light propagation
in expanding Universe 425–428
in Schwarzschild metric 399–404
light year 2
LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravity-wave
Observatory) 415
limb-darkening law 43
Liouville’s theorem 207–208
Local Group (of galaxies) 273, 286–287
local standard of rest (LSR) 166
local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE)
33–34
Lorentz equation 303
Lorentz transformation 249
Los Alamos opacity tables 48
lowering an index (of a tensor) 361
LSR (local standard of rest) 166
LTE (local thermodynamic equilibrium)
33–34
luminosity distance 430
Lyman- αforest 348–349
M1, seeCrab nebula
M31, seeAndromeda Galaxy
M51 262
M81 239–240M87 287–288, 289
magnetic buoyancy 236, 258
magnetic ﬁeld
galaxies 239–241, 266
Galaxy (our) 14,187–191, 243
jets277–278
neutron stars
and pulsars 141–143,
144–145, 151, 234
stars 79,119, 123
Sun 119, 120–123
magnetic ﬂux tube 235
magnetic mirror 245–246
magnetic pressure 230
magnetic reconnection 242–243
magnetic Reynolds number 230
magnetic tension 230
magnetoconvection 234
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) 220, 228–230
magnitude scale 6,8–9
main sequence 81–89, 102
Malmquist bias 155
maser action 185, 195
mass–luminosity relation 75,80–81
mass–radius relation (of white dwarfs) 135,
151
matter-dominated Universe 317–322,
350–352, 439
matter-radiation decoupling 327, 341,
351–352, 438
matter-radiation equality 317, 326
Mattig’ s
formula 428
Maxwellian velocity distribution 32–34,
93–94, 129, 149, 198, 204
Maxwell’s equations 228–229, 233, 254, 299,
303–304
mean free path 33,56
mean molecular weight 71,130
megaparsec (Mpc) 2–3
Mercury 11,398
Messier Catalogue 21
metals 70,174, 181
metric
for weak gravitational ﬁeld 375–378
Kerr 361, 387, 392
Robertson–Walker 306, 309, 312, 420, 428
Schwarzschild, seeSchwarzschild metric
two-dimensional 302, 357, 361–363,
366–367, 370, 372–373 ,384
metric tensor 302
,357, 360–362
MHD (magnetohydrodynamics) 220, 228–230
Michelson interferometer 414–415
Milky Way, seeGalaxy (our)
millisecond pulsar 144–145, 146
mixing length theory 69

<<<PAGE 488>>>

468 Index
molecular clouds 183–185,193–194
morphological classiﬁcation (of galaxies)
262–265
Mount Palomar Observatory 16
Mount Wilson Observatory 16,261
Mpc (megaparsec) 2–3
narrow-line region (NLR) 285
Navier–Stokes equation 223
negative hydrogen ion 52–53
neutrinos 13,105–108, 118–119, 334–338
neutron drip 138
neutron stars 10,110, 127–128
formation in supernovae 117, 139–141
in binary systems 13,143–149, 296
magnetic ﬁeld 141–143, 144–145, 151, 234
observational conﬁrmations 139–149
theoretical issues 137–139, 151, 406
New General Catalogue (NGC) 21
Newton 4,5,16
Newtonian cosmology 298, 306–311, 420
NGC (Ne
w General Catalogue) 21
NGC 1132 263
NGC 1300 264
NGC 4038 and NGC 4039 288
NGC 4261 284
NGC 5033 267
non-thermal radiation 19,253
normal galaxies 261–270
nuclear burning 97
nuclear energy generation rate 67,97,101
nuclear fuel 97
nuclear fusion 92
nuclear reactions
in early Universe 100–101, 326, 331–334,
337
in stars 65–67, 85, 91–103, 105–108
in supernovae 117–118
nucleosynthesis, see nuclear reactions
null geodesic 399
Oa n dBs t a r s78, 157, 173–174, 185, 191
Ohm’s law 228, 233
Olbers paradox 154–155, 433
Oort constants 164–165 ,167–169, 172, 195
Oort limit 175
,212–213
opacity 47–53, 70,101, 103
open cluster 86,158, 203
open Universe 311, 319–320
optical astronomy 15–18
optical depth 28,36
optical telescopes 7,16–18
optically thick 29–30
optically thin 29–30orbits of stars 166–173
oscillator strength 53,183, 195
parallax 2,5,79
parallel transport 363
Parker instability 239–241
parsec (pc) 2–3
particle acceleration 243–248
Pauli’s exclusion principle 84,127, 129, 139
pc (parsec) 2–3
perihelion precession (of planets) 398, 416
pinhole camera 57
–58
Planck’s law 24,33–34
plane parallel atmosphere 35–46
planetary nebula 114–115
planetary science 4,123, 128
planets 4,11,123–124
plasma 219–220, 228–259, 277
plasma frequency 14,255
plasma oscillations 256, 258
polarization of gravitational waves 412–415
polarization of starlight 187–189
pole star 6
polytropic relation 133
Poisson’s equation 204–205, 213, 224, 383
Population I 174
Population II 174, 265
pp (proton-proton) chain 98–101, 103,
106–108
precession 7
proper motion 5
proton-proton (pp) chain 98–101, 103,
106–108
Proxima Centauri 2
Ptolemy 4
,168
pulsars 3,19,128, 139–145, 148–149, 151
as probes of ISM 188, 190
quantum tunnelling 93–94, 124
quarks 325
quasars 19,21,278–286, 324, 345–349
quasi-stellar object (QSO) 280
QSO (quasi-stellar object) 280
R.A. (right ascension) 6–7
radiation ﬁeld 24
radiation ﬂux 24–25
radiation pressure 25–26, 71,131–132, 150
radiation-dominated Universe 317, 322–324,
350–352
radiative equilibrium 41
radiative transfer 23,26–30, 35–48
radiative transfer equation 28–30, 36
radio astronomy 18
–19, 276
radio galaxies 276–280, 285–286

<<<PAGE 489>>>

Index 469
radio jets 277–286, 296
radio telescopes 18–19
radio-loud quasars 280, 285–286
radio-quiet quasars 280, 285–286
raising an index (of a tensor) 361–362
ram pressure 292
Rayleigh scattering 51,160
red giants 84,87–88, 109–110, 112, 114, 117,
128, 145
redshift z(of galaxies) 271, 275–276, 308,
321, 426–427
reﬂecting telescope 16
refracting telescope 16
reionization 349
relativistic beaming 248–251, 282
relativistic electrons, see cosmic rays
resolving power 16,22
resonance 95,101
Ricci tensor 369
Riemann curvature tensor 368–369, 384
right ascension (R.A.) 6–7
Robertson–W alk
er metric 306, 309, 312, 420,
428
Roche lobe 112, 145, 146
Rosseland mean 47
rotation
Galaxy (our) 160–165
pulsars 140–141, 144–145
spiral galaxies 267–269
stars 119–120
Sun 119–120
rotation curves (of spiral galaxies) 267–269,
289
RR Lyrae stars 156–157
saddle surface 302–303, 360
SAGE 108
Sagittarius constellation 8,18,155
Saha equation 32–34, 48,58,219, 341, 354
Salpeter initial mass function 194
scale factor (of the Universe) 306
scattering 44,50–52
Schechter’s law 263
Schwarzschild metric 390–391, 416
light motion 399–404, 417
particle motion 392
–398, 416
singularity and horizon 405–407
Schwarzschild radius 283, 391–392, 405–407
Schwarzschild stability condition 69
Schwarzschild velocity ellipsoid 171–172,
211, 216
seeing 16–17
Seyfert galaxies 276–278, 285–286
signs of the zodiac 6singularity (of black hole) 405–406
Sirius 9,21
Sloan Digital Sky Survey 293
Small Magellanic Cloud 156
SN 1987A 13,115–118
SNU (solar neutrino unit) 107
solar, see Sun
solar ﬂare 241
solar mass 1
solar motion 169–171, 215
solar neighbourhood 169–173, 211–217
solar neutrinos 13,105–108
solar system formation 118
solar wind 112–114, 254
sound speed 105
,226, 339, 351
sound wave, see acoustic wave
source function 29
Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) 20
speciﬁc intensity 24
speckle imaging 17
spectral classiﬁcation 78
spectral lines
galaxies and quasars 271, 276–79, 285–286,
293, 347–349, 435
hot gas in galaxy clusters 291–292
interstellar medium (ISM) 178–185,
266–267
Sun and stars 5,28
theory from radiative transfer 28,31,
43–46, 53–55, 178–182
spectroscopic binaries 80
spheroidal component 173
spiral arm 188, 239
spiral galaxies 157, 199, 262–270, 276, 286,
291–293
spontaneous emission 178–180
standard candle 273
–274
standard solar model 102, 105, 106–108
star count analysis 153–155, 194
star formation 20,124, 185, 173, 193–194,
223, 227, 266, 353
stars
colour 9,80–81
evolution 108–112, 128
HR diagram 76,80–89, 109–111
interior, see stellar interior
lifetime 76–77
magnetic ﬁeld 79,119, 123
mass 1,79–80, 85–86
mass-luminosity relation 75,80–81
nuclear reactions 65–67, 91–103, 105–108
rotation 119
spectral classiﬁcation 78
virial
theorem 65

<<<PAGE 490>>>

470 Index
starspots 123
steady state cosmology 324
Stefan–Boltzmann law 39,57,76,84
stellar atmosphere 35–46
stellar dynamics 197–218
stellar evolution 108–112, 128
stellar interior 35,61,91
convection 67–70
hydrostatic equilibrium 62–64
models 70–74, 101–103
nuclear reactions 65–67, 91–103, 105–108
opacity 47–53
radiative transfer 46–48, 67
virial theorem 65
stellar populations 173–174, 265
stellar structure, see stellar interior
stellar wind 112–114, 128
stimulated emission, see induced
emission
Stokes’s theorem (for tensors) 367–368
Str¨omgren sphere 186–187
structure formation 349–353
Sudb ury
Neutrino Observatory 108
summation convention 359
Sun
apparent magnitude 9
age3,102
convection inside 103–104
corona 113–114
distance 1
magnetic ﬁeld 119, 120–123
mass 1
neutrinos from 13,105–108
oscillations 104–105
rotation 119–120
standard model 102, 105, 106–108
sunspots 120–123, 234–236
Sunyaev–Zeldovich effect 343–344, 354
superclusters of galaxies 293
SuperKamiokande 107
superluminal motion 280–282
supernova 114, 128
and ISM 174, 187, 191, 291
and neutron stars 117, 139–141
nucleosynthesis in 117–118, 174,291
observ ations 115
–116, 118–119
particle acceleration 14,190, 248
types and production mechanisms 116–117,
139
use as standard candle 274, 309, 435–436,
439–440
Supernova 1987A 13,115–118
supersymmetry 338
surface brightness test 432–433synchrotron radiation 19,190, 220, 244, 266,
277, 285, 296
basic theory 248, 251–252
Taurus constellation 115
telescopes 7,15–20
tensors 298, 302, 357–373
curvature 367–371
deﬁnition (contravariant and covariant)
358–360
differentiation 363–367
geodesics 371–373
metric tensor 302, 357, 360–362
thermal broadening 174
,183
thermal ionization 32,58,78
thermodynamic equilibrium 30–34, 177,
327–331
Third Cambridge Catalogue (3C) 21
third integral 210
Thomson cross-section 51,148
Thomson scattering 50–52, 90,147–148, 343
and matter-radiation decoupling 59,
326–327, 341
triple alpha reaction 100–101
Tully–Fisher relation 269, 270, 274
tuning fork diagram 263–264
Tycho 115
Type Ia supernova 116–117, 274, 435–436,
439–440
Type II supernova 116–117
Uband 9
UBV (Ultraviolet–Blue–Visual) system 8–9
Uhuru 19,146,289
Ultra violet–Blue–V
isual ( UBV ) system 8–9
Universe, seecosmology
age3,89,198, 203, 275, 321–322
contents 313–317, 334–339, 423, 439–440
cosmological parameters, seecosmological
parameters
cosmological principle 294, 304–306
cosmological tests 428–435
density 310–311, 314, 439–440
early Universe, seeearly Universe
evolution 308–312, 317–326, 344–349,
423–424
expansion 271–276
light propagation 425–428
metric 304–308
thermal history 325–353
Vband 9,159
Vela
pulsar 140
velocity 4-vector 380

<<<PAGE 491>>>

Index 471
Very Large Array (VLA) 18,19,277, 405
Very Large Baseline Interferometry (VLBI)
18,280–281
violent relaxation 203
Virgo cluster 287–288, 289
virial theorem
for stars 65
for stellar dynamics 199–201, 287–288,
296, 324, 439
viscosity 147, 222–223
VLA (Very Large Array) 18,19,277, 405
VLBI (Very Large Baseline Interferometry)
18,280–281
V ogt–Russell theorem 73
voids (in galaxy distribution) 293
warm intercloud medium 183, 191–193
weak interaction 13,332, 334–335, 338Whirlpool Galaxy 262
white dwarfs 10,67,73,127–128,
accretion onto (and Type Ia supernova)
116–117, 149, 435
position in HR diagram 84,110
structure 84–85, 132–137, 151
WMAP (W
ilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe) 342–342, 436–439
world time 389
X-ray astronomy 19–20
X-ray telescope 19–20
Yerkes Observatory 16
Zeeman effect 79,120
zodiac, signs of the 6
zone of avoidance 160