
<<<PAGE 1>>>

97 8 1 2 9 2 0 2 2 9 3 2ISBN 978-1-29202-293-2An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics
Bradley W. Carroll   Dale A. Ostlie
Second Edition
An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics     Carroll  Ostlie     Second Edition

<<<PAGE 2>>>

"O*OUSPEVDUJPOUP.PEFSO"TUSPQIZTJDT
#SBEMFZ8$BSSPMM%BMF"0TUMJF
4FDPOE&EJUJPO

<<<PAGE 3>>>

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:  www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ  liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners.  
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of AmericaISBN 10: 1-292-02293-0
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-02293-2
ISBN 10: 1-292-02293-0
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-02293-2

<<<PAGE 4>>>

Table o f Content sPEARSON  CU STOM  LIBRA RY  
I1SFGBDF1
1 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF$FMFTUJBM4QIFSF7
7 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF$FMFTUJBM4QIFSF29
29 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
$FMFTUJBM.FDIBOJDT31
31 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
$FMFTUJBM.FDIBOJDT63
63 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF$POUJOVPVT4QFDUSVNPG-JHIU69
69 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF$POUJOVPVT4QFDUSVNPG-JHIU93
93 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF5IFPSZPG4QFDJBM3FMBUJWJUZ97
97 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF5IFPSZPG4QFDJBM3FMBUJWJUZ123
123 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF*OUFSBDUJPOPG-JHIUBOE.BUUFS129
129 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF*OUFSBDUJPOPG-JHIUBOE.BUUFS157
157 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5FMFTDPQFT161
161 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5FMFTDPQFT195
195 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie

<<<PAGE 5>>>

II#JOBSZ4ZTUFNTBOE4UFMMBS1BSBNFUFST199
199 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
#JOBSZ4ZTUFNTBOE4UFMMBS1BSBNFUFST221
221 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF$MBTTJGJDBUJPOPG4UFMMBS4QFDUSB229
229 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF$MBTTJGJDBUJPOPG4UFMMBS4QFDUSB257
257 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
4UFMMBS"UNPTQIFSFT263
263 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
4UFMMBS"UNPTQIFSFT313
313 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF4VO321
321 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF4VO369
369 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF*OUFSJPSTPG4UBST373
373 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF*OUFSJPSTPG4UBST435
435 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF*OUFSTUFMMBS.FEJVNBOE4UBS'PSNBUJPO441
441 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF*OUFSTUFMMBS.FEJVNBOE4UBS'PSNBUJPO487
487 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
.BJO4FRVFODFBOE1PTU.BJO4FRVFODF4UFMMBS&WPMVUJPO491
491 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
.BJO4FRVFODFBOE1PTU.BJO4FRVFODF4UFMMBS&WPMVUJPO527
527 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
4UFMMBS1VMTBUJPO537
537 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
4UFMMBS1VMTBUJPO569
569 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF'BUFPG.BTTJWF4UBST575
575 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF'BUFPG.BTTJWF4UBST613
613 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie

<<<PAGE 6>>>

III5IF%FHFOFSBUF3FNOBOUTPG4UBST617
617 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF%FHFOFSBUF3FNOBOUTPG4UBST665
665 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
(FOFSBM3FMBUJWJUZBOE#MBDL)PMFT671
671 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
(FOFSBM3FMBUJWJUZBOE#MBDL)PMFT711
711 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
$MPTF#JOBSZ4UBS4ZTUFNT717
717 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
$MPTF#JOBSZ4UBS4ZTUFNT773
773 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1IZTJDBM1SPDFTTFTJOUIF4PMBS4ZTUFN781
781 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
1IZTJDBM1SPDFTTFTJOUIF4PMBS4ZTUFN803
803 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF5FSSFTUSJBM1MBOFUT809
809 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF5FSSFTUSJBM1MBOFUT845
845 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF3FBMNTPGUIF(JBOU1MBOFUT849
849 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF3FBMNTPGUIF(JBOU1MBOFUT883
883 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
.JOPS#PEJFTPGUIF4PMBS4ZTUFN891
891 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
.JOPS#PEJFTPGUIF4PMBS4ZTUFN925
925 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
'PSNBUJPOPG1MBOFUBSZ4ZTUFNT929
929 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
'PSNBUJPOPG1MBOFUBSZ4ZTUFNT953
953 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF/BUVSFPG(BMBYJFT955
955 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF/BUVSFPG(BMBYJFT1011
1011 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie

<<<PAGE 7>>>

IV5IF.JMLZ8BZ(BMBYZ1019
1019 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF.JMLZ8BZ(BMBYZ1081
1081 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
(BMBDUJD&WPMVUJPO1093
1093 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
(BMBDUJD&WPMVUJPO1129
1129 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF4USVDUVSFPGUIF6OJWFSTF1135
1135 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF4USVDUVSFPGUIF6OJWFSTF1181
1181 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"DUJWF(BMBYJFT1187
1187 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
"DUJWF(BMBYJFT1245
1245 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
$PTNPMPHZ1251
1251 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
$PTNPMPHZ1329
1329 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
5IF&BSMZ6OJWFSTF1345
1345 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
1SPCMFN4FU	F
5IF&BSMZ6OJWFSTF1395
1395 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY"TUSPOPNJDBMBOE1IZTJDBM$POTUBOUT1397
1397 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY6OJU$POWFSTJPOT1401
1401 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY4PMBS4ZTUFN%BUB1403
1403 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY5IF$POTUFMMBUJPOT1405
1405 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY5IF#SJHIUFTU4UBST1407
1407 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY5IF/FBSFTU4UBST1409
1409 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY4UFMMBS%BUB1411
1411 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie

<<<PAGE 8>>>

V"QQFOEJY5IF.FTTJFS$BUBMPH1417
1417 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY$POTUBOUT"1SPHSBNNJOH.PEVMF1421
1421 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY0SCJU"1MBOFUBSZ0SCJU$PEF1423
1423 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY5XP4UBST"#JOBSZ4UBS$PEF1425
1425 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY4UBU4UBS"4UFMMBS4USVDUVSF$PEF1431
1431 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY(BMBYZ"5JEBM*OUFSBDUJPO$PEF1435
1435 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie
"QQFOEJY8."1%BUB1439
1439 Bradley W. Carroll/Dale A. Ostlie1441
1441 *OEFY

<<<PAGE 9>>>

VI

<<<PAGE 10>>>

PrefaceSince the ﬁrst edition ofAn Introduction to Modern Astrophysicsand its abbreviated com-panion text,An Introduction to Modern Stellar Astrophysics, ﬁrst appeared in 1996, therehas been an incredible explosion in our knowledge of the heavens. It was just two monthsbefore the printing of the ﬁrst editions that Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz announcedthe discovery of an extrasolar planet around 51 Pegasi, the ﬁrst planet found orbiting amain-sequence star. In the next eleven years, the number of known extrasolar planets hasgrown to over 193. Not only do these discoveries shed new light on how stars and planetarysystems form, but they also inform us about formation and planetary evolution in our ownSolar System.In addition, within the past decade important discoveries have been made of objects,within our Solar System but beyond Pluto, that are similar in size to that diminutive planet.In fact, one of the newly discovered Kuiper belt objects, currently referred to as 2003 UB313(until the International Astronomical Union makes an ofﬁcial determination), appears to belarger than Pluto, challenging our deﬁnition of what a planet is and how many planets ourSolar System is home to.Explorations by robotic spacecraft and landers throughout our Solar System have alsoyielded a tremendous amount of new information about our celestial neighborhood. Thearmada of orbiters, along with the remarkable rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, have conﬁrmedthat liquid water has existed on the surface of Mars in the past. We have also had roboticemissaries visit Jupiter and Saturn, touch down on the surfaces of Titan and asteroids, crashinto cometary nuclei, and even return cometary dust to Earth.Missions such as Swift have enabled us to close in on the solutions to the mysteriousgamma-ray bursts that were such an enigma at the timeAn Introduction to Modern Astro-physicsﬁrst appeared. We now know that one class of gamma-ray bursts is associated withcore-collapse supernovae and that the other class is probably associated with the merger oftwo neutron stars, or a neutron star and a black hole, in a binary system.Remarkably precise observations of the center of our Milky Way Galaxy and othergalaxies, since the publication of the ﬁrst editions, have revealed that a great many, perhapsmost, spiral and large elliptical galaxies are home to one or more supermassive black holesat their centers. It also appears likely that galactic mergers help to grow these monsters intheir centers. Furthermore, it now seems almost certain that supermassive black holes are thecentral engines responsible for the exotic and remarkably energetic phenomena associatedwith radio galaxies, Seyfert galaxies, blazars, and quasars.The past decade has also witnessed the startling discovery that the expansion of the uni-verse is not slowing down but, rather, is actually accelerating! This remarkable observationsuggests that we currently live in a dark-energy-dominated universe, in which Einstein’sFrom the Preface o  f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 11>>>

cosmological constant (once considered his “greatest blunder”) plays an important rolein our understanding of cosmology. Dark energy was not even imagined in cosmologicalmodels at the time the ﬁrst editions were published.Indeed, since the publication of the ﬁrst editions, cosmology has entered into a new era ofprecision measurements. With the release of the remarkable data obtained by the WilkinsonMicrowave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), previously large uncertainties in the age of theuniverse have been reduced to less than 2% (13.7±0.2 Gyr). At the same time, stellarevolution theory and observations have led to the determination that the ages of the oldestglobular clusters are in full agreement with the upper limit of the age of the universe.We opened the preface to the ﬁrst editions with the sentence “There has never beena more exciting time to study modern astrophysics”; this has certainly been borne out inthe tremendous advances that have occurred over the past decade. It is also clear that thisincredible decade of discovery is only a prelude to further advances to come. Joining theHubble Space Telescope in its high-resolution study of the heavens have been the ChandraX-ray Observatory and the Spitzer Infrared Space Telescope. From the ground, 8-m andlarger telescopes have also joined the search for new information about our remarkableuniverse. Tremendously ambitious sky surveys have generated a previously unimaginedwealth of data that provide critically important statistical data sets; the Sloan Digital SkySurvey, the Two-Micron All Sky Survey, the 2dF redshift survey, the Hubble Deep Fieldsand Ultradeep Fields, and others have become indispensable tools for hosts of studies. Wealso anticipate the ﬁrst observations from new observatories and spacecraft, including thehigh-altitude (5000 m) Atacama Large Millimeter Array and high-precision astrometricmissions such as Gaia and SIM PlanetQuest. Of course, studies of our own Solar Systemalso continue; just the day before this preface was written, the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiterentered orbit around the red planet.When the ﬁrst editions were written, even the World Wide Web was in its infancy. Todayit is hard to imagine a world in which virtually any information you might want is onlya search engine and a mouse click away. With enormous data sets available online, alongwith fully searchable journal and preprint archives, the ability to access critical informationvery rapidly has been truly revolutionary.Needless to say, a second edition of BOB (the “Big Orange Book,” asAn Introductionto Modern Astrophysicshas come to be known by many students) and its associated textis long overdue. In addition to an abbreviated version focusing on stellar astrophysics (AnIntroduction to Modern Stellar Astrophysics), a second abbreviated version (An Introductionto Modern Galactic Astrophysics and Cosmology) is being published. We are conﬁdent thatBOB and its smaller siblings will serve the needs of a range of introductory astrophysicscourses and that they will instill some of the excitement felt by the authors and hosts ofastronomers and astrophysicists worldwide.We have switched from cgs to SI units in the second edition. Although we are personallymore comfortable quoting luminosities in ergs s−1rather than watts, our students are not.We do not want students to feel exasperated by a new system of units during their ﬁrstencounter with the concepts of modern astrophysics. However, we have retained the naturalunits of parsecs and solar units (M⊙and L⊙) because they provide a comparative contextfor numerical values. An appendix of unit conversions (see back endpapers) is included forPreface


<<<PAGE 12>>>

those who delve into the professional literature and discover the world of angstroms, ergs,and esu.Our goal in writing these texts was to open the entire ﬁeld of modern astrophysics toyou by using only the basic tools of physics. Nothing is more satisfying than appreciatingthe drama of the universe through an understanding of its underlying physical principles.The advantages of a mathematical approach to understanding the heavenly spectacle wereobvious to Plato, as manifested in hisEpinomis:Are you unaware that the true astronomer must be a person of great wisdom?Hence there will be a need for several sciences. The ﬁrst and most importantis that which treats of pure numbers. To those who pursue their studies inthe proper way, all geometric constructions, all systems of numbers, all dulyconstituted melodic progressions, the single ordered scheme of all celestialrevolutions should disclose themselves. And, believe me, no one will everbehold that spectacle without the studies we have described, and so be able toboast that they have won it by an easy route.Now, 24 centuries later, the application of a little physics and mathematics still leads todeep insights.These texts were also born of the frustration we encountered while teaching our junior-level astrophysics course. Most of the available astronomy texts seemed more descriptivethan mathematical. Students who were learning about Schrödinger’s equation, partitionfunctions, and multipole expansions in other courses felt handicapped because their astro-physics text did not take advantage of their physics background. It seemed a double shame tous because a course in astrophysics offers students the unique opportunity of actually usingthe physics they have learned to appreciate many of astronomy’s fascinating phenomena.Furthermore, as a discipline, astrophysics draws on virtually every aspect of physics. Thusastrophysics gives students the chance to review and extend their knowledge.Anyone who has had an introductory calculus-based physics course is ready to under-stand nearly all the major concepts of modern astrophysics. The amount of modern physicscovered in such a course varies widely, so we have included a chapter on the theory ofspecial relativity and one on quantum physics which will provide the necessary backgroundin these areas. Everything else in the text is self-contained and generously cross-referenced,so you will not lose sight of the chain of reasoning that leads to some of the most astoundingideas in all of science.1Although we have attempted to be fairly rigorous, we have tended to favor the sort ofback-of-the-envelope calculation that uses a simple model of the system being studied.The payoff-to-effort ratio is so high, yielding 80% of the understanding for 20% of theeffort, that these quick calculations should be a part of every astrophysicist’s toolkit. Infact, while writing this book we were constantly surprised by the number of phenomenathat could be described in this way. Above all, we have tried to be honest with you; weremained determined not to simplify the material beyond recognition. Stellar interiors,1Footnotes are used when we don’t want to interrupt the main ﬂow of a paragraph.Preface


<<<PAGE 13>>>

stellar atmospheres, general relativity, and cosmology—all are described with a depth thatis more satisfying than mere hand-waving description.Computational astrophysics is today as fundamental to the advance in our understandingof astronomy as observation and traditional theory, and so we have developed numerouscomputer problems, as well as several complete codes, that are integrated with the textmaterial. You can calculate your own planetary orbits, compute observed features of binarystar systems, make your own models of stars, and reproduce the gravitational interactionsbetween galaxies. These codes favor simplicity over sophistication for pedagogical rea-sons; you can easily expand on the conceptually transparent codes that we have provided.Astrophysicists have traditionally led the way in large-scale computation and visualization,and we have tried to provide a gentle introduction to this blend of science and art.Instructors can use these texts to create courses tailored to their particular needs byapproaching the content as an astrophysical smorgasbord. By judiciously selecting topics,we have used BOB to teach a semester-long course in stellar astrophysics. (Of course,much was omitted from the ﬁrst 18 chapters, but the text is designed to accommodate suchsurgery.) Interested students have then gone on to take an additional course in cosmology.On the other hand, using the entire text would nicely ﬁll a year-long survey course (and thensome) covering all of modern astrophysics. To facilitate the selection of topics, as well asidentify important topics within sections, we have added subsection headings to the secondeditions. Instructors may choose to skim, or even omit, subsections in accordance with theirown as well as their students’ interests—and thereby design a course to their liking.An extensive website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysicsis associated withthese texts. It contains downloadable versions of the computer codes in various languages,including Fortran, C++, and, in some cases, Java. There are also links to some of themany important websites in astronomy. In addition, links are provided to public domainimages found in the texts, as well as to line art that can be used for instructor presentations.Instructors may also obtain a detailed solutions manual directly from the publisher.Throughout the process of the extensive revisions for the second editions, our editors havemaintained a positive and supportive attitude that has sustained us throughout. Although wemust have sorely tried their patience, Adam R. S. Black, Lothlórien Homet, Ashley TaylorAnderson, Deb Greco, Stacie Kent, Shannon Tozier, and Carol Sawyer (at Techsetters) havebeen truly wonderful to work with.We have certainly been fortunate in our professional associations throughout the years.We want to express our gratitude and appreciation to Art Cox, John Cox (1926–1984),Carl Hansen, Hugh Van Horn, and Lee Anne Willson, whose profound inﬂuence on us hasremained and, we hope, shines through the pages ahead.Our good fortune has been extended to include the many expert reviewers who casta merciless eye on our chapters and gave us invaluable advice on how to improve them.For their careful reading of the ﬁrst editions, we owe a great debt to Robert Antonucci,Martin Burkhead, Peter Foukal, David Friend, Carl Hansen, H. Lawrence Helfer, StevenD. Kawaler, William Keel, J. Ward Moody, Tobias Owen, Judith Pipher, Lawrence Pinsky,Joseph Silk, J. Allyn Smith, and Rosemary Wyse. Additionally, the extensive revisions tothe second editions have been carefully reviewed by Bryon D. Anderson, Markus J. As-chwanden, Andrew Blain, Donald J. Bord, Jean-Pierre Caillault, Richard Crowe, DanielDale, Constantine Deliyannis, Kathy DeGioia Eastwood, J. C. Evans, Debra Fischer, KimPreface


<<<PAGE 14>>>

Griest, Triston Guillot, Fred Hamann, Jason Harlow, Peter Hauschildt, Lynne A. Hillen-brand, Philip Hughes, William H. Ingham, David Jewitt, Steven D. Kawaler, John Kielkopf,Jeremy King, John Kolena, Matthew Lister, Donald G. Luttermoser, Geoff Marcy, NormanMarkworth, Pedro Marronetti, C. R. O’Dell, Frederik Paerels, Eric S. Perlman, BradleyM. Peterson, Slawomir Piatek, Lawrence Pinsky, Martin Pohl, Eric Preston, Irving K. Rob-bins,Andrew Robinson, Gary D. Schmidt, Steven Stahler, Richard D. Sydora, Paula Szkody,Henry Throop, Michael T. Vaughn, Dan Watson, Joel Weisberg, Gregory G. Wood, MattA. Wood, Kausar Yasmin, Andrew Youdin, Esther Zirbel, E. J. Zita, and others. Over thepast decade, we have received valuable input from users of the ﬁrst-edition texts that hasshaped many of the revisions and corrections to the second editions. Several generationsof students have provided us with a different and extremely valuable perspective as well.Unfortunately, no matter how ﬁne the sieve, some mistakes are sure to slip through, andsome arguments and derivations may be less than perfectly clear. The responsibility for theremaining errors is entirely ours, and we invite you to submit comments and corrections tous at our e-mail address:modastro@weber.edu.Unfortunately, the burden of writing has not been conﬁned to the authors but was un-avoidably shared by family and friends. We wish to thank our parents, Wayne and MarjorieCarroll, and Dean and Dorothy Ostlie, for raising us to be intellectual explorers of this fas-cinating universe. Finally, it is to those people who makeouruniverse so wondrous that wededicate this book: our wives, Lynn Carroll and Candy Ostlie, and Dale’s terriﬁc children,Michael and Megan. Without their love, patience, encouragement, and constant support,this project would never have been completed.And now it is time to get up into Utah’s beautiful mountains for some skiing, hiking,mountain biking, ﬁshing, and camping and share those down-to-Earth joys with our families!Bradley W. CarrollDale A. OstlieWeber State UniversityOgden, UTmodastro@weber.eduPreface


<<<PAGE 15>>>



<<<PAGE 16>>>

From Chapter 1 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.The Celestial Sphere
by 

<<<PAGE 17>>>

The Celestial Sphere1The Greek Tradition2The Copernican Revolution3Positions on the Celestial Sphere4Physics and Astronomy1THE GREEK TRADITIONHuman beings have long looked up at the sky and pondered its mysteries. Evidence of thelong struggle to understand its secrets may be seen in remnants of cultures around the world:the great Stonehenge monument in England, the structures and the writings of the Maya andAztecs, and the medicine wheels of the Native Americans. However, our modern scientiﬁcview of the universe traces its beginnings to the ancient Greek tradition of natural philosophy.Pythagoras (ca. 550b.c.) ﬁrst demonstrated the fundamental relationship between numbersand nature through his study of musical intervals and through his investigation of thegeometry of the right angle. The Greeks continued their study of the universe for hundredsof years using the natural language of mathematics employed by Pythagoras. The moderndiscipline of astronomy depends heavily on a mathematical formulation of its physicaltheories, following the process begun by the ancient Greeks.In an initial investigation of the night sky, perhaps its most obvious feature to a carefulobserver is the fact that it is constantly changing. Not only do the stars move steadily fromeast to west during the course of a night, but different stars are visible in the evening sky,depending upon the season. Of course the Moon also changes, both in its position in thesky and in its phase. More subtle and more complex are the movements of the planets, or“wandering stars.”The Geocentric UniversePlato (ca. 350b.c.) suggested that to understand the motions of the heavens, one must ﬁrstbegin with a set of workable assumptions, or hypotheses. It seemed obvious that the starsof the night sky revolved about a ﬁxed Earth and that the heavens ought to obey the purestpossible form of motion. Plato therefore proposed that celestial bodies should move aboutEarth with a uniform (or constant) speed and follow a circular motion with Earth at thecenter of that motion. This concept of ageocentric universewas a natural consequence ofthe apparently unchanging relationship of the stars to one another in ﬁxed constellations.


<<<PAGE 18>>>

Equator (Earth)Celestial sphereNorth celestial poleNorth pole (Earth)
South pole (Earth)South celestial poleCelestial equatorFIGURE 1The celestial sphere. Earth is depicted in the center of the celestial sphere.If the stars were simply attached to acelestial spherethat rotated about an axis passingthrough the North and South poles of Earth and intersecting the celestial sphere at thenorthandsouth celestial poles, respectively (Fig. 1), all of the stars’ known motions could bedescribed.Retrograde MotionThe wandering stars posed a somewhat more difﬁcult problem.Aplanet such as Mars movesslowly from west to east against the ﬁxed background stars and then mysteriously reversesdirection for a period of time before resuming its previous path (Fig. 2). Attempting tounderstand this backward, orretrograde,motionbecame the principal problem in astron-omy for nearly 2000 years! Eudoxus of Cnidus, a student of Plato’s and an exceptionalmathematician, suggested that each of the wandering stars occupied its own sphere and thatall the spheres were connected through axes oriented at different angles and rotating at var-ious speeds. Although this theory of a complex system of spheres initially was marginallysuccessful at explaining retrograde motion, predictions began to deviate signiﬁcantly fromthe observations as more data were obtained.Hipparchus (ca. 150b.c.), perhaps the most notable of the Greek astronomers, proposeda system of circles to explain retrograde motion. By placing a planet on a small, rotatingepicyclethat in turn moved on a largerdeferent, he was able to reproduce the behavior ofthe wandering stars. Furthermore, this system was able to explain the increased brightnessof the planets during their retrograde phases as resulting from changes in their distancesfrom Earth. Hipparchus also created the ﬁrst catalog of the stars, developed a magnitudesystem for describing the brightness of stars that is still in use today, and contributed to thedevelopment of trigonometry.During the next two hundred years, the model of planetary motion put forth by Hip-parchus also proved increasingly unsatisfactory in explaining many of the details of the ob-servations. Claudius Ptolemy (ca.a.d.100) introduced reﬁnements to the epicycle/deferentThe Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 19>>>

654321Right ascension (hours)Declination (degrees)2520151050April 15, 2006February 28, 2006November 4, 2005October 1, 2005August 30, 2005January 1, 2006December 10, 2005July 15, 2005FIGURE 2The retrograde motion of Mars in 2005. The general, long-term motion of the planetis eastward relative to the background stars. However, between October 1 and December 10, 2005,the planet’s motion temporarily becomes westward (retrograde). (Of course the planet’s short-termdaily motion across the sky is always from east to west.) The coordinates of right ascension anddeclination are discussedinFig.13.Betelgeuse,thebrightstarintheconstellationofOrion,isvisibleat(α, δ)=(5h55m,+7◦24′),Aldebaran,intheconstellationofTaurus,hascoor-dinates(4h36m,+16◦31′),a n dt h eH y a d e sa n dP l e i a d e ss t a rc l u s t e r s( a l s oi nT a u r u s )a r ev i s i b l ea t(4h24m,+15◦45′)and(3h44m,+23◦58′), respectively./H9258PlanetEpicycleDeferentEquantEarthDeferent centerFIGURE 3The Ptolemaic model of planetary motion.system by addingequants(Fig. 3), resulting in a constantangularspeed of the epicycleabout the deferent (dθ/dtwas assumed to be constant). He also moved Earth away fromthe deferent center and even allowed for a wobble of the deferent itself. Predictions of thePtolemaic model did agree more closely with observations than any previously devisedscheme, but the original philosophical tenets of Plato (uniform and circular motion) weresigniﬁcantly compromised.Despite its shortcomings, the Ptolemaic model became almost universally accepted asthe correct explanation of the motion of the wandering stars. When a disagreement betweenthe model and observations would develop, the model was modiﬁed slightly by the additionof another circle. This process of “ﬁxing” the existing theory led to an increasingly complextheoretical description of observable phenomena.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 20>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 4(a) Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543). (b) The Copernican model of planetary motion:Planets travel in circles with the Sun at the center of motion. (Courtesy of Yerkes Observatory.)2THE COPERNICAN REVOLUTIONBy the sixteenth century the inherent simplicity of the Ptolemaic model was gone. Polish-born astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543), hoping to return the science to a lesscumbersome, more elegant view of the universe, suggested aheliocentric(Sun-centered)model of planetary motion (Fig. 4).1His bold proposal led immediately to a much lesscomplicated description of the relationships between the planets and the stars. Fearingsevere criticism from the Catholic Church, whose doctrine then declared that Earth wasthe center of the universe, Copernicus postponed publication of his ideas until late in life.De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium(On the Revolution of the Celestial Sphere) ﬁrstappeared in the year of his death. Faced with a radical new view of the universe, alongwith Earth’s location in it, even some supporters of Copernicus argued that the heliocentricmodel merely represented a mathematical improvement in calculating planetary positionsbut did not actually reﬂect the true geometry of the universe. In fact, a preface to that effectwas added by Osiander, the priest who acted as the book’s publisher.Bringing Order to the PlanetsOne immediate consequence of the Copernican model was the ability to establish the orderof all of the planets from the Sun, along with their relative distances and orbital periods.The fact that Mercury and Venus are never seen more than 28◦and 47◦, respectively, eastor west of the Sun clearly establishes that their orbits are located inside the orbit of Earth.These planets are referred to asinferior planets, and their maximum angular separationseast or west of the Sun are known asgreatest eastern elongationandgreatest western1Actually, Aristarchus proposed a heliocentric model of the universe in 280b.c.At that time, however, there wasno compelling evidence to suggest that Earth itself was in motion.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 21>>>

SunGreatestwesternelongationGreatesteasternelongationSuperiorconjunction
InferiorconjunctionOrbit ofsuperior planetOrbit ofinferior planet
WesternquadratureEasternquadratureOppositionConjunction
EarthFIGURE 5Orbital conﬁgurations of the planets.elongation, respectively (see Fig. 5). Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn (the most distant planetsknown to Copernicus) can be seen as much as 180◦from the Sun, an alignment knownasopposition. This could only occur if thesesuperior planetshave orbits outside Earth’sorbit. The Copernican model also predicts that only inferior planets can pass in front of thesolar disk (inferior conjunction), as observed.Retrograde Motion RevisitedThe great long-standing problem of astronomy—retrograde motion—was also easily ex-plained through the Copernican model. Consider the case of a superior planet such as Mars.Assuming, as Copernicus did, that the farther a planet is from the Sun, the more slowlyit moves in its orbit, Mars will then be overtaken by the faster-moving Earth. As a result,the apparent position of Mars will shift against the relatively ﬁxed background stars, withthe planet seemingly moving backward near opposition, where it is closest to Earth and atits brightest (see Fig. 6). Since the orbits of all of the planets are not in the same plane,retrograde loops will occur. The same analysis works equally well for all other planets,superior and inferior.The relative orbital motions of Earth and the other planets mean that the time intervalbetween successive oppositions or conjunctions can differ signiﬁcantly from the amount oftime necessary to make one complete orbit relative to the background stars (Fig. 7). Theformer time interval (between oppositions) is known as thesynodic period(S), and thelatter time interval (measured relative to the background stars) is referred to as thesiderealperiod(P). It is left as an exercise to show that the relationship between the two periods isgiven by1/S=/braceleftBigg1/P−1/P⊕(inferior)1/P⊕−1/P(superior),(1)The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 22>>>

117776345212233445566
Mars orbitEarth orbitSunFIGURE 6The retrograde motion of Mars as described by the Copernican model. Note that thelines of sight from Earth to Mars cross for positions 3, 4, and 5. This effect, combined with the slightlydiffering planes of the two orbits result in retrograde paths near opposition. Recall the retrograde (orwestward) motion of Mars between October 1, 2005, and December 10, 2005, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Oppositiont = 0Oppositiont = S
SunMars orbitEarth orbit1.50.51.51.00.5
0.02.00.01.02.02.1352.135
FIGURE 7The relationship between the sidereal and synodic periods of Mars. The two periodsdo not agree due to the motion of Earth. The numbers represent the elapsed time in sidereal yearssince Mars was initially at opposition. Note that Earth completes more than two orbits in a synodicperiod ofS=2.135 yr, whereas Mars completes slightly more than one orbit during one synodicperiod from opposition to opposition.when perfectly circular orbits and constant speeds are assumed;P⊕is the sidereal periodof Earth’s orbit (365.256308 d).Although the Copernican model did represent a simpler, more elegant model of planetarymotion, it was not successful in predicting positions any more accurately than the Ptolemaicmodel. This lack of improvement was due to Copernicus’s inability to relinquish the 2000-year-old concept that planetary motion required circles, the human notion of perfection. Asa consequence, Copernicus was forced (as were the Greeks) to introduce the concept ofepicycles to“ﬁx”his model.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 23>>>

Perhaps the quintessential example of a scientiﬁc revolution was the revolution begunby Copernicus. What we think of today as the obvious solution to the problem of planetarymotion—a heliocentric universe—was perceived as a very strange and even rebelliousnotion during a time of major upheaval, when Columbus had recently sailed to the“newworld”and Martin Luther had proposed radical revisions in Christianity. Thomas Kuhnhas suggested that an established scientiﬁc theory is much more than just a framework forguiding the study of natural phenomena. The presentparadigm(or prevailing scientiﬁctheory) is actually a way ofseeingthe universe around us. We ask questions, pose newresearch problems, and interpret the results of experiments and observations in the contextof the paradigm. Viewing the universe in any other way requires a complete shift from thecurrent paradigm. To suggest that Earth actually orbits the Sun instead of believing that theSun inexorably rises and sets about aﬁxed Earth is to argue for a change in the very structureof the universe, a structure that was believed to be correct and beyond question for nearly2000 years. Not until the complexity of the old Ptolemaic scheme became too unwieldycould the intellectual environment reach a point where the concept of a heliocentric universewas even possible.3POSITIONS ON THE CELESTIAL SPHEREThe Copernican revolution has shown us that the notion of a geocentric universe is incorrect.Nevertheless, with the exception of a small number of planetary probes, our observationsof the heavens are still based on a reference frame centered on Earth. The daily (ordiurnal)rotation of Earth, coupled with its annual motion around the Sun and the slow wobble of itsrotation axis, together with relative motions of the stars, planets, and other objects, resultsin the constantly changing positions of celestial objects. To catalog the locations of objectssuch as the Crab supernova remnant in Taurus or the great spiral galaxy of Andromeda,coordinates must be speciﬁed. Moreover, the coordinate system should not be sensitive tothe short-term manifestations of Earth’s motions; otherwise the speciﬁed coordinates wouldconstantly change.The Altitude–Azimuth Coordinate SystemViewing objects in the night sky requires only directions to them, not their distances. Wecan imagine that all objects are located on a celestial sphere, just as the ancient Greeksbelieved. It then becomes sufﬁcient to specify only two coordinates. The most straight-forward coordinate system one might devise is based on the observer’s local horizon. Thealtitude–azimuth(orhorizon)coordinate systemis based on the measurement of the az-imuth angle along the horizon together with the altitude angle above the horizon (Fig. 8).Thealtitudehis deﬁned as that angle measured from the horizon to the object along a greatcircle2that passes through that object and the point on the celestial sphere directly abovethe observer, a point known as thezenith. Equivalently, thezenith distancezis the anglemeasured from the zenith to the object, soz+h=90◦. TheazimuthAis simply the angle2A great circle is the curve resulting from the intersection of a sphere with a plane passing through thecenterofthat sphere.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 24>>>

ZenithWestEastSouthStarNorthzhAOFIGURE 8The altitude–azimuth coordinate system.h,z, andAare the altitude, zenith distance,and azimuth, respectively.measured along the horizon eastward from north to the great circle used for the measureof altitude. (Themeridianis another frequently used great circle; it is deﬁned as passingthrough the observer’s zenith and intersecting the horizon due north and south.)Although simple to deﬁne, the altitude–azimuth system is difﬁcult to use in practice.Coordinates of celestial objects in this system are speciﬁc to the local latitude and longitudeof the observer and are difﬁcult to transform to other locations on Earth. Also, since Earthis rotating, stars appear to move constantly across the sky, meaning that the coordinates ofeach object are constantly changing, even for the local observer. Complicating the problemstill further, the stars rise approximately 4 minutes earlier on each successive night, so thateven when viewed from the same location at a speciﬁed time, the coordinates change fromday to day.Daily and Seasonal Changes in the SkyTo understand the problem of these day-to-day changes in altitude–azimuth coordinates, wemust consider the orbital motion of Earth about the Sun (see Fig. 9). As Earth orbits theSun, our view of the distant stars is constantly changing. Our line of sight to the Sun sweepsthrough the constellations during the seasons; consequently, we see the Sun apparentlymove through those constellations along a path referred to as theecliptic.3During thespring the Sun appears to travel across the constellation of Virgo, in the summer it movesthrough Orion, during the autumn months it enters Aquarius, and in the winter the Sun islocated near Scorpius. As a consequence, those constellations become obscured in the glareof daylight, and other constellations appear in our night sky. This seasonal change in theconstellations is directly related to the fact that a given star rises approximately 4 minutesearlier each day. Since Earth completes one sidereal period in approximately 365.26 days,it moves slightly less than 1◦around its orbit in 24 hours. Thus Earth must actually rotatenearly 361◦to bring the Sun to the meridian on two successive days (Fig. 10). Because ofthe much greater distances to the stars, they do not shift their positions signiﬁcantly as Earthorbits the Sun. As a result, placing a star on the meridian on successive nights requires onlya 360◦rotation. It takes approximately 4 minutes for Earth to rotate the extra 1◦. Therefore agiven star rises 4 minutes earlier each night.Solar timeis deﬁned as anaverageinterval of3The termeclipticis derived from the observation of eclipses along that path through the heavens.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 25>>>

To NCP23.5ºToScorpiusToOrionEarth(Dec 21)Earth(Jun 21)EquatorialplaneSunEcliptic planeFIGURE 9The plane of Earth’s orbit seen edge-on. The tilt of Earth’s rotation axis relative tothe ecliptic is also shown.
SunEarthOne daylaterTo distant starTo distant star1º1ºFIGURE 10Earth must rotate nearly 361◦per solar day and only 360◦per sidereal day.24 hours between meridian crossings of the Sun, andsidereal timeis based on consecutivemeridian crossings of a star.Seasonal climatic variations are also due to the orbital motion of Earth, coupled with theapproximately 23.5◦tilt of its rotation axis. As a result of the tilt, the ecliptic moves northand south of thecelestial equator(Fig. 11), which is deﬁned by passing a plane throughEarth at its equator and extending that plane out to the celestial sphere. The sinusoidalshape of the ecliptic occurs because the Northern Hemisphere alternately points towardand then away from the Sun during Earth’s annual orbit. Twice during the year the Suncrosses the celestial equator, once moving northward along the ecliptic and later movingto the south. In theﬁrst case, the point of intersection is called thevernal equinoxandthe southern crossing occurs at theautumnal equinox. Spring ofﬁcially begins when thecenter of the Sun is precisely on the vernal equinox; similarly, fall begins when the centerof the Sun crosses the autumnal equinox. The most northern excursion of the Sun along theecliptic occurs at thesummer solstice, representing the ofﬁcial start of summer, and thesouthernmost position of the Sun is deﬁned as thewinter solstice.The seasonal variations in weather are due to the position of the Sun relative to thecelestial equator. During the summer months in the Northern Hemisphere, the Sun’s northerndeclination causes it to appear higher in the sky, producing longer days and more intensesunlight. During the winter months the declination of the Sun is below the celestial equator,its path above the horizon is shorter, and its rays are less intense (see Fig. 12). The moredirect the Sun’s rays, the more energy per unit area strikes Earth’s surface and the higherthe resulting surface temperature.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 26>>>

Dec 21 Sep 23 Jun 21 Mar 20 Dec 2118126018
(Approximate dates)Right ascension (hr)
Winter solsticeSummer solsticeAutumnalequinoxVernalequinox (   )Winter solstice3020100–10–20–30Declination (deg)
FIGURE 11The ecliptic is the annual path of the Sun across the celestial sphere and is sinusoidalabout the celestial equator. Summer solstice is at a declination of 23.5◦and winter solstice is at adeclination of−23.5◦. See Fig. 13 for explanations of right ascension and declination.
NorthSouthHorizonSCPNCPDec 21Mar 20Sep 23Jun 21LWestEastCelestialequatorDec 21Jun 2173.5º26.5º1.04 m2.24 m1 m1 m
(a)(b)FIGURE 12(a) The diurnal path of the Sun across the celestial sphere for an observer at latitudeLwhen the Sun is located at the vernal equinox (March), the summer solstice (June), the autumnalequinox (September), and the winter solstice (December). NCP and SCP designate the north and southcelestial poles, respectively. The dots represent the location of the Sun at local noon on the approximatedates indicated. (b) The direction of the Sun’s rays at noon at the summer solstice (approximatelyJune 21) and at the winter solstice (approximately December 21) for an observer at 40◦N latitude.The Equatorial Coordinate SystemA coordinate system that results in nearly constant values for the positions of celestial ob-jects, despite the complexities of diurnal and annual motions, is necessarily less straightfor-ward than the altitude–azimuth system. Theequatorial coordinate system(see Fig. 13)is based on the latitude–longitude system of Earth but does not participate in the planet’srotation.Declinationδis the equivalent of latitude and is measured in degrees north orThe Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 27>>>

/H9254/H9251NCP
SCPCelestialsphere
CelestialequatorStarEarth
FIGURE 13The equatorial coordinate system.α,δ, andϒdesignate right ascension, declination,and the position of the vernal equinox, respectively.south of the celestial equator.Right ascensionαis analogous to longitude and is measuredeastward along the celestial equator from the vernal equinox (ϒ) to its intersection withthe object’shour circle(the great circle passing through the object being considered andthrough the north celestial pole). Right ascension is traditionally measured in hours, min-utes, and seconds; 24 hours of right ascension is equivalent to 360◦, or 1 hour=15◦. Therationale for this unit of measure is based on the 24 hours (sidereal time) necessary for anobject to make two successive crossings of the observer’s local meridian. The coordinatesof right ascension and declination are also indicated in Figs. 2 and 11. Since the equa-torial coordinate system is based on the celestial equator and the vernal equinox, changesin the latitude and longitude of the observer do not affect the values of right ascension anddeclination. Values ofαandδare similarly unaffected by the annual motion of Earth aroundthe Sun.Thelocal sidereal timeof the observer is deﬁned as the amount of time that has elapsedsince the vernal equinox last traversed the meridian. Local sidereal time is also equivalent tothehour angleHof the vernal equinox, where hour angle is deﬁned as the angle betweena celestial object and the observer’s meridian, measured in the direction of the object’smotion around the celestial sphere.PrecessionDespite referencing the equatorial coordinate system to the celestial equator and its inter-section with the ecliptic (the vernal equinox),precessioncauses the right ascension anddeclination of celestial objects to change, albeit very slowly. Precession is the slow wobbleof Earth’s rotation axis due to our planet’s nonspherical shape and its gravitational inter-action with the Sun and the Moon. It was Hipparchus whoﬁrst observed the effects ofprecession. Although we will not discuss the physical cause of this phenomenon in detail,it is completely analogous to the well-known precession of a child’s toy top. Earth’s pre-cession period is 25,770 years and causes the north celestial pole to make a slow circlethrough the heavens. Although Polaris (the North Star) is currently within 1◦of the northThe Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 28>>>

celestial pole, in 13,000 years it will be nearly 47◦away from that point. The same effectalso causes a 50.26′′yr−1westward motion of the vernal equinox along the ecliptic.4Anadditional precession effect due to Earth–planet interactions results in an eastward motionof the vernal equinox of 0.12′′yr−1.Because precession alters the position of the vernal equinox along the ecliptic, it isnecessary to refer to a speciﬁcepoch(or reference date) when listing the right ascensionand declination of a celestial object. The current values ofαandδmay then be calculated,based on the amount of time elapsed since the reference epoch. The epoch commonly usedtoday for astronomical catalogs of stars, galaxies, and other celestial phenomena refers toan object’s position at noon in Greenwich, England (universal time,UT) on January 1,2000.5A catalog using this reference date is designated as J2000.0. The preﬁx, J, in thedesignation J2000.0 refers to theJulian calendar, which was introduced by Julius Caesarin 46b.c.Approximate expressions for the changes in the coordinates relative to J2000.0 are/Delta1α=M+Nsinαtanδ/Delta1δ=Ncosα,(2)(3)whereMandNare given byM=1.◦2812323T+0.◦0003879T2+0.◦0000101T3N=0.◦5567530T−0.◦0001185T2−0.◦0000116T3andTis deﬁned asT=(t−2000.0)/100(4)wheretis the current date, speciﬁed in fractions of a year.Example 3.1.Altair, the brightest star in the summer constellation of Aquila, has thefollowing J2000.0 coordinates:α=19h50m47.0,sδ=+08◦52′06.0′′. Using Eqs. ( 2) and( 3), we may precess the star’s coordinates to noon Greenwich mean time on July 30, 2005.Writing the date ast=2005.575, we have thatT=0.05575. This implies thatM=0.071430◦andN=0.031039◦. From the relations between time and the angularcontinued41 arcminute = 1′= 1/60 degree; 1 arcsecond = 1′′= 1/60 arcminute.5Universal time is also sometimes referred to asGreenwich mean time. Technically there are two forms ofuniversal time;UT1is based on Earth’s rotation rate, andUTC(coordinated universal time) is the basis of theworldwide system of civil time and is measured by atomic clocks. Because Earth’s rotation rate is less regularthan the time kept by atomic clocks, it is necessary to adjust UTC clocks by about one second (aleap second)roughly every year to year and a half. Among other effects contributing to the difference between UT1 and UTCis the slowing of Earth’s rotation rate due to tidal effects.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 29>>>

measure of right ascension,1h=15◦1m=15′1s=15′′the corrections to the coordinates are/Delta1α=0.071430◦+(0.031039◦)sin 297.696◦tan 8.86833◦=0.067142◦≃16.11sand/Delta1δ=(0.031039◦)cos 297.696◦=0.014426◦≃51.93′′.Thus Altair’s precessed coordinates areα=19h51m03.1sandδ=+08◦52′57.9′′.Measurements of TimeThe civic calendar commonly used in most countries today is theGregorian calendar. TheGregorian calendar, introduced by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582, carefully speciﬁes whichyears are to be considered leap years. Although leap years are useful for many purposes,astronomers are generally interested in the number of days (or seconds) between events,not in worrying about the complexities of leap years. Consequently, astronomers typicallyrefer to the times when observations were made in terms of the elapsed time since somespeciﬁed zero time. The time that is universally used is noon on January 1, 4713b.c.,a sspeciﬁed by the Julian calendar. This time is designated as JD 0.0, where JD indicatesJulian Date.6The Julian date of J2000.0 is JD 2451545.0. Times other than noon universaltime are speciﬁed as fractions of a day; for example, 6pmJanuary 1, 2000 UT would bedesignated JD 2451545.25. Referring to Julian date, the parameterTdeﬁned by Eq. ( 4)can also be written asT=(JD−2451545.0)/36525,where the constant 36,525 is taken from theJulian year, which is deﬁned to be exactly365.25 days.Another commonly-used designation is theModiﬁed Julian Date(MJD), deﬁned asMJD≡JD−2400000.5, where JD refers to the Julian date. Thus a MJD day begins atmidnight, universal time, rather than at noon.6The Julian date JD 0.0 was proposed by Joseph Justus Scaliger (1540–1609) in 1583. His choice was based onthe convergence of three calendar cycles; the 28 years required for the Julian calendar dates to fall on the samedays of the week, the 19 years required for the phases of the Moon tonearlyfall on the same dates of the year, andthe 15-year Roman tax cycle. 28×19×15=7980 means that the three calendars align once every 7980 years.JD 0.0 corresponds to the last time the three calendars all started their cycles together.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 30>>>

Because of the need to measure events very precisely in astronomy, various high-precision time measurements are used. For instance,Heliocentric Julian Date(HJD) isthe Julian Date of an event as measured from the center of the Sun. In order to determinethe heliocentric Julian date, astronomers must consider the time it would take light to travelfrom a celestial object to the center of the Sun rather than to Earth.Terrestrial Time(TT)is time measured on the surface of Earth, taking into consideration the effects of special andgeneralrelativityasEarthmovesaroundtheSunandrotatesonitsownaxisArchaeoastronomyAn interesting application of the ideas discussed above is in the interdisciplinaryﬁeld ofarchaeoastronomy, a merger of archaeology and astronomy. Archaeoastronomy is aﬁeldof study that relies heavily on historical adjustments that must be made to the positions ofobjects in the sky resulting from precession. It is the goal of archaeoastronomy to studythe astronomy of past cultures, the investigation of which relies heavily on the alignmentsof ancient structures with celestial objects. Because of the long periods of time since con-struction, care must be given to the proper precession of celestial coordinates if any proposedalignments are to be meaningful. The Great Pyramid at Giza (Fig. 14), one of the“sevenwonders of the world,”is an example of such a structure. Believed to have been erectedabout 2600b.c., the Great Pyramid has long been the subject of speculation. Although manyof the proposals concerning this amazing monument are more than somewhat fanciful, therecan be no doubt about its careful orientation with the four cardinal positions, north, south,east, and west. The greatest misalignment of any side from a true cardinal direction is nomore than 512′. Equally astounding is the nearly perfect square formed by its base; no twosides differ in length by more than 20 cm.Perhaps the most demanding alignments discovered so far are associated with the“airshafts”leading from the King’s Chamber (the main chamber of the pyramid) to the outside.These air shafts seem too poorly designed to circulate fresh air into the tomb of Pharaoh, andTo ThubanTo Orion’s belt
FIGURE 14The astronomical alignments of the Great Pyramid at Giza. (Adaptation of aﬁgurefrom Grifﬁth Observatory.)The Celestial Sphere
.


<<<PAGE 31>>>

it is now thought that they served another function. The Egyptians believed that when theirpharaohs died, their souls would travel to the sky to join Osiris, the god of life, death, andrebirth. Osiris was associated with the constellation we now know as Orion. Allowing forover one-sixth of a precession period since the construction of the Great Pyramid, VirginiaTrimble has shown that one of the air shafts pointed directly to Orion’s belt. The other airshaft pointed toward Thuban, the star that wasthenclosest to the north celestial pole, thepoint in the sky about which all else turns.As a modern scientiﬁc culture, we trace our study of astronomy to the ancient Greeks, butit has become apparent that many cultures carefully studied the sky and its mysterious pointsof light. Archaeological structures worldwide apparently exhibit astronomical alignments.Although some of these alignments may be coincidental, it is clear that many of them wereby design.The Effects of Motions Through the HeavensAnother effect contributing to the change in equatorial coordinates is due to the intrinsicvelocities of the objects themselves.7As we have already discussed, the Sun, the Moon,and the planets exhibit relatively rapid and complex motions through the heavens. The starsalso move with respect to one another. Even though their actual speeds may be very large,the apparent relative motions of stars are generally very difﬁcult to measure because of theirenormous distances.Consider the velocity of a star relative to an observer (Fig. 15). The velocity vector
/H9258v/H9258vrv
FIGURE 15The components of velocity.vris the star’s radial velocity andvθis the star’stransverse velocity.7Parallaxan important periodic motion of the stars resulting from the motion of Earth about the Sun.The Celestial Sphere
 is may be decomposed into two mutually perpendicular components, one  lying along the line of sight and the other perpendicular to it. The line-of-sight com-ponent is the star’s radial velocity, the second component is the star’svr;


<<<PAGE 32>>>

/Delta1d=vθ/Delta1t.If the distance from the observer to the star isr, then the angular change in its positionalong the celestial sphere is given by/Delta1θ=/Delta1dr=vθr/Delta1t.Thus the star’s proper motion,µ, is related to its transverse velocity byµ≡dθdt=vθr.(5)An Application of Spherical TrigonometryThe laws of spherical trigonometry must be employed in order toﬁnd the relationshipbetween/Delta1θand changes in the equatorial coordinates,/Delta1αand/Delta1δ, on the celestial sphere.A spherical triangle such as the one depicted in Fig. 16 is composed of three intersectingsegments of great circles. For a spherical triangle the following relationships hold (with allsides measured in arc length, e.g., degrees):Law of sinessinasinA=sinbsinB=sincsinCLaw of cosines for sidescosa=cosbcosc+sinbsinccosALaw of cosines for anglescosA=−cosBcosC+sinBsinCcosa.Figure 17 shows the motion of a star on the celestial sphere from pointAto pointB.The angular distance traveled is/Delta1θ. Let pointPbe located at the north celestial pole sothat the arcsAP,AB, andBPform segments of great circles. The star is then said to bemoving in the direction of theposition angleφ(∠PAB), measured from the north celestialpole. Now, construct a segment of a circleNBsuch thatNis at the same declination asBand∠PNB=90◦. If the coordinates of the star at pointAare(α, δ)and its new coordinatesat pointBare(α+/Delta1α, δ+/Delta1δ), then∠APB=/Delta1α,AP=90◦−δ, andNP=BP=90◦−(δ+/Delta1δ). Using the law of sines,sin(/Delta1θ)sin(/Delta1α)=sin[90◦−(δ+/Delta1δ)]sinφ,The Celestial Spheretransverseortangential velocity,vθ, along the celestial sphere. This transverse velocityappears as aslow, angular changein its equatorial coordinates, known asproper motion(usually expressed in seconds of arc per year). In a time interval/Delta1t, the star will havemoved in a direction perpendicular to the observer’s line of sight a distance


<<<PAGE 33>>>

ACBcba
FIGURE 16A spherical triangle. Each leg is a segment of a great circle on the surface of a sphere,and all angles are less than 180◦.a,b, andcare in angular units (e.g., degrees).
Celestial equatorD/H9251D/H9254D/H9258/H9278BNP
A/H9254
FIGURE 17The proper motion of a star across the celestial sphere. The star is assumed to bemoving fromAtoBalong the position angleφ.orsin(/Delta1α)cos(δ+/Delta1δ)=sin(/Delta1θ)sinφ.Assuming that the changes in position are much less than one radian, we may use the small-angle approximations sinϵ∼ϵand cosϵ∼1. Employing the appropriate trigonometricidentity and neglecting all terms of second order or higher, the previous equation reducesto/Delta1α=/Delta1θsinφcosδ.(6)The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 34>>>

The law of cosines for sides may also be used toﬁnd an expression for the change in thedeclination:cos[90◦−(δ+/Delta1δ)]=cos(90◦−δ)cos(/Delta1θ)+sin(90◦−δ)sin(/Delta1θ)cosφ.Again using small-angle approximations and trigonometric identities, this expression re-duces to/Delta1δ=/Delta1θcosφ.(7)(Note that this is the same result that would be obtained if we had used plane trigonometry.This should be expected, however, since we have assumed that the triangle being consideredhas an area much smaller than the total area of the sphere and should therefore appearessentiallyﬂat.) Combining Eqs. ( 6) and ( 7), we arrive at the expression for the angulardistance traveled in terms of the changes in right ascension and declination:(/Delta1θ)2=(/Delta1αcosδ)2+(/Delta1δ)2.(8)4PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMYThe mathematical view of natureﬁrst proposed by Pythagoras and the Greeks led ultimatelyto the Copernican revolution. The inability of astronomers to accuratelyﬁt the observedpositions of the“wandering stars”with mathematical models resulted in a dramatic changein our perception of Earth’s location in the universe. However, an equally important stepstill remained in the development of science: the search forphysical causesof observableAs a part of our investigation of the science of astronomy, it will be necessary to studythe details of celestial motions, the nature of light, the structure of the atom, and the shapeof space itself. Rapid advances in astronomy over the past several decades have occurredbecause of advances in our understanding of fundamental physics and because of improve-ments in the tools we use to study the heavens: telescopes and computers.Essentially every area of physics plays an important role in some aspect of astronomy.Particle physics and astrophysics merge in the study of the Big Bang; the basic questionof the origin of the zoo of elementary particles, as well as the very nature of the fundamentalforces, is intimately linked to how the universe was formed. Nuclear physics providesinformation about the types of reactions that are possible in the interiors of stars, and atomicphysics describes how individual atoms interact with one another and with light, processesthat are basic to a great many astrophysical phenomena. Condensed-matter physics plays aThe Celestial Sphere
phenomena.As we will see the modern study of astronomy relies heavily on an under-standing of the physical nature of the universe. The application of physics to astronomy, astrophysics, has proved very successful in explaining a wide range of observations, in-cluding strange and exotic objects and events, such as pulsating stars, supernovae, variable X-ray sources, black holes, quasars, gamma-ray bursts, and the Big Bang.,


<<<PAGE 35>>>

role in the crusts of neutron stars and in the center of Jupiter. Thermodynamics is involvedeverywhere from the Big Bang to the interiors of stars. Even electronics plays an importantrole in the development of new detectors capable of giving a clearer view of the universearound us.With the advent of modern technology and the space age, telescopes have been built tostudy the heavens with ever-increasing sensitivity. No longer limited to detecting visiblelight, telescopes are now capable of“seeing”gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet light, infraredradiation, and radio signals. Many of these telescopes require operation above Earth’satmosphere to carry out their missions. Other types of telescopes, very different in nature,detect elementary particles instead of light and are often placed below ground to study theheavens.Computers have provided us with the power to carry out the enormous number of calcu-lations necessary to build mathematical models from fundamental physical principles. Thebirth of high-speed computing machines has enabled astronomers to calculate the evolutionof a star and compare those calculations with observations; it is also possible to study therotation of a galaxy and its interaction with neighboring galaxies. Processes that requirebillions of years (signiﬁcantly longer than any National Science Foundation grant) cannotpossibly be observed directly but may be investigated using the modern supercomputer.All of these tools and related disciplines are used to look at the heavens with a probingeye. The study of astronomy is a natural extension of human curiosity in its purest form. Justas a small child is always asking why this or that is the way it is, the goal of an astronomeris to attempt to understand the nature of the universe in all of its complexity, simply for thesake of understanding—the ultimate end of any intellectual adventure. In a very real sense,the true beauty of the heavens lies not only in observing the stars on a dark night but alsoin considering the delicate interplay between the physical processes that cause the stars toexist at all.The most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it iscomprehensible.—Albert EinsteinSUGGESTED READINGGeneralAveni, Anthony,Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico, The University of Texas Press, Austin,1980.Bronowski, J.,The Ascent of Man, Little, Brown, Boston, 1973.Casper, Barry M., and Noer, Richard J.,Revolutions in Physics, W. W. Norton, New York,1972.Hadingham, Evan,Early Man and the Cosmos, Walker and Company, New York, 1984.Krupp, E. C.,Echos of the Ancient Skies: The Astronomy of Lost Civilizations, Harper &Row, New York, 1983.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 36>>>

Kuhn, Thomas S.,The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Third Edition, The University ofChicago Press, Chicago, 1996.Ruggles, Clive L. N.,Astronomy in Prehistoric Britain and Ireland, Yale University Press,New Haven, 1999.Sagan, Carl,Cosmos, Random House, New York, 1980.SIMBAD Astronomical Database,http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Sky and TelescopeSky Chart,http://skyandtelescope.com/observing/skychart/TechnicalAcker, Agnes, and Jaschek, Carlos,Astronomical Methods and Calculations, John Wileyand Sons, Chichester, 1986.Astronomical Almanac, United States Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, D.C.Cox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Lang, Kenneth R.,Astrophysical Formulae, Third Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York,1999.Smart, W. M., and Green, Robin Michael,Textbook on Spherical Astronomy, Sixth Edition,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1977.The Celestial Sphere


<<<PAGE 37>>>



<<<PAGE 38>>>

PROBLEM SET1Derive the relationship between a planet’s synodic period and its sidereal period (Eq. 1).Consider both inferior and superior planets.2Devise methods to determine therelativedistances of each of the planets from the Sun giventhe information available to Copernicus (observable angles between the planets and the Sun,orbital conf gurations, and synodic periods).3 (a)The observed orbital synodic periods of Venus and Mars are 583.9 days and 779.9 days,respectively. Calculate their sidereal periods.(b)Which one of the superior planets has the shortest synodic period? Why?4List the right ascension and declination of the Sun when it is located at the vernal equinox, thesummer solstice, the autumnal equinox, and the winter solstice.5 (a)Referring to Fig. 12(a), calculate the altitude of the Sun along the meridian on the f rstday of summer for an observer at a latitude of 42◦north.The Celestial Sphere
1/S=/braceleftBigg1/P−1/P⊕(inferior)1/P⊕−1/P(superior)
NorthSouthHorizonSCPNCPDec 21Mar 20Sep 23Jun 21LWestEastCelestialequator(a)FIGURE 12(a) The diurnal path of the Sun across the celestial sphere for an observer at latitudeLwhen the Sun is located at the vernal equinox (March), the summer solstice (June), the autumnalequinox (September), and the winter solstice (December). NCP and SCP designate the north and southcelestial poles, respectively. The dots represent the location of the Sun at local noon on the approximatedates indicated.From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ii(1)
,

<<<PAGE 39>>>

(b)What is the maximum altitude of the Sun on the first day of winter at the same latitude?6 (a)Circumpolar stars are stars that never set below the horizon of the local observer or starsthat are never visible above the horizon. After sketching a diagram similar to  Fig.12(a),calculate the range of declinations for these two groups of stars for an observerat thelatitudeL.
(b)At what latitude(s) on Earth will the Sun never set when it is at the summer solstice?(c)Is there any latitude on Earth where the Sun will never set when it is at the vernal equinox?If so, where?7 (a)Determine the Julian date for 16:15 UT on July 14, 2006. (Hint:Be sure to include any leapyears in your calculation.)(b)What is the corresponding modif ed Julian date?8Proxima Centauri (αCentauri C) is the closest star to the Sun and is a part of a triple star system.It has the epoch J2000.0 coordinates(α, δ)=(14h29m42.95s,−62◦40′46.1′′). The brightestmember of the system, Alpha Centauri (αCentauri A) has J2000.0 coordinates of(α, δ)=(14h39m36.50s,−60◦50′02.3′′).(a)What is the angular separation of Proxima Centauri and Alpha Centauri?(b)If the distance to Proxima Centauri is 4.0×1016m, how far is the star from Alpha Centauri?9 (a)Using the information in Problem 8, precess the coordinates of Proxima Centauri to epochJ2010.0.(b)The proper motion of Proxima Centauri is 3.84′′yr−1with the position angle 282◦. Calculatethe change inαandδdue to proper motion between 2000.0 and 2010.0.(c)Which effect makes the largest contribution to changes in the coordinates of Proxima Cen-tauri: precession or proper motion?10Which values of right ascension would be best for viewing by an observer at a latitude of 40◦in January?11Verify that Eq. ( 7) follows directly from the expression immediately preceding it./Delta1δ=/Delta1θcosφ.iThe Celestial Sphere: Problem Set
(7)
NorthSouthHorizonSCPNCPDec 21Mar 20Sep 23Jun 21LWestEastCelestialequator(a)FIGURE 12(a) The diurnal path of the Sun across the celestial sphere for an observer at latitudeLwhen the Sun is located at the vernal equinox (March), the summer solstice (June), the autumnalequinox (September), and the winter solstice (December). NCP and SCP designate the north and southcelestial poles, respectively. The dots represent the location of the Sun at local noon on the approximatedates indicated.


<<<PAGE 40>>>

Celestial Mechanics1Elliptical Orbits2Newtonian Mechanics3Kepler’ s Laws Derived4The Virial Theorem1ELLIPTICAL ORBITSAlthough the inherent simplicity of the Copernican model was aesthetically pleasing, theidea of a heliocentric universe was not immediately accepted; it lacked the support ofobservations capable of unambiguously demonstrating that a geocentric model was wrong.Tycho Brahe: The Great Naked-Eye ObserverAfter the death of Copernicus, Tycho Brahe (1546–1601), the foremost naked-eye observer,carefully followed the motions of the “wandering stars” and other celestial objects. Hecarried out his work at the observatory, Uraniborg, on the island of Hveen (a facility providedfor him by King Frederick II of Denmark). To improve the accuracy of his observations,Tycho used large measuring instruments, such as the quadrant depicted in the mural inFig. 1(a). Tycho’s observations were so meticulous that he was able to measure the positionof an object in the heavens to an accuracy of better than 4′, approximately one-eighth theangular diameter of a full moon. Through the accuracy of his observations he demonstratedfor the ﬁrst time that comets must be much farther away than the Moon, rather than beingsome form of atmospheric phenomenon. Tycho is also credited with observing the supernovaof 1572, which clearly demonstrated that the heavens were not unchanging as Churchdoctrine held. (This observation prompted King Frederick to build Uraniborg.) Despite thegreat care with which he carried out his work, Tycho was not able to ﬁnd any clear evidenceof the motion of Earth through the heavens, and he therefore concluded that the Copernicanmodel must be false.Kepler’s Laws of Planetary MotionAt Tycho’s invitation, Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), a German mathematician, joined himlater in Prague [Fig. 1(b)]. Unlike Tycho, Kepler was a heliocentrist, and it was hisdesire to ﬁnd a geometrical model of the universe that would be consistent with the bestobservations then available, namely Tycho’s.After Tycho’s death, Kepler inherited the massFrom Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.2by 

<<<PAGE 41>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 1(a) Mural of Tycho Brahe (1546–1601). (b) Johannes Kepler (1571–1630). (Courtesyof Yerkes Observatory.)of observations accumulated over the years and began a painstaking analysis of the data. Hisinitial, almost mystic, idea was that the universe is arranged with ﬁve perfect solids, nestedto support the six known naked-eye planets (including Earth) on crystalline spheres, withthe entire system centered on the Sun. After this model proved unsuccessful, he attemptedto devise an accurate set of circular planetary orbits about the Sun, focusing speciﬁcally onMars. Through his very clever use of offset circles and equants,1Kepler was able to obtainexcellent agreement with Tycho’s data for all but two of the points available. In particular,the discrepant points were each off by approximately 8′, or twice the accuracy of Tycho’sdata. Believing that Tycho would not have made observational errors of this magnitude,Kepler felt forced to dismiss the idea of purely circular motion.Rejecting the last fundamental assumption of the Ptolemaic model, Kepler began toconsider the possibility that planetary orbits were elliptical in shape rather than circular.Through this relatively minor mathematical (though monumental philosophical) change,he was ﬁnally able to bring all of Tycho’s observations into agreement with a model forplanetary motion. This paradigm shift also allowed Kepler to discover that the orbital speedof a planet is not constant but varies in a precise way depending on its location in its orbit.In 1609 Kepler published the ﬁrst two of his three laws of planetary motion in the bookAstronomica Nova, orThe New Astronomy:Kepler’s First LawA planet orbits the Sun in an ellipse, with the Sun at onefocus of the ellipse.Kepler’s Second LawA line connecting a planet to the Sun sweeps out equalareas in equal time intervals.1RecallthegeocentricuseofcirclesandequantsbyPtolemy.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 42>>>

FIGURE 2Kepler’s second law states that the area swept out by a line between a planet and thefocus of an ellipse is always the same for a given time interval, regardless of the planet’s position inits orbit. The dots are evenly spaced in time.Kepler’s ﬁrst and second laws are illustrated in Fig. 2, where each dot on the ellipserepresents the position of the planet during evenly spaced time intervals.Kepler’s third law was published ten years later in the bookHarmonica Mundi(TheHarmony of the World). His ﬁnal law relates the average orbital distance of a planet fromthe Sun to its sidereal period:Kepler’s Third LawThe Harmonic Law.P2=a3wherePis the orbital period of the planet, measured inyears, andais the average distanceof the planet from the Sun, inastronomical units, or AU. Anastronomical unitis, bydeﬁnition, the average distance between Earth and the Sun, 1.496×1011m. The graph ofKepler’s third law shown in Fig. 3 was prepared using data for each planet in our SolarSyste . mIn retrospect it is easy to understand why the assumption of uniform and circular motionﬁrst proposed nearly 2000 years earlier was not determined to be wrong much sooner;in most cases, planetary motion differs little from purely circular motion. In fact, it wasactually fortuitous that Kepler chose to focus on Mars, since the data for that planet wereparticularly good and Mars deviates from circular motion more than most of the others.The Geometry of Elliptical MotionTo appreciate the signiﬁcance of Kepler’s laws, we must ﬁrst understand the nature of theellipse. An ellipse (see Fig. 4) is deﬁned by that set of points that satisﬁes the equationr+r′=2a,(1)whereais a constant known as thesemimajor axis(half the length of the long, or majoraxis of the ellipse), andrandr′represent the distances to the ellipse from the twofocalCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 43>>>

MercuryVenusMarsJupiterSaturnUranusNeptunePluto
Earth1010.1Semimajor axis (AU)0.1110100Period (yr)FIGURE 3Kepler’s third law for planets orbiting the Sun.
/H9258FF'arr'baeFIGURE 4The geometry of an elliptical orbit.points,FandF′, respectively. According to Kepler’s ﬁrst law, a planet orbits the Sun in anellipse, with the Sun located at one focus of the ellipse, theprincipal focus,F(the otherfocus is empty space). Notice that ifFandF′were located at the same point, thenr′=rand the previous equation would reduce tor=r′=a, the equation for a circle. Thus acircle is simply a special case of an ellipse. The distancebis known as thesemiminor axis.Theeccentricity,e(0≤e<1), of the ellipse is deﬁned as the distance between the focidivided by the major axis, 2a, of the ellipse, implying that the distance of either focal pointfrom the center of the ellipse may be expressed asae. For a circle,e=0. The point on theellipse that is closest to the principal focus (located on the major axis) is calledperihelion;the point on the opposite end of the major axis and farthest from the principal focus isknown asaphelion.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 44>>>

A convenient relationship amonga,b, andemay be determined geometrically. Considerone of the two points at either end of the semiminor axis of an ellipse, wherer=r′.In this case,r=aand, by the Pythagorean theorem,r2=b2+a2e2. Substitution leadsimmediately to the expressionb2=a2⎝parenleftbig1−e2⎝parenrightbig.(2)Kepler’s second law states that the orbital speed of a planet depends on itslocationinthat orbit. To describe in detail the orbital behavior of a planet, it is necessary to specifywhere that planet is (its position vector) as well as how fast, and in what direction, theplanet is moving (its velocity vector). It is often most convenient to express a planet’s orbitin polar coordinates, indicating its distancerfrom the principal focus in terms of an angleθmeasured counterclockwise from the major axis of the ellipse beginning with the directiontoward perihelion (see Fig. 4). Using the Pythagorean theorem, we haver′2=r2sin2θ+(2ae+rcosθ)2,which reduces tor′2=r2+4ae(ae+rcosθ).Using the deﬁnition of an ellipse,r+r′=2a, we ﬁnd thatr=a⎝parenleftbig1−e2⎝parenrightbig1+ecosθ(0≤e<1).(3)It is left as an exercise to show that the total area of an ellipse is given byA=πab.(4)Example 1.1.Using Eq. ( 3), it is possible to determine the variation in distance ofa planet from the principal focus throughout its orbit. The semimajor axis of Mars’s orbitis 1.5237 AU (or 2.2794×1011m) and the planet’s orbital eccentricity is 0.0934. Whenθ=0◦, the planet is at perihelion and is at a distance given byrp=a⎝parenleftbig1−e2⎝parenrightbig1+e=a(1−e)(5)=1.3814 AU.continuedCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 45>>>

Similarly, at aphelion (θ=180◦), the point where Mars is farthest from the Sun, the distanceis given byra=a⎝parenleftbig1−e2⎝parenrightbig1−e=a(1+e)(6)=1.6660 AU.The variation in Mars’s orbital distance from the Sun between perihelion and aphelion isapproximately 19%.An ellipse is actually one of a class of curves known as conic sections, found by passinga plane through a cone (see Fig. 5). Each type of conic section has its own characteristicrange of eccentricities. As already mentioned, a circle is a conic section withe=0, and anellipse has 0≤e<1. A curve havinge=1 is known as aparabolaand is described bythe equationr=2p1+cosθ(e=1),(7)wherepis the distance of closest approach to the parabola’sonefocus, atθ=0. Curves
Circle
ParabolaEllipse
HyperbolaEllipsee = 0.6a = 2.5Parabolae = 1.0a = 1.0Hyperbolae = 1.4a = 2.5Circlee = 0.0a = 1.0Focus
(a)(b)FIGURE 5(a) Conic sections. (b) Related orbital paths.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 46>>>

having eccentricities greater than unity,e>1, arehyperbolasand have the formr=a⎝parenleftbige2−1⎝parenrightbig1+ecosθ(e >1).(8)Each type of conic section is related to a speciﬁc form of celestial motion.2NEWTONIAN MECHANICSAt the time Kepler was developing his three laws of planetary motion, Galileo Galilei(1564–1642), perhaps the ﬁrst of the true experimental physicists, was studying the motionof objects on Earth [Fig. 6(a)]. It was Galileo who proposed the earliest formulation of theconcept of inertia. He had also developed an understanding of acceleration; in particular, herealized that objects near the surface of Earth fall with the same acceleration, independentof their weight. Whether Galileo publicly proved this fact by dropping objects of differingweights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa is a matter of some debate.The Observations of GalileoGalileo is also the father of modern observational astronomy. Shortly after learning aboutthe 1608 invention of the ﬁrst crude spyglass, he thought through its design and constructedhis own. Using his new telescope to carefully observe the heavens, Galileo quickly madea number of important observations in support of the heliocentric model of the universe.In particular, he discovered that the band of light known as the Milky Way, which runsfrom horizon to horizon, is not merely a cloud, as had previously been supposed, but
(a)(b)FIGURE 6(a) Galileo Galilei (1564–1642). (b) Isaac Newton (1642–1727). (Courtesy of YerkesObservatory.)Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 47>>>

actually contains an enormous number of individual stars not resolvable by the naked eye.Galileo also observed that the Moon possesses craters and therefore is not a perfect sphere.Observations of the varying phases of Venus implied that the planet does not shine by its ownpower, but must be reﬂecting sunlight from constantly changing angles relative to the Sunand Earth while it orbits the Sun. He also discovered that the Sun itself is blemished, havingsunspots that vary in number and location. But perhaps the most damaging observation forthe geocentric model, a model still strongly supported by the Church, was the discovery offour moons in orbit about Jupiter, indicating the existence of at least one other center ofmotion in the universe.Many of Galileo’s ﬁrst observations were published in his bookSidereus Nuncius(TheStarry Messenger) in 1610. By 1616 the Church forced him to withdraw his support of theCopernican model, although he was able to continue his study of astronomy for some years.In 1632 Galileo published another work,The Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems,i nwhich a three-character play was staged. In the play Salviati was the proponent of Galileo’sviews, Simplicio believed in the oldAristotelian view, and Sagredo acted as the neutral thirdparty who was invariably swayed by Salviati’s arguments. In a strong reaction, Galileo wascalled before the Roman Inquisition and his book was heavily censored. The book was thenplaced on theIndexof banned books, a collection of titles that included works of Copernicusand Kepler. Galileo was put under house arrest for the remainder of his life, serving out histerm at his home in Florence.In 1992, after a 13-year study by Vatican experts, Pope John Paul II ofﬁcially announcedthat, because of a “tragic mutual incomprehension,” the Roman Catholic Church had erredin its condemnation of Galileo some 360 years earlier. By reevaluating its position, theChurch demonstrated that, at least on this issue, there is room for the philosophical viewsof both science and religion.Newton’s Three Laws of MotionIsaac Newton (1642–1727), arguably the greatest of any scientiﬁc mind in history[Fig. 6(b)], was born on Christmas Day in the year of Galileo’s death. At age 18, Newtonenrolled at Cambridge University and subsequently obtained his bachelor’s degree. In thetwo years following the completion of his formal studies, and while living at home in Wool-sthorpe, in rural England, away from the immediate dangers of the Plague, Newton engagedin what was likely the most productive period of scientiﬁc work ever carried out by oneindividual. During that interval, he made signiﬁcant discoveries and theoretical advancesin understanding motion, astronomy, optics, and mathematics. Although his work was notpublished immediately, thePhilosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica(MathematicalPrinciples of Natural Philosophy), now simply known as thePrincipia, ﬁnally appearedin 1687 and contained much of his work on mechanics, gravitation, and the calculus. Thepublication of thePrincipiacame about largely as a result of the urging of Edmond Halley,who paid for its printing. Another book,Optiks, appeared separately in 1704 and containedNewton’s ideas about the nature of light and some of his early experiments in optics.Although many of his ideas concerning the particle nature of light were later shown to bein error,muchofNewton’sotherworkisstillusedextensivelytoday.Newton’s great intellect is evidenced in his solution of the so-called brachistochroneproblem posed by Johann Bernoulli, the Swiss mathematician, as a challenge to his col-Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 48>>>

leagues. The brachistochrone problem amounts to ﬁnding the curve along which a beadcould slide over a frictionless wire in the least amount of time while under the inﬂuenceonly of gravity. The deadline for ﬁnding a solution was set at a year and a half. The problemwas presented to Newton late one afternoon; by the next morning he had found the answerby inventing a new area of mathematics known as the calculus of variations. Although thesolution was published anonymously at Newton’s request, Bernoulli commented, “By theclaw, the lion is revealed.”Concerning the successes of his own career, Newton wrote:I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to havebeen only like a boy, playing on the seashore, and diverting myself, in now andthen ﬁnding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, while the greatocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.Today, classical mechanics is described by Newton’s three laws of motion, along with hisuniversallaw of gravity. Outside of the realms of atomic dimensions, velocities approachingthe speed of light, or extreme gravitational forces, Newtonian physics has proved verysuccessful in explaining the results of observations and experiments. Those regimes whereNewtonian mechanics have been shown to be unsatisfactory will be discussed in laterchapters.Newton’s ﬁrst law of motion may be stated as follows:Newton’s First LawThe Law of Inertia.An object at rest will remain at restand an object in motion will remain in motion in a straight line at a constantspeed unless acted upon by an external force.To establish whether an object is actually moving, a reference frame must be established. Inlater chapters we will refer to reference frames that have the special property that the ﬁrstlaw is valid; all such frames are known asinertial reference frames. Noninertial referenceframes are accelerated with respect to inertial frames.The ﬁrst law may be restated in terms of the momentum of an object,p=mv, wheremandvare mass and velocity, respectively.2Thus Newton’s ﬁrst law may be expressed as“the momentum of an object remains constant unless it experiences an external force.”3The second law is actually a deﬁnition of the concept of force:Newton’s Second LawThenetforce (the sum of all forces) acting on an objectis proportional to the object’s mass and its resultant acceleration.If an object is experiencingnforces, then the net force is given byFnet=n⎝summationdisplayi=1Fi=ma.(9)2Hereafter, all vectors will be indicated by boldface type. Vectors are quantities described by both a magnitudeand a direction. Some texts use alternate notations for vectors, expressing them either as⃗vor⃗v.3The law of inertia is an extension of the original concept developed by Galileo.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 49>>>

m1m2F21F12FIGURE 7Newton’s third law.However, assuming that the mass is constant and using the deﬁnitiona≡dv/dt, Newton’ssecond law may also be expressed asFnet=mdvdt=d(mv)dt=dpdt;(10)the net force on an object is equal to the time rate of change of its momentum,p.Fnet=dp/dtactually represents the most general statement of the second law, allowing for a timevariation in the mass of the object such as occurs with rocket propulsion.The third law of motion is generally expressed as follows:Newton’s Third LawFor every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.In this law,actionandreactionare to be interpreted as forces acting on different objects.Consider the force exertedonone object (object 1)bya second object (object 2),F12.Newton’s third law states that the force exerted on object 2 by object 1,F21, must necessarilybe of the same magnitude but in the opposite direction (see Fig. 7). Mathematically, thethird law can be represented asF12=−F21.Newton’s Law of Universal GravitationUsing his three laws of motion along with Kepler’s third law, Newton was able to ﬁnd anexpression describing the force that holds planets in their orbits. Consider the special caseofcircularorbital motion of a massmabout a much larger massM(M≫m). Allowingfor a system of units other than years and astronomical units, Kepler’s third law may bewritten asP2=kr3,whereris the distance between the two objects andkis a constant of proportionality. Writingthe period of the orbit in terms of the orbit’s circumference and the constant velocity ofmyieldsP=2πrv,and substituting into the prior equation gives4π2r2v2=kr3.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 50>>>

Rearranging terms and multiplying both sides bymlead to the expressionmv2r=4π2mkr2.The left-hand side of the equation may be recognized as the centripetal force for circularmotion, soF=4π2mkr2must be the gravitational force keepingmin its orbit aboutM. However, Newton’s thirdlaw states that the magnitude of the force exerted onMbymmust equal the magnitude ofthe force exerted onmbyM. Therefore, the form of the equation ought to be symmetricwith respect to exchange ofmandM, implyingF=4π2Mk′r2.Expressing this symmetry explicitly and grouping the remaining constants into a new con-stant, we haveF=4π2Mmk′′r2,wherek=k′′/Mandk′=k′′/m. Finally, introducing a new constant,G≡4π2/k′′,w earrive at the form of theLaw of Universal Gravitationfound by Newton,F=GMmr2,(11)whereG=6.673×10−11Nm2kg−2(theUniversal Gravitational Constant).4Newton’s law of gravity applies to any two objects having mass. In particular, for anextended object (as opposed to a point mass), the force exerted by that object on anotherextended object may be found by integrating over each of their mass distributions.Example1.The force exerted by aspherically symmetricobject of massMon a pointmassmmay be found by integrating over rings centered along a line connecting the pointmass to the center of the extended object (see Fig. 8). In this way all points on a speciﬁcring are located at the same distance fromm. Furthermore, because of the symmetry ofthe ring, the gravitational force vector associated with it is oriented along the ring’s centralaxis. Once a general description of the force due to one ring is determined, it is possible toadd up the individual contributions from all such rings throughout the entire volume of themassM. The result will be the force onmdue toM.continued4At the time this text was written, the uncertainty inGwas±0.010×10−11Nm2kg−2.Celestial Mechanics
2.


<<<PAGE 51>>>

R0Rrms
MdMringFIGURE 8The gravitational effect of a spherically symmetric mass distribution.Letrbe the distance between the centers of the two masses,Mandm.R0is the radiusof the large mass, andsis the distance from the point mass to a point on the ring. Becauseof the symmetry of the problem, only the component of the gravitational force vector alongthe line connecting the centers of the two objects needs to be calculated; the perpendicularcomponents will cancel. IfdMringis the mass of theringbeing considered, the force exertedby that ring onmis given bydFring=GmdMrings2cosφ.Assuming that the mass density,ρ(R), of the extended object is a function of radius onlyand that the volume of the ring of thicknessdRisdVring, weﬁnd thatdMring=ρ(R) dVring=ρ(R)2πRsinθRd θd R=2πR2ρ(R)sinθd Rd θ .The cosine is given bycosφ=r−Rcosθs,wheresmay be found by the Pythagorean theorem:s=⎝radicalBig(r−Rcosθ)2+R2sin2θ=⎝radicalbigr2−2rRcosθ+R2.Substituting into the expression fordFring, summing over allringslocated at a distanceRfrom the center of the massM(i.e., integrating over allθfrom 0 toπfor constantR), andthen summing over all resultantshellsof radiusRfromR=0t oR=R0give the totalCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 52>>>

force of gravity acting on the small massmalong the system’s line of symmetry:F=Gm⎝integraldisplayR00⎝integraldisplayπ0(r−Rcosθ)ρ(R)2πR2sinθs3dθ dR=2πGm⎝integraldisplayR00⎝integraldisplayπ0rR2ρ(R)sinθ⎝parenleftbigr2+R2−2rRcosθ⎝parenrightbig3/2dθ dR−2πGm⎝integraldisplayR00⎝integraldisplayπ0R3ρ(R)sinθcosθ⎝parenleftbigr2+R2−2rRcosθ⎝parenrightbig3/2dθ dR.The integrations overθmay be carried out by making the change of variable,u≡s2=r2+R2−2rRcosθ. Then cosθ=(r2+R2−u)/2rRand sinθd θ=du/2rR. After theappropriate substitutions and integration over the new variableu, the equation for the forcebecomesF=Gmr2⎝integraldisplayR004πR2ρ(R) dR.Notice that the integrand is just the mass of ashellof thicknessdR, having a volumedVshell,ordMshell=4πR2ρ(R) dR=ρ(R) dVshell.Therefore, the integrand gives the force onmdue to a spherically symmetric mass shell ofmassdMshellasdFshell=Gm dMshellr2.The shell acts gravitationally as if its mass were located entirely at its center.Finally,integrating over the mass shells, we have that the force exerted onmby an extended,spherically symmetric mass distribution is directed along the line of symmetry between thetwo objects and is given byF=GMmr2,just the equation for the force of gravity between two point masses.When an object is dropped near the surface of Earth, it accelerates toward the center ofEarth at the rateg=9.80 m s−2, the local acceleration of gravity. Using Newton’s secondlaw and his law of gravity, an expression for the acceleration of gravity may be found. Ifmis the mass of the falling object,M⊕andR⊕are the mass and radius of Earth, respectively,andhis the height of the object above Earth, then the force of gravity onmdue to Earth isgiven byF=GM⊕m(R⊕+h)2.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 53>>>

Assuming thatmis near Earth’s surface, thenh≪R⊕andF≃GM⊕mR2⊕.However,F=ma=mg; thusg=GM⊕R2⊕.(12)Substituting the valuesM⊕=5.9736×1024kg andR⊕=6.378136×106m gives a valueforgin agreement with the measured value.The Orbit of the MoonThe famous story that an apple falling on Newton’s head allowed him to immediatelyrealize that gravity holds the Moon in its orbit is probably somewhat fanciful and inaccurate.However, he did demonstrate that, along with the acceleration of the falling apple, gravitywas responsible for the motion of Earth’s closest neighbor.Example 2.2.Assuming for simplicity that the Moon’s orbit is exactly circular, wecan calculate the centripetal acceleration of the Moon rapidly. Recall that the centripetalacceleration of an object moving in a perfect circle is given byac=v2r.In this case,ris the distance from the center of Earth to the center of the Moon,r=3.84401×108m, andvis the Moon’s orbital velocity, given byv=2πrP,whereP=27.3 days=2.36×106s is the sidereal orbital period of the Moon. Findingv=1.02 km s−1gives a value for the centripetal acceleration ofac=0.0027 m s−2.The acceleration of the Moon caused by Earth’s gravitational pull may also be calculateddirectly fromag=GM⊕r2=0.0027 m s−2,in agreement with the value for the centripetal acceleration.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 54>>>

Work and EnergyIn astrophysics, as in any area of physics, it is often very helpful to have some understand-ing of the energetics of speciﬁc physical phenomena in order to determine whether theseprocesses are important in certain systems. Some models may be ruled out immediatelyif they are incapable of producing the amount of energy observed. Energy arguments alsooften result in simpler solutions to particular problems. For example, in the evolution of aplanetary atmosphere, the possibility of a particular component of the atmosphere escapingmust be considered. Such a consideration is based on a calculation of the escape speed ofthe gas particles.The amount of energy (the work) necessary to raise an object of massma heighthagainst a gravitational force is equal to the change in thepotential energyof the system.Generally, the change in potential energy resulting from a change in position between twopoints is given byUf−Ui=/Delta1U=−⎝integraldisplayrfriF·dr,(13)whereFis the force vector,riandrfare the initial andﬁnal position vectors, respectively,anddris the inﬁnitesimal change in the position vector for some general coordinate system(see Fig. 9). If the gravitational force onmis due to a massMlocated at the origin, thenFis directed inward towardM,dris directed outward,F·dr=−Fd r, and the change inpotential energy becomes/Delta1U=⎝integraldisplayrfriGMmr2dr.Evaluating the integral, we haveUf−Ui=−GMm⎝parenleftbigg1rf−1ri⎝parenrightbigg.
MxymzrfridrF
FIGURE 9Gravitational potential energy. The amount of work done depends on the direction ofmotion relative to the direction of the force vector.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 55>>>

Since onlyrelative changesin potential energy are physically meaningful, a referenceposition where the potential energy is deﬁned as being identically zero may be chosen. If,for a speciﬁc gravitational system, it is assumed that the potential energy goes to zero atinﬁnity, lettingrfapproach inﬁnity (rf→∞) and dropping the subscripts for simplicitygiveU=−GMmr.(14)Of course, the process can be reversed: The force may be found bydifferentiatingthegravitational potential energy. For forces that depend only onr,F=−∂U∂r.(15)In a general three-dimensional description,F=− ∇U, where∇Urepresents thegradientofU. In rectangular coordinates this becomesF=−∂U∂xˆi−∂U∂yˆj−∂U∂zˆk.Work must be performed on a massive object if itsspeed,|v|, is to be changed. This canbe seen by rewriting the work integral,ﬁrst in terms of time, then speed:W≡−/Delta1U=⎝integraldisplayrfriF·dr=⎝integraldisplaytftidpdt·(vdt)=⎝integraldisplaytftimdvdt·(vdt)=⎝integraldisplaytftim⎝parenleftbiggv·dvdt⎝parenrightbiggdt=⎝integraldisplaytftimd⎝parenleftbig12v2⎝parenrightbigdtdt=⎝integraldisplayvfvimd⎝parenleftbigg12v2⎝parenrightbigg=12mv2f−12mv2i.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 56>>>

We may now identify the quantityK=12mv2(16)as thekinetic energyof the object. Thus work done on the particle results in an equiva-lent change in the particle’s kinetic energy. This statement is simply one example of theconservation of energy, a concept that is encountered frequently in all areas of physics.Consider a particle of massmthat has an initial velocityvand is at a distancerfromthe center of a larger massM, such as Earth. How fast must the mass be moving upward tocompletely escape the pull of gravity? To calculate theescape speed, energy conservationmay be used directly. The total initial mechanical energy of the particle (both kinetic andpotential) is given byE=12mv2−GMmr.Assume that, in the critical case, theﬁnal velocity of the mass will be zero at a positioninﬁnitely far fromM, implying that both the kinetic and potential energy will become zero.Clearly, by conservation of energy, thetotalenergy of the particle must be identically zeroat all times. Thus12mv2=GMmr,which may be solved immediately for the initial speed ofmto givevesc=⎝radicalbig2GM/r.(17)Notice that the mass of the escaping object does not enter into theﬁnal expression for theescape speed. Near the surface of Earth,vesc=11.2 km s−1.3KEPLER’S LAWS DERIVEDAlthough Kepler didﬁnally determine that the geometry of planetary motion was in the moregeneral form of an ellipse rather than circular motion, he was unable to explain the natureof the force that kept the planets moving in their precise patterns. Not only was Newtonsuccessful in quantifying that force, he was also able to generalize Kepler’s work, derivingthe empirical laws of planetary motion from the gravitational force law. The derivation ofKepler’s laws represented a crucial step in the development of modern astrophysics.The Center-of-Mass Reference FrameHowever, before proceeding onward to derive Kepler’s laws, it will be useful to examinemore closely the dynamics of orbital motion. An interacting two-body problem, such asCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 57>>>

z'
x'y'rRr'2r'1m2Mm1
FIGURE 10A general Cartesian coordinate system indicating the positions ofm1,m2, and thecenter of mass (located atM).binary orbits, or the more general many-body problem (often called theN-body problem),is most easily done in the reference frame of thecenter of mass.Figure 10 shows two objects of massesm1andm2at positionsr′1andr′2, respectively,with the displacement vector fromr′1tor′2given byr=r′2−r′1.Deﬁne a position vectorRto be aweightedaverage of the position vectors of the individualmasses,R≡m1r′1+m2r′2m1+m2.(18)Of course, this deﬁnition can be immediately generalized to the case ofnobjects,R≡⎝summationtextni=1mir′i⎝summationtextni=1mi.Rewriting the equation, we haven⎝summationdisplayi=1miR=n⎝summationdisplayi=1mir′i.Then, if we deﬁneMto be the total mass of the system,M≡⎝summationtextni=1mi, the previous equationbecomesMR=n⎝summationdisplayi=1mir′i.Assuming that the individual masses do not change, differentiating both sides with respectCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 58>>>

to time givesMdRdt=n⎝summationdisplayi=1midr′idtorMV=n⎝summationdisplayi=1miv′i.The right-hand side is the sum of the linear momenta of every particle in the system,so the total linear momentum of the system may be treated as thoughallof the mass werelocated atR, moving with a velocityV. ThusRis the position of the center of mass of thesystem, andVis the center-of-mass velocity. LettingP≡MVbe the linear momentum ofthe center of mass andp′i≡miv′ibe the linear momentum of an individual particlei, andagain differentiating both sides with respect to time, yieldsdPdt=n⎝summationdisplayi=1dp′idt.If we assume thatallof the forces acting on individual particles in the system are due toother particles contained within the system, Newton’s third law requires that the total forcemust be zero. This constraint exists because of the equal magnitudes and opposite directionsof action–reaction pairs. Of course, the momentum of individual masses may change. Usingcenter-of-mass quantities, weﬁnd that the total (or net) force on the system isF=dPdt=Md2Rdt2=0.Therefore, the center of mass will not accelerate if no external forces exist. This impliesthat a reference frame associated with the center of mass must be an inertial reference frameand that theN-body problem may be simpliﬁed by choosing a coordinate system for whichthe center of mass is at rest atR=0.If we choose a center-of-mass reference frame for a binary system, depicted in Fig. 11(R=0), Eq. ( 18) becomesm1r1+m2r2m1+m2=0,(19)where the primes have been dropped, indicating center-of-mass coordinates. Bothr1andr2may now be rewritten in terms of the displacement vector,r. Substitutingr2=r1+rgivesr1=−m2m1+m2r(20)r2=m1m1+m2r.(21)Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 59>>>

xyzm1r1r2m2MFIGURE 11The center-of-mass reference frame for a binary orbit, with the center of massﬁxedat the origin of the coordinate system.Next, deﬁne thereduced massto beµ≡m1m2m1+m2.(22)Thenr1andr2becomer1=−µm1rr2=µm2r.(23)(24)The convenience of the center-of-mass reference frame becomes evident when the totalenergy and orbital angular momentum of the system are considered. Including the necessarykinetic energy and gravitational potential energy terms, the total energy may be expressedasE=12m1|v1|2+12m2|v2|2−Gm1m2|r2−r1|.Substituting the relations forr1andr2, along with the expression for the total mass of thesystem and the deﬁnition for the reduced mass, givesE=12µv2−GMµr,(25)wherev=|v|andv≡dr/dt. We have also used the notationr=|r2−r1|. The totalenergy of the system is equal to the kinetic energy of the reduced mass, plus the potentialenergy of the reduced mass moving about a massM, assumed to be located andﬁxed atthe origin. The distance betweenµandMis equal to the separation between the objects ofmassesm1andm2.Similarly, the total orbital angular momentum,L=m1r1×v1+m2r2×v2Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 60>>>

xyz/H9262rMFIGURE 12A binary orbit may be reduced to the equivalent problem of calculating the motionof the reduced mass,µ, about the total mass,M, located at the origin.becomesL=µr×v=r×p,(26)wherep≡µv. The total orbital angular momentum equals the angular momentum of thereduced mass only.In general, the two-body problem may be treated as an equivalent one-body problem with the reduced massµmoving about aﬁxed massMat a distancer(seeFig. 12).The Derivation of Kepler’s First LawTo obtain Kepler’s laws, we begin by considering the effect of gravitation on the orbitalangular momentum of a planet. Using center-of-mass coordinates and evaluating the timederivative of the orbital angular momentum of the reduced mass (Eq. 26) givedLdt=drdt×p+r×dpdt=v×p+r×F,the second expression arising from the deﬁnition of velocity and Newton’s second law.Notice that becausevandpare in the same direction, their cross product is identically zero.Similarly, sinceFis a central force directed inward alongr, the cross product ofrandFisalso zero. The result is an important general statement concerning angular momentum:dLdt=0,(27)the angular momentum of a system is a constant for a central force law. Equation ( 26)further shows that the position vectorris always perpendicular to the constant angularmomentum vectorL, meaning that the orbit of the reduced mass lies in a plane perpendiculartoL.Using the radial unit vectorˆr(sor=rˆr), we can write the angular momentum vectorin an alternative form asL=µr×v=µrˆr×ddt(rˆr)Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 61>>>

=µrˆr×⎝parenleftbiggdrdtˆr+rddtˆr⎝parenrightbigg=µr2ˆr×ddtˆr.(The last result comes from the fact thatˆr×ˆr=0.) In vector form, the acceleration of thereduced mass due to the gravitational force exerted byMisa=−GMr2ˆr.Taking the vector cross product of the acceleration of the reduced mass with its own orbitalangular momentum givesa×L=−GMr2ˆr×⎝parenleftbiggµr2ˆr×ddtˆr⎝parenrightbigg=−GMµˆr×⎝parenleftbiggˆr×ddtˆr⎝parenrightbigg.Applying the vector identityA×(B×C)=(A·C)B−(A·B)Cresults ina×L=−GMµ⎝bracketleftbigg⎝parenleftbiggˆr·ddtˆr⎝parenrightbiggˆr−⎝parenleftbigˆr·ˆr⎝parenrightbigddtˆr⎝bracketrightbigg.Becauseˆris a unit vector,ˆr·ˆr=1 andddt(ˆr·ˆr)=2ˆr·ddtˆr=0.As a result,a×L=GMµddtˆror, by referring to Eq. ( 27),ddt(v×L)=ddt(GMµˆr).Integrating with respect to time then yieldsv×L=GMµˆr+D,(28)whereDis a constant vector. Becausev×Landˆrboth lie in the orbital plane, so mustD. Furthermore, the magnitude of the left-hand side will be greatest at perihelion when thevelocity of the reduced mass is a maximum. Moreover, the magnitude of the right-handside is greatest whenˆrandDpoint in the same direction. Therefore,Dis directed towardperihelion. As shown below, the magnitude ofDdetermines the eccentricity of the orbit.We next take the vector dot product of Eq. ( 28) with the position vectorr=rˆr:r·(v×L)=GMµrˆr·ˆr+r·D.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 62>>>

Invoking the vector identityA·(B×C)=(A×B)·Cgives(r×v)·L=GMµr+rDcosθ.Finally, recalling the deﬁnition of angular momentum (Eq. 26), we obtainL2µ=GMµr⎝parenleftbigg1+DcosθGMµ⎝parenrightbigg,whereθis the angle of the reduced mass as measured from the direction to perihelion.Deﬁninge≡D/GMµand solving forr, weﬁndKepler’s First Law (revisited)r=L2/µ2GM(1+ecosθ).(29)This is exactly the equation of a conic section, as may be seen by comparing Eq. ( 29)with Eqs. ( 3), ( 7), and ( 8) for an ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola, respectively.Thepath of the reduced mass about the center of mass under the inﬂuence of gravity (or anyother inverse-square force) is a conic section.Elliptical orbits result from an attractiver−2central-force law such as gravity when the total energy of the system is less than zero (abound system), parabolic trajectories are obtained when the energy is identically zero, andhyperbolic paths result from an unbounded system with an energy that is greater than zero.When Eq. ( 29) is translated back to a physical reference frame on the sky, weﬁndthat Kepler’sﬁrst law for bound planetary orbits may be stated as:Both objects in a binaryorbit move about the center of mass in ellipses, with the center of mass occupying onefocus of each ellipse.Newton was able to demonstrate the elliptical behavior of planetarymotion and found that Kepler’sﬁrst law must be generalized somewhat: The center of massof the system, rather than the exact center of the Sun, is actually located at the focus ofthe ellipse. For our Solar System, such a mistake is understandable, since the largest ofthe planets, Jupiter, has only 1/1000 the mass of the Sun. This places the center of massof the Sun–Jupiter system near the surface of the Sun. Having used the naked-eye data ofTycho, Kepler can be forgiven for not realizing his error.For the case of closed planetary orbits, comparing Eqs. ( 3) and ( 29) shows that thetotal orbital angular momentum of the system isL=µ⎝radicalBigGMa⎝parenleftbig1−e2⎝parenrightbig.(30)Note thatLis a maximum for purely circular motion (e=0) and goes to zero as theeccentricity approaches unity, as expected.The Derivation of Kepler’s Second LawTo derive Kepler’s second law, which relates the area of a section of an ellipse to a timeinterval, we begin by considering the inﬁnitesimal area element in polar coordinates, asCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 63>>>

d/H9258r d/H9258dA = r dr d/H9258rdrFIGURE 13The inﬁnitesimal area element in polar coordinates.shown in Fig. 13:dA=dr (r dθ)=rd rd θ .If we integrate from the principal focus of the ellipse to a speciﬁc distance,r, the area sweptout by an inﬁnitesimal change inθbecomesdA=12r2dθ.Therefore, the time rate of change in area swept out by a line joining a point on the ellipseto the focus becomesdAdt=12r2dθdt.(31)Now the orbital velocity,v, may be expressed in two components, one directed alongrandthe other perpendicular tor. Lettingˆrandˆθbe the unit vectors alongrand its normal,respectively,vmay be written as (see Fig. 14)v=vr+vθ=drdtˆr+rdθdtˆθ.Substitutingvθinto Eq. ( 31) givesdAdt=12rvθ.Sincerandvθare perpendicular,rvθ=|r×v|=⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingleLµ⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle=Lµ.Finally, the time derivative of the area becomesKepler’s Second Law (revisited)dAdt=12Lµ.(32)Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 64>>>

/H9258Frv/H9258vvr
FIGURE 14The velocity vector for elliptical motion in polar coordinates.It has already been shown that the orbital angular momentum is a constant, sothe time rateof change of the area swept out by a line connecting a planet to the focus of an ellipse isa constant, one-half of the orbital angular momentum per unit mass. This is just Kepler’ssecond law.Expressions for the speed of the reduced mass at perihelion (θ=0) and aphelion (θ=π/2) may be easily obtained from Eq. ( 29). Since at both perihelion and aphelion,randvare perpendicular, the magnitude of the angular momentum at these points simply becomesL=µrv.Eq. ( 29) at perihelion may thus be written asrp=(µrpvp)2/µ2GM(1+e),whereas at aphelionra=(µrava)2/µ2GM(1−e).RecallingfromExample.1thatrp=a(1−e)at perihelion andra=a(1+e)at aphe-lion, we immediately obtainv2p=GM(1+e)rp=GMa⎝parenleftbigg1+e1−e⎝parenrightbigg(33)at perihelion andv2a=GM(1−e)ra=GMa⎝parenleftbigg1−e1+e⎝parenrightbigg.(34)at aphelion. Celestial Mechanics
1


<<<PAGE 65>>>

The total orbital energy may be found as well:E=12µv2p−GMµrp.Making the appropriate substitutions, and after some rearrangement,E=−GMµ2a=−Gm1m22a.(35)The total energy of a binary orbit depends only on the semimajor axisaand is exactlyone-half the time-averaged potential energy of the system,E=12⟨U⟩,where⟨U⟩denotes an average over one orbital period.5This is one example of thevirialtheorem, a general property of gravitationally bound systems. The virial theorem will bediscussedindetailinSection4.A useful expression for the velocity of the reduced mass (or the relative velocity ofm1andm2) may be found directly by using the conservation of energy and equating the totalorbital energy to the sum of the kinetic and potential energies:−GMµ2a=12µv2−GMµr.Using the identityM=m1+m2, this simpliﬁes to givev2=G(m1+m2)⎝parenleftbigg2r−1a⎝parenrightbigg.(36)This expression could also have been obtained directly by adding the vector componentsof orbital velocity. Calculatingvr,vθ, andv2will be left as exercises.The Derivation of Kepler’s Third LawWe areﬁnally in a position to derive the last of Kepler’s laws. Integrating the mathematicalexpression for Kepler’s second law (Eq. 32) over one orbital period,P, gives the resultA=12LµP.Here the massmorbiting about a much largerﬁxedmassMhas been replaced by the moregeneral reduced massµorbiting about the center of mass. Substituting the area of an ellipse,5The proof that⟨U⟩=−GMµ/ais left as an exercise. Note that the time average,⟨1/r⟩, is equal to 1/a, but⟨r⟩̸=a.Celestial Mechanics
 


<<<PAGE 66>>>

A=πab, squaring the equation, and rearranging, we obtain the expressionP2=4π2a2b2µ2L2.Finally, using Eq. ( 2) and the expression for the total orbital angular momentum (Eq. 30),the last equation simpliﬁes to becomeKepler’s Third Law (revisited)P2=4π2G(m1+m2)a3.(37)This is the general form of Kepler’s third law. Not only did Newton demonstrate the re-lationship between the semimajor axis of an elliptical orbit and the orbital period, he alsofound a term not discovered empirically by Kepler, the square of the orbital period is in-versely proportional to the total mass of the system. Once again Kepler can be forgivenfor not noticing the effect. Tycho’s data were for our Solar System only, and because theSun’s massM⊙is so much greater than the mass of any of the planets,M⊙+mplanet≃M⊙.ExpressingPin years andain astronomical units gives a value of unity for the collectionof constants (including the Sun’s mass).6The importance to astronomy of Newton’s form of Kepler’s third law cannot be over-stated. This law provides the most direct way of obtaining masses of celestial objects, acritical parameter in understanding a wide range of phenomena. Kepler’s laws, as derivedby Newton, apply equally well to planets orbiting the Sun, moons orbiting planets, starsin orbit about one another, and galaxy–galaxy orbits. Knowledge of the period of an orbitand the semimajor axis of the ellipse yields the total mass of the system. If relative dis-tances to the center of mass are also known, the individual masses may be determined usingEq. ( 19).Example 3.1.The orbital sidereal period of Io, one of the four Galilean moons of Jupiter,is 1.77 days=1.53×105s and the semimajor axis of its orbit is 4.22×108m. Assumingthat the mass of Io is insigniﬁcant compared to that of Jupiter, the mass of the planet maybe estimated using Kepler’s third law:MJupiter=4π2Ga3P2=1.90×1027kg=318 M⊕.discussedinthischapter.mass that is orbiting about a much larger star (or it may be thought of as calculating themotion of the reduced mass about the total mass). Data generated byOrbitwere used toproduceFig.2.6In 1621 Kepler was able to demonstrate that the four Galilean moons also obeyed his third law in the formP2=ka3, where the constantkdiffered from unity. He did not attribute the fact thatk̸=1 to mass, however.is asimplecomputerprogramthatmakesuseofmanyoftheideast willcalculate,asafunctionoftime,thelocationofasmallCelestial Mechanics
IOrbit


<<<PAGE 67>>>

4THE VIRIAL THEOREMIn the last section we found that the total energy of the binary orbit was just one-half ofthe time-averaged gravitational potential energy (Eq. 35), orE=⟨U⟩/2. Since the totalenergy of the system is negative, the system is necessarily bound. For gravitationally boundsystems in equilibrium, it can be shown that the total energy is always one-half of thetime-averaged potential energy; this is known as thevirial theorem.To prove the virial theorem, begin by considering the quantityQ≡⎝summationdisplayipi·ri,wherepiandriare the linear momentum and position vectors for particleiin some inertialreference frame, and the sum is taken to be over all particles in the system. The timederivative ofQisdQdt=⎝summationdisplayi⎝parenleftbiggdpidt·ri+pi·dridt⎝parenrightbigg.(38)Now, the left-hand side of the expression is justdQdt=ddt⎝summationdisplayimidridt·ri=ddt⎝summationdisplayi12ddt⎝parenleftbigmir2i⎝parenrightbig=12d2Idt2,whereI=⎝summationdisplayimir2iis themoment of inertiaof the collection of particles. Substituting back into Eq. ( 38),12d2Idt2−⎝summationdisplayipi·dridt=⎝summationdisplayidpidt·ri.(39)The second term on the left-hand side is just−⎝summationdisplayipi·dridt=−⎝summationdisplayimivi·vi=−2⎝summationdisplayi12miv2i=−2K,twice the negative of the total kinetic energy of the system. If we use Newton’s second law,Eq. ( 39) becomes12d2Idt2−2K=⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri.(40)The right-hand side of this expression is known as thevirial of Clausius, named after thephysicist whoﬁrst found this important energy relation.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 68>>>

IfFijrepresents the force of interaction between two particles in the system (actuallythe force onidue toj), then, considering all of the possible forces acting oni,⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri=⎝summationdisplayi⎛⎜⎝⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iFij⎞⎟⎠·ri.Rewriting the position vector of particleiasri=12(ri+rj)+12(ri−rj), weﬁnd⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri=12⎝summationdisplayi⎛⎜⎝⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iFij⎞⎟⎠·⎝parenleftbigri+rj⎝parenrightbig+12⎝summationdisplayi⎛⎜⎝⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iFij⎞⎟⎠·⎝parenleftbigri−rj⎝parenrightbig.From Newton’s third law,Fij=−Fji, implying that theﬁrst term on the right-hand side iszero, by symmetry. Thus the virial of Clausius may be expressed as⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri=12⎝summationdisplayi⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iFij·⎝parenleftbigri−rj⎝parenrightbig.(41)If it is assumed that the only contribution to the force is the result of the gravitationalinteraction between massive particles included in the system, thenFijisFij=Gmimjr2ijˆrij,whererij=|rj−ri|is the separation between particlesiandj, andˆrijis the unit vectordirected fromitoj:ˆrij≡rj−ririj.Substituting the gravitational force into Eq. ( 41) gives⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri=−12⎝summationdisplayi⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iGmimjr3ij⎝parenleftbigrj−ri⎝parenrightbig2=−12⎝summationdisplayi⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iGmimjrij.(42)The quantity−Gmimjrijis just the potential energyUijbetween particlesiandj. Note, however, that−GmjmirjiCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 69>>>

also represents the same potential energy term and is included in the double sum as well,so the right-hand side of Eq. ( 42) includes the potential interaction between each pair ofparticles twice. Considering the factor of 1/2, Eq. ( 42) simply becomes⎝summationdisplayiFi·ri=−12⎝summationdisplayi⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iGmimjrij=12⎝summationdisplayi⎝summationdisplayjj̸=iUij=U,(43)the total potential energy of the system of particles. Finally, substituting into Eq. ( 40) andtaking the average with respect to time give12⎝angbracketleftbiggd2Idt2⎝angbracketrightbigg−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.(44)The average ofd2I/dt2over some time intervalτis just⎝angbracketleftbiggd2Idt2⎝angbracketrightbigg=1τ⎝integraldisplayτ0d2Idt2dt(45)=1τ⎝parenleftbiggdIdt⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingleτ−dIdt⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle0⎝parenrightbigg.If the system is periodic, as in the case for orbital motion, thendIdt⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingleτ=dIdt⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle⎝vextendsingle0and the average over one period will be zero. Even if the system being considered is notstrictly periodic, the average will still approach zero when evaluated over a sufﬁcientlylong period of time (i.e.,τ→∞), assuming of course thatdI/dtis bounded. This woulddescribe, for example, a system that has reached an equilibrium or steady-state conﬁguration.In either case, we now have⎝angbracketleftbigd2I/dt2⎝angbracketrightbig=0, so−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.(46)This result is one form of the virial theorem. The theorem may also be expressed in termsof the total energy of the system by using the relation⟨E⟩=⟨K⟩+⟨U⟩. Thus⟨E⟩=12⟨U⟩,(47)just what we found for the binary orbit problem.The virial theorem applies to a wide variety of systems, from an ideal gas to a clusterof galaxies. For instance, consider the case of a static star. In equilibrium a star must obeythe virial theorem, implying that its total energy is negative, one-half of the total potentialenergy. Assuming that the star formed as a result of the gravitational collapse of a largeCelestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 70>>>

cloud (a nebula), the potential energy of the system must have changed from an initial valueof nearly zero to its negative static value. This implies that the star must have lost energy inthe process, meaning that gravitational energy must have been radiated into space duringthe collapse. Applications of the virial theorem will be described in more detail in laterchapters.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralKuhn, Thomas S.,The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Third Edition, University ofChicago Press, Chicago, 1996.Westfall, Richard S.,Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, 1980.TechnicalArya, Atam P.,Introduction to Classical Mechanics, Second Edition, Prentice Hall, UpperSaddle River, NJ, 1998.Clayton, Donald D.,Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis, University ofChicago Press, New York, 1983.Fowles, Grant R., and Cassiday, George L.,Analytical Mechanics, Seventh Edition, Thom-son Brooks/Cole, Belmont, CA, 2005.Marion, Jerry B., and Thornton, Stephen T.,Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems,Fourth Edition, Saunders College Publishing, Fort Worth, 1995.Celestial Mechanics


<<<PAGE 71>>>



<<<PAGE 72>>>

PROBLEM SET1!SSUMETHATARECTANGULARCOORDINATESYSTEMHASITSORIGINATTHECENTEROFANELLIPTICALPLANETARYORBIT AND THAT THE COORDINATE SYSTEMSxAXIS LIES ALONG THE MAJOR AXIS OF THE ELLIPSE 3HOW THATTHE EQUATION FOR THE ELLIPSE IS GIVEN BYxa+yb=,WHEREaANDbARE THE LENGTHS OF THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS AND THE SEMIMINOR AXIS RESPECTIVELY25SING THE RESULT OF 0ROBLEM  PROVE THAT THE AREA OF AN ELLIPSE IS GIVEN BYA=πab3 (a)"EGINNINGWITH%Q 	AND+EPLERSSECONDLAWDERIVEGENERALEXPRESSIONSFORvrANDvθFOR A MASSmIN AN ELLIPTICAL ORBIT ABOUT A SECOND MASSm9OUR FNAL ANSWERS SHOULD BEFUNCTIONS OFPea ANDθONLY(b)5SING THE EXPRESSIONS FORvrANDvθTHAT YOU DERIVED IN PART A	 VERIFY %Q  	 DIRECTLYFROMv=vr+vθ4$ERIVE %Q  	 FROM THE SUM OF THE KINETIC AND POTENTIAL ENERGY TERMS FOR THE MASSESmANDmCelestial Mechanics
r=a⎝parenleftbig−e⎝parenrightbig+eCOSθ(≤e<).v=G(m+m)⎝parenleftbiggr−a⎝parenrightbigg.E=µv−GMµr,5$ERIVE %Q  	 FROM THE TOTAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF THE MASSESmANDmL=µr×v=r×p,
&ROM #HAPTER  O  F  !N )NTRODUCTION TO -ODERN !STROPHYSIC3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú BY 0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDS 				
  I


<<<PAGE 73>>>

6 (a)!SSUMING THAT THE 3UN INTERACTS ONLY WITH *UPITER CALCULATE THE TOTAL ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF THE 3UNn*UPITER SYSTEM 4HE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF *UPITERS ORBIT ISa=. !5ITS ORBITAL ECCENTRICITY ISe=. AND ITS ORBITAL PERIOD ISP=. YR(b)%STIMATETHECONTRIBUTIONTHE3UNMAKESTOTHETOTALORBITALANGULARMOMENTUMOFTHE3UNn*UPITER SYSTEM &OR SIMPLICITY ASSUME THAT THE 3UNS ORBITAL ECCENTRICITY ISe= RATHERTHANe=.(INT&IRST FND THE DISTANCE OF THE CENTER OF THE 3UN FROM THE CENTER OFMASS(c)-AKING THE APPROXIMATION THAT THE ORBIT OF *UPITER IS A PERFECT CIRCLE ESTIMATE THE CONTRIBUTIONITMAKESTOTHETOTALORBITALANGULARMOMENTUMOFTHE3UNn*UPITERSYSTEM#OMPAREYOUR ANSWER WITH THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO VALUES FOUND IN PARTS A	 AND B	(d)2ECALL THAT THE MOMENT OF INERTIA OF A SOLID SPHERE OF MASSmAND RADIUSrIS GIVEN BYI=mrWHEN THE SPHERE SPINS ON AN AXIS PASSING THROUGH ITS CENTER &URTHERMORE ITSROTATIONAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM MAY BE WRITTEN ASL=Iω,WHEREωIS THE ANGULAR FREQUENCY MEASURED IN RAD S− !SSUMING INCORRECTLY	 THAT BOTHTHE 3UN AND *UPITER ROTATE AS SOLID SPHERES CALCULATE APPROXIMATE VALUES FOR THE ROTATIONALANGULAR MOMENTA OF THE 3UN AND *UPITER 4AKE THE ROTATION PERIODS OF THE 3UN AND *UPITERTO BE  DAYS AND  HOURS RESPECTIVELY 4HE RADIUS OF THE 3UN IS .×M AND THERADIUS OF *UPITER IS .×M(e)7HAT PART OF THE 3UNn*UPITER SYSTEM MAKES THE LARGEST CONTRIBUTION TO THE TOTAL ANGULARMOMENTUM7 (a)5SING DATA CONTAINED IN 0ROBLEM  AND IN THE CHAPTER #ELESTIAL   -ECHANICS   CALCULATETHE ESCAPE SPEED AT THESURFACE OF *UPITER(b)#ALCULATETHEESCAPESPEEDFROMTHE3OLAR3YSTEMSTARTINGFROM%ARTHSORBIT!SSUMETHATTHE 3UN CONSTITUTES ALL OF THE MASS OF THE 3OLAR 3YSTEM8 (a)4HE(UBBLE3PACE4ELESCOPEISINANEARLYCIRCULARORBITAPPROXIMATELYKMMILES	ABOVE THE SURFACE OF %ARTH %STIMATE ITS ORBITAL PERIOD(b)#OMMUNICATIONSANDWEATHERSATELLITESAREOFTENPLACEDINGEOSYNCHRONOUShPARKINGvORBITSABOVE %ARTH 4HESE ARE ORBITS WHERE SATELLITES CAN REMAIN FXED ABOVE A SPECIFC POINT ONTHE SURFACE OF %ARTH!T WHAT ALTITUDE MUST THESE SATELLITES BE LOCATED(c))SITPOSSIBLEFORASATELLITEINAGEOSYNCHRONOUSORBITTOREMAINhPARKEDvOVERANYLOCATIONON THE SURFACE OF %ARTH7HY OR WHY NOT9)NGENERALANINTEGRALAVERAGEOFSOMECONTINUOUSFUNCTIONf (t)OVERANINTERVALτISGIVENBY⟨f (t)⟩=τ⎝integraldisplayτf (t) dt."EGINNING WITH AN EXPRESSION FOR THE INTEGRAL AVERAGE PROVE THAT⟨U⟩=−GMµa,A BINARY SYSTEMS GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL ENERGY AVERAGED OVER ONE PERIOD EQUALS THE VALUEOF THE INSTANTANEOUS POTENTIAL ENERGY OF THE SYSTEM WHEN THE TWO MASSES ARE SEPARATED BY THECelestial Mechanics: Problem Set
hvI
II


<<<PAGE 74>>>

DISTANCEa THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF THE ORBIT OF THE REDUCED MASS ABOUT THE CENTER OF MASS(INT9OU MAY FND THE FOLLOWING DEFNITE INTEGRAL USEFUL⎝integraldisplayπdθ+eCOSθ=π√−e.105SING THE DEFNITION OF THE INTEGRAL AVERAGE GIVEN IN 0ROBLEM  PROVE THAT⟨r⟩̸=aFOR THE ORBIT OF THE REDUCED MASS ABOUT THE CENTER OF MASS11'IVEN THAT A GEOCENTRIC UNIVERSE IS MATHEMATICALLY	 ONLY A MATTER OF THE CHOICE OF A REFERENCEFRAME EXPLAIN WHY THE 0TOLEMAIC MODEL OF THE UNIVERSE WAS ABLE TO SURVIVE SCRUTINY FOR SUCHA LONG PERIOD OF TIME126ERIFY THAT +EPLERS THIRD LAW IN THE FORM OF %Q  	 APPLIES TO THE FOUR MOONS THAT 'ALILEODISCOVERED ORBITING *UPITER THE 'ALILEAN MOONS )O %UROPA 'ANYMEDE AND #ALLISTO	(a)5SING THE DATA AVAILABLE IN!PPENDIXCREATE A GRAPH OF LOGPVSLOGa(b)&ROM THE GRAPH SHOW THAT THE SLOPE OF THE BESTFT STRAIGHT LINE THROUGH THE DATA IS /(c)#ALCULATE THE MASS OF *UPITER FROM THE VALUE OF THEyINTERCEPT13!N ALTERNATIVE DERIVATION OF THE TOTAL ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM CAN BE OBTAINED BY APPLYINGTHE CONSERVATION LAWS OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM AND ENERGY(a)&ROMCONSERVATIONOFANGULARMOMENTUMSHOWTHATTHERATIOOFORBITALSPEEDSATPERIHELIONAND APHELION IS GIVEN BYvpva=+e−e.(b)"Y EQUATING THE ORBITAL MECHANICAL ENERGIES AT PERIHELION AND APHELION DERIVE %QS   	AND 	 FOR THE PERIHELION AND APHELION SPEEDS RESPECTIVELY
(c)/BTAIN %Q   	 DIRECTLY FROM THE EXPRESSION FORvpORva	14#OMETARY ORBITS USUALLY HAVE VERY LARGE ECCENTRICITIES OFTEN APPROACHING OR EVEN EXCEEDING	UNITY (ALLEYS COMET HAS AN ORBITAL PERIOD OF  YR AND AN ORBITAL ECCENTRICITY OFe=.(a)7HAT IS THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF #OMET (ALLEYS ORBIT3OLOR3YSTEM $ATA
vp=GM(+e)rp=GMa⎝parenleftbigg+e−e⎝parenrightbiggva=GM(−e)ra=GMa⎝parenleftbigg−e+e⎝parenrightbigg.P=πG(m+m)a.
L=µ⎝radicalBigGMa⎝parenleftbig−e⎝parenrightbig.(b)5SE THE ORBITAL DATA OF #OMET (ALLEY TO ESTIMATE THE MASS OF THE 3UN(c)#ALCULATE THE DISTANCE OF #OMET (ALLEY FROM THE 3UN AT PERIHELION AND APHELIONCelestial Mechanics: Problem Set
	
			III
I


<<<PAGE 75>>>

164HE CODEOrbitCAN BE USED TO GENERATE ORBITAL POSITIONS GIVEN THE MASS OFTHE CENTRAL STAR THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF THE ORBIT AND THE ORBITAL ECCENTRICITY 5SINGOrbitTOGENERATE THE DATA PLOT THE ORBITS FOR THREE HYPOTHETICAL OBJECTS ORBITING OUR 3UN!SSUME THATTHE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF EACH ORBIT IS !5 AND THAT THE ORBITAL ECCENTRICITIES ARE(a)(b)(c).OTE0LOT ALL THREE ORBITS ON A COMMON COORDINATE SYSTEM AND INDICATE THE PRINCIPAL FOCUSLOCATED ATx=.,y=.17 (a)&ROM THE DATA GIVEN IN%XAMPLE    OF  #ELESTIA L -ECHANICS USEOrbitTOFOR-ARS 0LOT AT LEAST  POINTS EVENLY SPACED IN TIME ON A SHEET OF GRAPH PAPERAND CLEARLYINDICATE THE PRINCIPAL FOCUS(b)5SING A COMPASS DRAW A PERFECT CIRCLE ON TOP OF THE ELLIPTICAL ORBIT FOR -ARS CHOOSING THERADIUSOFTHECIRCLEANDITSCENTERCAREFULLYINORDERTOMAKETHEBESTPOSSIBLEAPPROXIMATIONOFTHEORBIT"ESURETOMARKTHECENTEROFTHECIRCLEYOUCHOSENOTETHATITWILLNOTCORRESPONDTO THE PRINCIPAL FOCUS OF THE ELLIPTICAL ORBIT	(c)7HAT CAN YOU CONCLUDE ABOUT THE MERIT OF +EPLERS FRST ATTEMPTS TO USE OFFSET CIRCLES ANDEQUANTS TO MODEL THE ORBIT OF -ARS18AND-ARS"YMAKINGVERYSLIGHTMODIFCATIONSTOOrbit AMOREREALISTIC DIAGRAMCANBE CREATEDCOMPUTER PROBLEMS155SINGOrbitTOGETHERWITHTHEDATAGIVENIN0ROBLEM ESTIMATETHEAMOUNTOFTIMEREQUIREDFOR(ALLEYSCOMET TO MOVE FROM PERIHELION TO A DISTANCE OF !5 AWAY FROM THE PRINCIPAL FOCUS
hv
4HE BELOW FIGURE WASDRAWNASSUMINGPERFECTLYCIRCULARMOTIONANDCONSTANTORBITALSPEEDSFOR%ARTH(d)$ETERMINETHEORBITALSPEEDOFTHECOMETWHENATPERIHELIONATAPHELIONANDONTHESEMIMINOR AXIS OF ITS ORBIT(e)(OWMANYTIMESLARGERISTHEKINETICENERGYOF(ALLEYSCOMETATPERIHELIONTHANATAPHELION
GENERATEAN  ORBIT
/PPOSITIONT  /PPOSITIONT  3
3UN-ARS ORBIT%ARTH ORBIT

FIGURE4HE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE SIDEREAL AND SYNODIC PERIODS OF -ARS4HE TWO PERIODSDO NOT AGREE DUE TO THE MOTION OF %ARTH 4HE NUMBERS REPRESENT THE ELAPSED TIME IN SIDEREAL YEARSSINCE -ARS WAS INITIALLY AT OPPOSITION .OTE THAT %ARTH COMPLETES MORE THAN TWO ORBITS IN A SYNODICPERIOD OFS=. YR WHEREAS -ARS COMPLETES SLIGHTLY MORE THAN ONE ORBIT DURING ONE SYNODICPERIOD FROM OPPOSITION TO OPPOSITIONCelestial Mechanics: Problem Set
II


<<<PAGE 76>>>

(a)"EGINBYASSUMINGTHAT-ARSISINITIALLYATOPPOSITIONANDTHAT%ARTHAND-ARSHAPPENTOBEATTHEIR CLOSEST POSSIBLE APPROACH APHELION AND PERIHELION RESPECTIVELY	 5SE YOUR MODIFEDVERSION OFOrbitTO CALCULATE THE POSITIONS OF %ARTH AND -ARS BETWEEN TWO SUCCESSIVEOPPOSITIONS OF -ARS 'RAPH THE RESULTS(b)(OW MUCH TIME IN YEARS	 ELAPSED BETWEEN THE TWO OPPOSITIONS(c)$OES YOUR ANSWER IN PART B	 AGREE PRECISELY WITH THE RESULTS OBTAINED FROMTHE BELOW  EQUATION 7HYOR WHY NOT(d)7OULDYOUHAVEOBTAINEDTHESAMEANSWERTOPARTB	IFYOUHADSTARTEDTHECALCULATIONWITH%ARTH AT PERIHELION AND -ARS AT APHELION %XPLAIN YOUR ANSWER(e)&ROM THE RESULTS OF YOUR NUMERICAL EXPERIMENT EXPLAIN WHY -ARS APPEARS BRIGHTER IN THENIGHT SKY DURING CERTAIN OPPOSITIONS THAN DURING OTHERS/S=/braceleftBigg/P−/P⊕INFERIOR	/P⊕−/PSUPERIOR	Celestial Mechanics: Problem SetI


<<<PAGE 77>>>



<<<PAGE 78>>>

The Continuous Spectrum of Light1Stellar Parallax2The Magnitude Scale3The Wave Nature of Light4Blackbody Radiation5The Quantization of Energy6The Color Index1STELLAR PARALLAXMeasuring the intrinsic brightness of stars is inextricably linked with determining theirdistances. This chapter on the light emitted by stars therefore begins with the problem ofﬁnding the distance to astronomical objects, one of the most important and most difﬁculttasks faced by astronomers. Kepler’s laws in their original form describe therelativesizesof the planets’ orbits in terms of astronomical units; their actual dimensions were unknownto Kepler and his contemporaries. The true scale of the Solar System was ﬁrst revealedin 1761 when the distance to Venus was measured as it crossed the disk of the Sun ina rare transit during inferior conjunction. The method used wastrigonometric parallax,the familiar surveyor’s technique of triangulation. On Earth, the distance to the peak ofa remote mountain can be determined by measuring that peak’s angular position fromtwo observation points separated by a known baseline distance. Simple trigonometry thensupplies the distance to the peak; see Fig. 1. Similarly, the distances to the planets can bemeasured from two widely separated observation sites on Earth.Finding the distance even to the nearest stars requires a longer baseline than Earth’sdiameter. As Earth orbits the Sun, two observations of the same star made 6 months apartemploy a baseline equal to the diameter of Earth’s orbit. These measurements reveal that anearby star exhibits an annual back-and-forth change in its position against the stationaryd=1 AUtanp≃1pAU,From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.3by background of much more distant stars. of its own motion through space. However, this proper motion, seen from Earth, is not pe-riodic and so can be distinguished from the star’s periodic displacement caused by Earth’s orbital motion. As shown in Fig. 2, a measurement of the parallax angle p (one-half of the maximum change in angular position) allows the calculation of the distance d to the star.A star may also change its position as a consequence 


<<<PAGE 79>>>

2Bdp
FIGURE 1Trigonometric parallax:d=B/tanp.
dpSunEarth
FIGURE 2Stellar parallax:d=1/p′′pc.where the small-angle approximation tanp≃phas been employed for the parallax anglepmeasured inradians. Using 1 radian=57.2957795◦=206264.806′′to convertptop′′in units ofarcsecondsproducesd≃206,265p′′AU.Deﬁning a new unit of distance, theparsec(parallax-second, abbreviated pc), as 1 pc=2.06264806×105AU=3.0856776×1016m leads tod=1p′′pc.(1)By deﬁnition, when the parallax anglep=1′′, the distance to the star is 1 pc. Thus 1 parsecis the distance from which the radius of Earth’s orbit, 1AU, subtends an angle of 1′′.Anotherunit of distance often encountered is thelight-year(abbreviated ly), the distance traveledby light through a vacuum in one Julian year: 1 ly=9.460730472×1015m. One parsecis equivalent to 3.2615638 ly.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 80>>>

Even Proxima Centauri, the nearest star other than the Sun, has a parallax angle of lessthan 1′′. (Proxima Centauri is a member of the triple star systemαCentauri, and has aparallax angle of 0.77′′. If Earth’s orbit around the Sun were represented by a dime, thenProxima Centauri would be located 2.4 km away!) In fact, this cyclic change in a star’sposition is so difﬁcult to detect that it was not until 1838 that it was ﬁrst measured, byFriedrich Wilhelm Bessel (1784–1846), a German mathematician and astronomer.1Example 1.1.In 1838, after 4 years of observing 61 Cygni, Bessel announced his mea-surement of a parallax angle of 0.316′′for that star. This corresponds to a distance ofd=1p′′pc=10.316pc=3.16 pc=10.3 ly,within 10% of the modern value 3.48 pc. 61 Cygni is one of the Sun’s nearest neighbors.From 1989 to 1993, the European Space Agency’s (ESA’s) Hipparcos Space AstrometryMission operated high above Earth’s distorting atmosphere.2The spacecraft was able tomeasure parallax angles with accuracies approaching 0.001′′for over 118,000 stars, cor-responding to a distance of 1000 pc≡1 kpc (kiloparsec). Along with the high-precisionHipparcos experiment aboard the spacecraft, the lower-precision Tycho experiment pro-duced a catalog of more than 1 million stars with parallaxes down to 0.02′′–0.03′′. Thetwo catalogs were published in 1997 and are available on CD-ROMs and the World WideWeb. Despite the impressive accuracy of the Hipparcos mission, the distances that wereobtained are still quite small compared to the 8-kpc distance to the center of our Milky WayGalaxy, so stellar trigonometric parallax is currently useful only for surveying the localneighborhood of the Sun.However, within the next decade, NASA plans to launch the Space Interferometry Mis-sion (SIM PlanetQuest). This observatory will be able to determine positions, distances,and proper motions of stars with parallax angles as small as 4microarcseconds (0.000004′′),leading to the direct determination of distances of objects up to 250 kpc away, assuming thatthe objects are bright enough. In addition, ESA will launch theGaiamission within the nextdecade as well, which will catalog the brightest 1 billion stars with parallax angles as smallas 10 microarcseconds. With the anticipated levels of accuracy, these missions will be ableto catalog stars and other objects across the Milky Way Galaxy and even in nearby galaxies.Clearly these ambitious projects will provide an amazing wealth of new information aboutthe three-dimensional structure of our Galaxy and the nature of its constituents.1Tycho Brahe had searched for stellar parallax 250 years earlier, but his instruments were too imprecise to ﬁnd it.Tycho concluded that Earth does not move through space, and he was thus unable to accept Copernicus’s modelof a heliocentric Solar System.2Astrometryis the subdiscipline of astronomy that is concerned with the three-dimensional positions of celestialobjects.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 81>>>

2THE MAGNITUDE SCALENearly all of the information astronomers have received about the universe beyond ourSolar System has come from the careful study of the light emitted by stars, galaxies, andinterstellar clouds of gas and dust. Our modern understanding of the universe has been madepossible by the quantitative measurement of the intensity and polarization of light in everypart of the electromagnetic spectrum.Apparent MagnitudeThe Greek astronomer Hipparchus was one of the ﬁrst sky watchers to catalog the starsthat he saw. In addition to compiling a list of the positions of some 850 stars, Hipparchusinvented a numerical scale to describe how bright each star appeared in the sky. He assignedanapparent magnitudem=1 to the brightest stars in the sky, and he gave the dimmeststars visible to the naked eye an apparent magnitude ofm=6. Note that a smaller apparentmagnitude means a brighter-appearing star.Since Hipparchus’s time, astronomers have extended and reﬁned his apparent magnitudescale. In the nineteenth century, it was thought that the human eye responded to the differencein thelogarithmsof the brightness of two luminous objects. This theory led to a scale inwhich a difference of 1 magnitude between two stars implies a constantratiobetween theirbrightnesses. By the modern deﬁnition, a difference of 5 magnitudes corresponds exactlyto a factor of 100 in brightness, so a difference of 1 magnitude corresponds exactly to abrightness ratio of 1001/5≃2.512. Thus a ﬁrst-magnitude star appears 2.512 times brighterthan a second-magnitude star, 2.5122=6.310 times brighter than a third-magnitude star,and 100 times brighter than a sixth-magnitude star.Using sensitive detectors, astronomers can measure the apparent magnitude of an objectwith an accuracy of±0.01 magnitude, anddifferencesin magnitudes with an accuracy of±0.002 magnitude. Hipparchus’s scale has been extended in both directions, fromm=−26.83 for the Sun to approximatelym=30 for the faintest object detectable.3The totalrange of nearly 57 magnitudes corresponds to over 10057/5=(102)11.4≃1023for the ratioof the apparent brightness of the Sun to that of the faintest star or galaxy yet observed.Flux, Luminosity, and the Inverse Square LawThe “brightness” of a star is actually measured in terms of theradiant ﬂuxFreceived fromthe star. The radiant ﬂux is the total amount of light energy of all wavelengths that crossesa unit area oriented perpendicular to the direction of the light’s travel per unit time; that is,it is the number of joules of starlight energy per second (i.e., the number of watts) receivedby one square meter of a detector aimed at the star. Of course, the radiant ﬂux receivedfrom an object depends on both its intrinsicluminosity(energy emitted per second) and itsdistance from the observer. The same star, if located farther from Earth, would appear lessbright in the sky.3The magnitudes discussed in this section are actuallybolometricmagnitudes, measured over all wavelengths oflight; see Section 6 for a discussion of magnitudes measured by detectors over a ﬁnite wavelength region.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 82>>>

Imagine a star of luminosityLsurrounded by a huge spherical shell of radiusr. Then,assuming that no light is absorbed during its journey out to the shell, the radiant ﬂux,F,measured at distanceris related to the star’s luminosity byF=L4πr2,(2)the denominator being simply the area of the sphere. SinceLdoes not depend onr, theradiant ﬂux is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the star. This is thewell-knowninverse square lawfor light.4Example 2.1.The luminosity of the Sun isL⊙=3.839×1026W. At a distance of1 AU=1.496×1011m, Earth receives a radiant ﬂux above its absorbing atmosphere ofF=L4πr2=1365 W m−2.This value of the solar ﬂux is known as thesolar irradiance, sometimes also called thesolar constant. At a distance of 10 pc=2.063×106AU, an observer would measure theradiant ﬂux to be only 1/(2.063×106)2as large. That is, the radiant ﬂux from the Sunwould be 3.208×10−10Wm−2at a distance of 10 pc.Absolute MagnitudeUsing the inverse square law, astronomers can assign anabsolute magnitude,M, to eachstar. This is deﬁned to be the apparent magnitude a star would haveifit were located at adistance of 10 pc. Recall that a difference of 5 magnitudes between the apparent magnitudesof two stars corresponds to the smaller-magnitude star being 100 times brighter than thelarger-magnitude star. This allows us to specify their ﬂux ratio asF2F1=100(m1−m2)/5.(3)Taking the logarithm of both sides leads to the alternative form:m1−m2=−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggF1F2/parenrightbigg.(4)The Distance ModulusThe connection between a star’s apparent and absolute magnitudes and its distance may befound by combining Eqs. (2) and (3):100(m−M)/5=F10F=/parenleftbiggd10 pc/parenrightbigg2,4If the star is moving with a speed near that of light, the inverse square law must be modiﬁed slightly.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 83>>>

whereF10is the ﬂux that would be received if the star were at a distance of 10 pc, anddisthe star’s distance, measured inparsecs. Solving fordgivesd=10(m−M+5)/5pc.(5)The quantitym−Mis therefore a measure of the distance to a star and is called the star’sdistance modulus:m−M=5 log10(d)−5=5 log10/parenleftbiggd10 pc/parenrightbigg.(6)Example2..The apparent magnitude of the Sun ismSun=−26.83, and its distance is1 AU=4.848×10−6pc. Equation (6) shows that the absolute magnitude of the Sun isMSun=mSun−5 log10(d)+5=+4.74,as already given. The Sun’s distance modulus is thusmSun−MSun=−31.57.5For two stars at the same distance, Eq. ( 2) shows that the ratio of their radiant ﬂuxesis equal to the ratio of their luminosities. Thus Eq. ( 3) for absolute magnitudes becomes100(M1−M2)/5=L2L1.(7)Letting one of these stars be the Sun reveals the direct relation between a star’s absolutemagnitude and its luminosity:M=MSun−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggLL⊙/parenrightbigg,(8)where the absolute magnitude and luminosity of the Sun areMSun=+4.74 andL⊙=3.839×1026W, respectively. It is left as an exercise for you to show that a star’s apparentmagnitudemis related to the radiant ﬂuxFreceived from the star bym=MSun−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggFF10,⊙/parenrightbigg,(9)whereF10,⊙is the radiant ﬂux received from the Sun at a distance of 10 pc (see Exam-ple 2.1).The inverse square law for light, Eq. ( 2), relates the intrinsic properties of a star(luminosityLand absolute magnitudeM) to the quantities measured at a distance from5The magnitudesmandMfor the Sun have a “Sun” subscript (instead of “⊙”) to avoid confusion withM⊙, thestandard symbol for the Sun’s mass.The Continuous Spectrum of Light
2


<<<PAGE 84>>>

that star (radiant ﬂuxFand apparent magnitudem). At ﬁrst glance, it may seem thatastronomers must start with the measurable quantitiesFandmand then use the distanceto the star (if known) to determine the star’s intrinsic properties. However, if the starbelongs to an important class of objects known aspulsating variable stars, its intrinsicluminosityLand absolute magnitudeMcan be determinedwithoutany knowledge of itsdistance. Equation ( 5) then gives the distance to the variable star.the universe.3THE WAVE NATURE OF LIGHTMuch of the history of physics is concerned with the evolution of our ideas about the natureof light.The Speed of LightThe speed of light was ﬁrst measured with some accuracy in 1675, by the Danish astronomerOle Roemer (1644–1710). Roemer observed the moons of Jupiter as they passed into thegiant planet’s shadow, and he was able to calculate when future eclipses of the moons shouldoccur by using Kepler’s laws. However, Roemer discovered that when Earth was movingcloser to Jupiter, the eclipses occurred earlier than expected. Similarly, when Earth wasmoving away from Jupiter, the eclipses occurred behind schedule. Roemer realized thatthe discrepancy was caused by the differing amounts of time it took for light to travel thechanging distance between the two planets, and he concluded that 22 minutes was requiredfor light to cross the diameter of Earth’s orbit.6The resulting value of 2.2×108ms−1wasclose to the modern value of the speed of light. In 1983 the speed of lightin vacuowasformallydeﬁnedto bec=2.99792458×108ms−1, and the unit of length (the meter) isnow derived from this value.7Young’s Double-Slit ExperimentEven the fundamental nature of light has long been debated. Isaac Newton, for example,believed that light must consist of a rectilinear stream of particles, because only such astream could account for the sharpness of shadows. Christian Huygens (1629–1695), acontemporary of Newton, advanced the idea that light must consist of waves. Accordingto Huygens, light is described by the usual quantities appropriate for a wave. The distancebetween two successive wave crests is thewavelengthλ, and the number of waves persecond that pass a point in space is thefrequencyνof the wave. Then the speed of the lightwave is given byc=λν.(10)6We now know that it takes light about 16.5 minutes to travel 2 AU.7In 1905Albert Einstein realized that the speed of light is a universal constant of nature whose value is independentof the observe . This realization plays a central role in his Special Theory of Relativity.These stars act as beacons that illuminate the fundamental distance scale of
rThe Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 85>>>

Screen/H9258/H9258Path difference = d sin /H9258LdSlitSlitFIGURE 3Double-slit experiment.+=+=(a)(b)FIGURE 4Superposition principle for light waves. (a) Constructive interference. (b) Destructiveinterference.Both the particle and wave models could explain the familiar phenomena of the reﬂectionand refraction of light. However, the particle model prevailed, primarily on the strengthof Newton’s reputation, until the wave nature of light was conclusively demonstrated byThomas Young’s (1773–1829) famous double-slit experiment.In a double-slit experiment, monochromatic light of wavelengthλfrom a single sourcepasses through two narrow, parallel slits that are separated by a distanced. The light thenfalls upon a screen a distanceLbeyond the two slits (see Fig. 3). The series of lightand darkinterference fringesthat Young observed on the screen could be explained onlyby a wave model of light. As the light waves pass through the narrow slits,8they spreadout (diffract) radially in a succession of crests and troughs. Light obeys asuperpositionprinciple, so when two waves meet, they add algebraically; see Fig. 4. At the screen, if awave crest from one slit meets a wave crest from the other slit, a bright fringe or maximum isproduced by the resultingconstructive interference. But if a wave crest from one slit meetsa wave trough from the other slit, they cancel each other, and a dark fringe or minimumresults from thisdestructive interference.The interference pattern observed thus depends on the difference in the lengths of thepaths traveled by the light waves from the two slits to the screen. As shown in Fig. 3,ifL≫d, then to a good approximation this path difference isdsinθ. The light waveswill arrive at the screenin phaseif the path difference is equal to an integral number ofwavelengths. On the other hand, the light waves will arrive 180◦out of phaseif the pathdifference is equal to an odd integral number of half-wavelengths. So forL≫d, the angular8Actually, Young used pinholes in his original experiment.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 86>>>

positions of the bright and dark fringes fordouble-slit interferenceare given bydsinθ=/braceleftBiggnλ(n= 0, 1, 2, … for bright fringes)/parenleftbign−12/parenrightbigλ(n= 1, 2, 3, … for dark fringes).(11)In either case,nis called theorderof the maximum or minimum. From the measuredpositions of the light and dark fringes on the screen, Young was able to determine thewavelength of the light. At the short-wavelength end, Young found that violet light hasa wavelength of approximately 400 nm, while at the long-wavelength end, red light hasa wavelength of only 700 nm.9The diffraction of light goes unnoticed under everydayconditions for these short wavelengths, thus explaining Newton’s sharp shadows.Maxwell’s Electromagnetic Wave TheoryThe nature of these waves of light remained elusive until the early 1860s, when the Scottishmathematical physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) succeeded in condensing every-thing known about electric and magnetic ﬁelds into the four equations that today bear hisname. Maxwell found that his equations could be manipulated to produce wave equationsfor the electric and magnetic ﬁeld vectorsEandB. These wave equations predicted theexistence ofelectromagnetic wavesthat travel through a vacuum with speedv=1/√ϵ0µ0,whereϵ0andµ0are fundamental constants associated with the electric and magnetic ﬁelds,respectively. Upon inserting the values ofϵ0andµ0, Maxwell was amazed to discoverthat electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light. Furthermore, these equations im-plied that electromagnetic waves aretransversewaves, with the oscillatory electric andmagnetic ﬁelds perpendicular to each otherandto the direction of the wave’s propagation(see Fig. 5); such waves could exhibit the polarization10known to occur for light. Max-well wrote that “we can scarcely avoid the inference that light consists in the transversemodulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.”Maxwell did not live to see the experimental veriﬁcation of his prediction of electro-magnetic waves. Ten years after Maxwell’s death, the German physicist Heinrich Hertz(1857–1894) succeeded in producing radio waves in his laboratory. Hertz determined thatthese electromagnetic waves do indeed travel at the speed of light, and he conﬁrmed theirreﬂection, refraction, and polarization properties. In 1889, Hertz wrote:What is light? Since the time of Young and Fresnel we know that it is wavemotion.We know the velocity of the waves, we know their lengths, and we knowthat they are transverse; in short, our knowledge of the geometrical conditionsof the motion is complete. A doubt about these things is no longer possible; arefutation of these views is inconceivable to the physicist. The wave theory oflight is, from the point of view of human beings, certainty.9Another commonly used measure of the wavelength of light is theangstrom;1Å=0.1 nm. In these units, violetlight has a wavelength of 4000 Å and red light has a wavelength of 7000 Å.10The electromagnetic wave shown in Fig. 5 isplane-polarized, with its electric and magnetic ﬁelds oscillatingin planes. BecauseEandBare always perpendicular, their respective planes of polarization are perpendicular aswell.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 87>>>

v = cBE
FIGURE 5Electromagnetic wave.TABLE 1The Electromagnetic Spectrum.RegionWavelengthGamma rayλ<1 nmX-ray 1 nm<λ<10 nmUltraviolet 10 nm<λ<400 nmVisible 400 nm<λ<700 nmInfrared 700 nm<λ<1 mmMicrowave 1 mm<λ<10 cmRadio 10 cm<λThe Electromagnetic SpectrumToday, astronomers utilize light from every part of theelectromagnetic spectrum. The totalspectrum of light consists of electromagnetic waves of all wavelengths, ranging from veryshort-wavelength gamma rays to very long-wavelength radio waves. Table 1 shows howthe electromagnetic spectrum has been arbitrarily divided into various wavelength regions.The Poynting Vector and Radiation PressureLike all waves, electromagnetic waves carry both energy and momentum in the directionof propagation. The rate at which energy is carried by a light wave is described by thePoynting vector,11S=1µ0E×B,whereShas units of W m−2. The Poynting vector points in the direction of the electro-magnetic wave’s propagation and has a magnitude equal to the amount of energy per unittime that crosses a unit area oriented perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of11The Poynting vector is named after John Henry Poynting (1852–1914), the physicist who ﬁrst described it.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 88>>>

Frad (reflection)Frad (absorption)Area A (edge on)Reflectedlight path/H9258/H9258LightwaveFIGURE 6Radiation pressure force. The surface areaAis seen edge on.the wave. Because the magnitudes of the ﬁeldsEandBvary harmonically with time, thequantity of practical interest is thetime-averagedvalue of the Poynting vector over one cy-cle of the electromagnetic wave. In a vacuum the magnitude of the time-averaged Poyntingvector,⟨S⟩, is⟨S⟩=12µ0E0B0,(12)whereE0andB0are the maximum magnitudes (amplitudes) of the electric and magneticﬁelds, respectively. (For an electromagnetic wave in a vacuum,E0andB0are related byE0=cB0.) The time-averaged Poynting vector thus provides a description of the radiantﬂux in terms of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds of the light waves. However, it should beremembered that the radiant ﬂux discussed in Section 2 involves the amount of energyreceivedat all wavelengthsfrom a star, whereasE0andB0describe an electromagneticwave of a speciﬁed wavelength.Because an electromagnetic wave carries momentum, it can exert a force on a surfacehit by the light. The resultingradiation pressuredepends on whether the light is reﬂectedfrom or absorbed by the surface. Referring to Fig. 6, if the light is completely absorbed,then the force due to radiation pressure is in the direction of the light’s propagation and hasmagnitudeFrad=⟨S⟩Accosθ(absorption),(13)whereθis the angle of incidence of the light as measured from the direction perpendicularto the surface of areaA. Alternatively, if the light is completely reﬂected, then the radiationpressure force must act in a direction perpendicular to the surface; the reﬂected light cannotexert a force parallel to the surface. Then the magnitude of the force isFrad=2⟨S⟩Accos2θ(reﬂection).(14)Radiation pressure has a negligible effect on physical systems under everyday conditions.However, radiation pressure may play a dominant role in determining some aspects of thebehavior of extremely luminous objects such as early main-sequence stars, red supergiants,and accreting compact stars. It may also have a signiﬁcant effect on the small particles ofdust found throughout the interstellar medium.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 89>>>

4BLACKBODY RADIATIONAnyone who has looked at the constellation of Orion on a clear winter night has noticed thestrikingly different colors of red Betelgeuse (in Orion’s northeast shoulder) and blue-whiteRigel (in the southwest leg); see Fig. 7. These colors betray the difference in the surfacetemperatures of the two stars. Betelgeuse has a surface temperature of roughly 3600 K,signiﬁcantly cooler than the 13,000-K surface of Rigel.12The Connection between Color and TemperatureThe connection between the color of light emitted by a hot object and its temperature wasﬁrst noticed in 1792 by the English maker of ﬁne porcelain Thomas Wedgewood. All ofhis ovens became red-hot at the same temperature, independent of their size, shape, andconstruction. Subsequent investigations by many physicists revealed that any object witha temperature above absolute zero emits light of all wavelengths with varying degrees ofefﬁciency; anideal emitteris an object that absorbsallof the light energy incident uponit and reradiates this energy with the characteristic spectrum shown in Fig. 8. Becausean ideal emitter reﬂects no light, it is known as ablackbody, and the radiation it emitsis calledblackbody radiation. Stars and planets are blackbodies, at least to a rough ﬁrstapproximation.Figure 8 shows that a blackbody of temperatureTemits acontinuous spectrumwithsome energy at all wavelengths and that this blackbody spectrum peaks at a wavelengthλmax, which becomes shorter with increasing temperature. The relation betweenλmaxandBetelgeuse
Right ascension (hr)Declination (deg)651086420–2–4–6–8–10RigelFIGURE 7The constellation of Orion.12Bothofthesestarsarepulsatingvariables,sothevaluesquotedareaveragetemperatures.EstimatesofthesurfacetemperatureofBetelgeuseactuallyrangequitewidely,fromabout3100Kto3900K.Similarly,estimates of the surface temperature of Rigel range from 8000 K to 13,000 K.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 90>>>

Visible light5777 K7000 K
4000 K01234567B/H9261(T) (104 W m–2 nm–1 sr–1)
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400Wavelength /H9261 (nm)FIGURE 8Blackbody spectrum [Planck functionBλ(T )].Tis known asWien’s displacement law:13λmaxT=0.002897755 m K.(15)Example 4.1.Betelgeuse has a surface temperature of 3600 K. If we treat Betelgeuseas a blackbody, Wien’s displacement law shows that its continuous spectrum peaks at awavelength ofλmax≃0.0029 m K3600 K=8.05×10−7m=805 nm,which is in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Rigel, with a surfacetemperature of 13,000 K, has a continuous spectrum that peaks at a wavelength ofλmax≃0.0029 m K13,000 K=2.23×10−7m=223 nm,in the ultraviolet region.The Stefan–Boltzmann EquationFigure 8 also shows that as the temperature of a blackbody increases, it emits moreenergy per second atallwavelengths. Experiments performed by the Austrian physicist13In 1911, the German physicist Wilhelm Wien (1864–1928) received the Nobel Prize in 1911 for his theoreticalcontributions to understanding the blackbody spectrum.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 91>>>

Josef Stefan (1835–1893) in 1879 showed that the luminosity,L, of a blackbody of areaAand temperatureT(in kelvins) is given byL=AσT4.(16)Five years later another Austrian physicist, Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906), derived thisequation, now called theStefan–Boltzmann equation, using the laws of thermodynamicsand Maxwell’s formula for radiation pressure. The Stefan–Boltzmann constant,σ, has thevalueσ=5.670400×10−8Wm−2K−4.For a spherical star of radiusRand surface areaA=4πR2, the Stefan–Boltzmann equationtakes the formL=4πR2σT4e.(17)Since stars are not perfect blackbodies, we use this equation todeﬁnetheeffective temper-atureTeof a star’s surface. Combining this with the inverse square law, Eq. ( 2), showsthat at the surface of the star (r=R), thesurface ﬂuxisFsurf=σT4e.(18)Example 4.2.The luminosity of the Sun isL⊙=3.839×1026W and its radius isR⊙=6.95508×108m. The effective temperature of the Sun’s surface is thenT⊙=/parenleftbiggL⊙4πR2⊙σ/parenrightbigg14=5777 K.The radiant ﬂux at the solar surface isFsurf=σT4⊙=6.316×107Wm−2.According to Wien’s displacement law, the Sun’s continuous spectrum peaks at a wave-length ofλmax≃0.0029 m K5777 K=5.016×10−7m=501.6 nm.This wavelength falls in thegreenregion (491 nm<λ<575 nm) of the spectrum ofvisible light. However, the Sun emits a continuum of wavelengths both shorter and longerthanλmax, and the human eye perceives the Sun’s color as yellow. Because the Sun emitsmost of its energy at visible wavelengths (see Fig. 8), and because Earth’s atmosphere istransparent at these wavelengths, the evolutionary process of natural selection has produceda human eye sensitive to this wavelength region of the electromagnetic spectrum.Rounding offλmaxandT⊙to the values of 500 nm and 5800 K, respectively, permitsWien’s displacement law to be written in the approximate formλmaxT≈(500 nm)(5800 K).(19)The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 92>>>

The Eve of a New World ViewThis section draws to a close at the end of the nineteenth century. The physicists andastronomers of the time believed that all of the principles that govern the physical worldhad ﬁnally been discovered. Their scientiﬁc world view, theNewtonian paradigm, was theculmination of the heroic, golden age of classical physics that had ﬂourished for over threehundred years. The construction of this paradigm began with the brilliant observations ofGalileo and the subtle insights of Newton. Its architecture was framed by Newton’s laws,supported by the twin pillars of the conservation of energy and momentum and illuminatedby Maxwell’s electromagnetic waves. Its legacy was a deterministic description of a universethat ran like clockwork, with wheels turning inside of wheels, all of its gears perfectlymeshed. Physics was in danger of becoming a victim of its own success. There were nochallenges remaining. All of the great discoveries apparently had been made, and the onlytask remaining for men and women of science at the end of the nineteenth century wasﬁlling in the details.However, as the twentieth century opened, it became increasingly apparent that a crisiswas brewing. Physicists were frustrated by their inability to answer some of the simplestquestions concerning light. What is the medium through which light waves travel the vastdistances between the stars, and what is Earth’s speed through this medium? What deter-mines the continuous spectrum of blackbody radiation and the characteristic, discrete colorsof tubes ﬁlled with hot glowing gases? Astronomers were tantalized by hints of a treasureof knowledge just beyond their grasp.It took a physicist of the stature of Albert Einstein to topple the Newtonian paradigmand bring about two revolutions in physics. One transformed our ideas about space andtime, and the other changed our basic concepts of matter and energy. The rigid clockworkuniverse of the golden era was found to be an illusion and was replaced by a randomuniverse governed by the laws of probability and statistics. The following four lines aptlysummarize the situation. The ﬁrst two lines were written by the English poetAlexander Pope(1688–1744), a contemporary of Newton; the last two, by Sir J. C. Squire (1884–1958),were penned in 1926.Nature and Nature’s laws lay hid in night:God said,Let Newton be!and all was light.It did not last: the Devil howling “Ho!Let Einstein be!” restored the status quo.5THE QUANTIZATION OF ENERGYOne of the problems haunting physicists at the end of the nineteenth century was theirinability to derive from fundamental physical principles the blackbody radiation curve de-picted in Fig. 8. Lord Rayleigh14(1842–1919) had attempted to arrive at the expression byapplying Maxwell’s equations of classical electromagnetic theory together with the results14Lord Rayleigh, as he is commonly known, was born John William Strutt but succeeded to the title of third BaronRayleigh of Terling Place, Witham, in the county of Essex, when he was thirty years old.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 93>>>

from thermal physics. His strategy was to consider a cavity of temperatureTﬁlled withblackbody radiation. This may be thought of as a hot oven ﬁlled with standing waves ofelectromagnetic radiation. IfLis the distance between the oven’s walls, then the permittedwavelengths of the radiation areλ=2L,L,2L/3, 2L/4, 2L/5,..., extending forever to in-creasingly shorter wavelengths.15According to classical physics, each of these wavelengthsshould receive an amount of energy equal tokT, wherek=1.3806503×10−23JK−1isBoltzmann’s constant, familiar from the ideal gas lawPV=NkT. The result of Rayleigh’sderivation gaveBλ(T )≃2ckTλ4,(valid only ifλis long)(20)which agrees well with the long-wavelength tail of the blackbody radiation curve. However,a severe problem with Rayleigh’s result was recognized immediately; his solution forBλ(T )grows without limit asλ→0. The source of the problem is that according to classicalphysics, an inﬁnite number of inﬁnitesimally short wavelengths implied that an unlimitedamount of blackbody radiation energy was contained in the oven, a theoretical result soabsurd it was dubbed the “ultraviolet catastrophe.” Equation ( 20) is known today as theRayleigh–Jeans law.16Wien was also working on developing the correct mathematical expression for the black-body radiation curve. Guided by the Stefan–Boltzmann law (Eq. 16) and classical thermalphysics, Wien was able to develop an empirical law that described the curve at short wave-lengths but failed at longer wavelengths:Bλ(T )≃aλ−5e−b/λT,(valid only ifλis short)(21)whereaandbwere constants chosen to provide the best ﬁt to the experimental data.Planck’s Function for the Blackbody Radiation CurveBy late 1900 the German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947) had discovered that a modi-ﬁcation of Wien’s expression could be made to ﬁt the blackbody spectra shown in Fig. 8while simultaneously replicating the long-wavelength success of the Rayleigh–Jeans lawand avoiding the ultraviolet catastrophe:Bλ(T )=a/λ5eb/λT−1,In order to determine the constantsaandbwhile circumventing the ultraviolet catas-trophe, Planck employed a clever mathematical trick. He assumed that a standing electro-magnetic wave of wavelengthλand frequencyν=c/λcould not acquire just any arbitraryamount of energy. Instead, the wave could have only speciﬁc allowed energy values that15This is analogous to standing waves on a string of lengthLthat is held ﬁxed at both ends. The permittedwavelengths are the same as those of the standing electromagnetic waves.16James Jeans (1877–1946), a British astronomer, found a numerical error in Rayleigh’s original work; the correctedresult now bears the names of both men.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 94>>>

were integral multiples of a minimum wave energy.17This minimum energy, aquantumofenergy, is given byhνorhc/λ, wherehis a constant. Thus the energy of an electromagneticwave isnhνornhc/λ, wheren(an integer) is the number of quanta in the wave. Given thisassumption of quantized wave energy with a minimum energy proportional to the frequencyof the wave, the entire oven could not contain enough energy to supply even one quantumof energy for the short-wavelength, high-frequency waves. Thus the ultraviolet catastrophewould be avoided. Planck hoped that at the end of his derivation, the constanthcould beset to zero; certainly, an artiﬁcial constant should not remain in his ﬁnal result forBλ(T ).Planck’s stratagem worked! His formula, now known as thePlanck function, agreedwonderfully with experiment, butonlyif the constanthremained in the equation:18Bλ(T )=2hc2/λ5ehc/λkT−1.(22)Planck’s constanthas the valueh=6.62606876×10−34J s.The Planck Function and AstrophysicsFinally armed with the correct expression for the blackbody spectrum, we can apply Planck’sfunction to astrophysical systems. In spherical coordinates, the amount of radiant energy perunit time having wavelengths betweenλandλ+dλemitted by a blackbody of temperatureTand surface areadAinto a solid angled/Omega1≡sinθd θd φis given byBλ(T ) dλ dAcosθd /Omega1=Bλ(T ) dλ dAcosθsinθd θd φ;(23)see Fig. 9.19The units ofBλare therefore W m−3sr−1. Unfortunately, these units canbe misleading. You should note that “W m−3” indicates power (energy per unit time) perunit area per unit wavelength interval, W m−2m−1,notenergy per unit time per unitvolume. To help avoid confusion, the units of the wavelength intervaldλare sometimesexpressed in nanometers rather than meters, so the units of the Planck function becomeWm−2nm−1sr−1, as in Fig. 8.20At times it is more convenient to deal with frequency intervalsdνthan with wavelengthintervalsdλ. In this case the Planck function has the formBν(T )=2hν3/c2ehν/kT−1.(24)17Actually, Planck restricted the possible energies of hypothetical electromagnetic oscillators in the oven wallsthat emit the electromagnetic radiation.18It is left for you to show that the Planck function reduces to the Rayleigh–Jeans law at long wavelengths(Problem 10) and to Wien’s expression at short wavelengths (Problem 11).19Note thatdAcosθis the areadAprojected onto a plane perpendicular to the direction in which the radiation istraveling...20The value of the Planck function thus depends on the units of the wavelength interval. The conversion ofdλfrom meters to nanometers means that the values ofBλobtained by evaluating Eq. ( 22) must be divided by 109.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 95>>>

xyz
dAB/H9261(T)dW = sin /H9258 d/H9258 d/H9278d/H9278/H9278/H9258d/H9258
FIGURE 9Blackbody radiation from an element of surface areadA.Thus, in spherical coordinates,Bνdν dAcosθd /Omega1=Bνdν dAcosθsinθd θd φis the amount of energy per unit time of blackbody radiation having frequency betweenνandν+dνemitted by a blackbody of temperatureTand surface areadAinto a solid angled/Omega1=sinθd θd φ.The Planck function can be used to make the connection between the observed propertiesof a star (radiant ﬂux, apparent magnitude) and its intrinsic properties (radius, temperature).Consider a model star consisting of a spherical blackbody of radiusRand temperatureT.Assuming that each small patch of surface areadAemits blackbody radiationisotropically(equally in all directions) over the outward hemisphere, the energy per second havingwavelengths betweenλandλ+dλemitted by the star isLλdλ=/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπ/2θ=0/integraldisplayABλdλdAcosθsinθd θd φ .(25)The angular integration yields a factor ofπ, and the integral over the area of the sphereproduces a factor of 4πR2. The result isLλdλ=4π2R2Bλdλ(26)=8π2R2hc2/λ5ehc/λkT−1dλ.(27)Lλdλis known as themonochromatic luminosity. Comparing the Stefan–Boltzmannequation ( 17) with the result of integrating Eq. ( 26) over all wavelengths shows that/integraldisplay∞0Bλ(T ) dλ=σT4π.(28)The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 96>>>

In Problem 14, you will use Eq. ( 27) to express the Stefan–Boltzmann constant,σ,i nterms of the fundamental constantsc,h, andk. The monochromatic luminosity is relatedto themonochromatic ﬂux,Fλdλ, by the inverse square law for light, Eq. ( 2):Fλdλ=Lλ4πr2dλ=2πhc2/λ5ehc/λkT−1/parenleftbiggRr/parenrightbigg2dλ,(29)whereris the distance to the model star. ThusFλdλis the number of joules of starlightenergy with wavelengths betweenλandλ+dλthat arrive per second at one square meterof a detector aimed at the model star, assuming that no light has been absorbed or scatteredduring its journey from the star to the detector. Of course, Earth’s atmosphere absorbs somestarlight, but measurements of ﬂuxes and apparent magnitudes can be corrected to accountforthisabsorptionThevaluesofthesequantitiesusuallyquotedforstarsarein fact corrected values and would be the results of measurements above Earth’s absorbingatmosphere.6THE COLOR INDEXThe apparent and absolute magnitudes discussed in Section 2, measured over all wave-lengths of light emitted by a star, are known asbolometric magnitudesand are denoted bymbolandMbol, respectively.21In practice, however, detectors measure the radiant ﬂux of astar only within a certain wavelength region deﬁned by the sensitivity of the detector.UBV Wavelength FiltersThecolorof a star may be precisely determined by using ﬁlters that transmit the star’s lightonly within certain narrow wavelength bands. In the standardUBVsystem, a star’s apparentmagnitude is measured through three ﬁlters and is designated by three capital letters:•U, the star’sultravioletmagnitude, is measured through a ﬁlter centered at 365 nmwith an effective bandwidth of 68 nm.•B, the star’sbluemagnitude, is measured through a ﬁlter centered at 440 nm with aneffective bandwidth of 98 nm.•V, the star’svisualmagnitude, is measured through a ﬁlter centered at 550 nm withan effective bandwidth of 89 nm.Color Indices and the Bolometric CorrectionUsing Eq. ( 6), a star’s absolute color magnitudesMU,MB, andMVmay be determined ifits distancedis known.22Astar’sU−Bcolor indexis the difference between its ultraviolet21Abolometeris an instrument that measures the increase in temperature caused by the radiant ﬂux it receives atall wavelengths.22Note that although apparent magnitude is not denoted by a subscripted “m”i nt h eUBVsystem, the absolutemagnitude is denoted by a subscripted “M.”.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 97>>>

and blue magnitudes, and a star’sB−Vcolor index is the difference between its blue andvisual magnitudes:U−B=MU−MBandB−V=MB−MV.Stellar magnitudesdecreasewith increasing brightness; consequently, a star with a smallerB−Vcolor index isbluerthan a star with a larger value ofB−V. Because a color indexis the difference between two magnitudes, Eq. ( 6) shows that it is independent of the star’sdistance. The difference between a star’s bolometric magnitude and its visual magnitude isitsbolometric correctionBC:BC=mbol−V=Mbol−MV.(30)Example 6.1.Sirius, the brightest-appearing star in the sky, hasU,B, andVapparentmagnitudes ofU=−1.47,B=−1.43, andV=−1.44. Thus for Sirius,U−B=−1.47−(−1.43)=−0.04andB−V=−1.43−(−1.44)=0.01.Sirius is brightest at ultraviolet wavelengths, as expected for a star with an effective tem-perature ofTe=9970 K. For this surface temperature,λmax=0.0029 m K9970 K=291 nm,which is in the ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. The bolometric correc-tion for Sirius isBC=−0.09, so its apparent bolometric magnitude ismbol=V+BC=−1.44+(−0.09)=−1.53.The relation between apparent magnitude and radiant ﬂux, Eq. ( 4), can be used toderive expressions for the ultraviolet, blue, and visual magnitudes measured (above Earth’satmosphere) for a star. Asensitivity functionS(λ)is used to describe the fraction of thestar’s ﬂux that is detected at wavelengthλ.Sdepends on the reﬂectivity of the telescopemirrors, the bandwidth of theU,B, andVﬁlters, and the response of the photometer. Thus,for example, a star’s ultraviolet magnitudeUis given byU=−2.5 log10/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay∞0FλSUdλ/parenrightbigg+CU,(31)whereCUis a constant. Similar expressions are used for a star’s apparent magnitude withinother wavelength bands. The constantsCin the equations forU,B, andVdiffer for eachThe Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 98>>>

of these wavelength regions and are chosen so that the star Vega (αLyrae) has a magnitudeofzeroas seen through each ﬁlter.23This is a completely arbitrary choice and doesnotimply that Vega would appear equally bright when viewed through theU,B, andVﬁlters.However, the resulting values for the visual magnitudes of stars are about the same as thoserecorded by Hipparchus two thousand years ago.24Adifferentmethod is used to determine the constantCbolin the expression for thebolometric magnitude, measured over all wavelengths of light emitted by a star. For aperfectbolometer, capable of detecting 100 percent of the light arriving from a star, we setS(λ)≡1:mbol=−2.5 log10/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay∞0Fλdλ/parenrightbigg+Cbol.(32)The value forCboloriginated in the wish of astronomers that the value of the bolometriccorrectionBC=mbol−Vbe negative for all stars (since a star’s radiant ﬂux over all wavelengths is greater thanits ﬂux in any speciﬁed wavelength band) while still being as close to zero as possible.After a value ofCbolwas agreed upon, it was discovered that some supergiant stars havepositivebolometric corrections. Nevertheless, astronomers have chosen to continue usingthis unphysical method of measuring magnitudes.25It is left as an exercise for you toevaluate the constantCbolby using the value ofmbolassigned to the Sun:mSun=−26.83.The color indicesU−BandB−Vare immediately seen to beU−B=−2.5 log10/parenleftbigg/integraltextFλSUdλ/integraltextFλSBdλ/parenrightbigg+CU−B,(33)whereCU−B≡CU−CB. A similar relation holds forB−V. From Eq. ( 29), note thatalthough the apparent magnitudes depend on the radiusRof the model star and its distancer, the color indices do not, because the factor of(R/r)2cancels in Eq. ( 33). Thus thecolor index is a measure solely of the temperature of a model blackbody star.Example 6.2.A certain hot star has a surface temperature of 42,000 K and color indicesU−B=−1.19 andB−V=−0.33. The large negative value ofU−Bindicates thatthis star appears brightest at ultraviolet wavelengths, as can be conﬁrmed with Wien’sdisplacement law, Eq. (19). The spectrum of a 42,000-K blackbody peaks atλmax=0.0029 m K42,000 K=69 nm,continued23Actually, the average magnitude of several stars is used for this calibration.24See Chapter 1 of Böhm-Vitense (1989b) for a further discussion of the vagaries of the magnitude system usedby astronomers.25Some authors, such as Böhm-Vitense (1989a, 1989b), prefer to deﬁne the bolometric correction asBC=V−mbol, so their values ofBCare usually positive.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 99>>>

UB V1.00.80.60.40.20.0Sensitivity function   (/H9261)
300 400 500 600 700Wavelength (nm)FIGURE 10Sensitivity functionsS(λ)forU,B, andVﬁlters. (Data from Johnson,Ap. J.,141,923, 1965.)in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. This wavelength is much shorterthan the wavelengths transmitted by theU,B, andVﬁlters (see Fig. 10), so we will bedealing with the smoothly declining long-wavelength “tail” of the Planck functionBλ(T ).We can use the values of the color indices to estimate the constantCU−Bin Eq. ( 33),andCB−Vin a similar equation for the color indexB−V. In this estimate, we will use astep function to represent the sensitivity function:S(λ)=1 inside the ﬁlter’s bandwidth,andS(λ)=0 otherwise. The integrals in Eq. ( 33) may then be approximated by the valueof the Planck functionBλat the center of the ﬁlter bandwidth, multiplied by that bandwidth.Thus, for the wavelengths and bandwidths/Delta1λlisted previously,U−B=−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggB365/Delta1λUB440/Delta1λB/parenrightbigg+CU−B−1.19=−0.32+CU−BCU−B=−0.87,andB−V=−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggB440/Delta1λBB550/Delta1λV/parenrightbigg+CB−V−0.33=−0.98+CB−VCB−V=0.65.It is left as an exercise for you to use these values ofCU−BandCB−Vto estimate thecolor indices for a model blackbody Sun with a surface temperature of 5777 K. AlthoughThe Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 100>>>

the resulting value ofB−V=+0.57 is in fair agreement with the measured value ofB−V=+0.650 for the Sun, the estimate ofU−B=−0.22 is quite different from themeasured value ofU−B=+0.195.The Color–Color DiagramFigure 11 is acolor–color diagramshowing the relation between theU−BandB−Vcolor indices for main-sequence stars.26Astronomers face the difﬁcult task of connectinga star’s position on a color–color diagram with the physical properties of the star itself. Ifstars actually behaved as blackbodies, the color–color diagram would be the straight dashedline shown in Fig. 11. However, stars are not true blackbodies.ome light is absorbed as it travels through a star’s atmosphere, and theamount of light absorbed depends on both the wavelength of the light and the temperatureof the star. Other factors also play a role, causing the color indices of main-sequence andsupergiant stars of the same temperature to be slightly different. The color–color diagramin Fig. 11 shows that the agreement between actual stars and model blackbody stars isbest for very hot stars.
BlackbodyB0A0F0G0K0M0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0B – VU – B–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.5FIGURE 11Color–color diagram for main-sequence stars. The dashed line is for a blackbody.
26in their centers. Approximately 80% to 90% of all stars are main-sequence stars. The letter labels in Fig. 11 arespectral types.S
Main-sequence stars are powered by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen nucleiThe Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 101>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralFerris, Timothy,Coming of Age in the Milky Way, William Morrow, New York, 1988.Grifﬁn, Roger, “The Radial-Velocity Revolution,”Sky and Telescope, September 1989.Hearnshaw, John B., “Origins of the Stellar Magnitude Scale,”Sky and Telescope, November1992.Herrmann, Dieter B.,The History of Astronomy from Hershel to Hertzsprung, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 1984.Perryman, Michael, “Hipparcos: The Stars in Three Dimensions,”Sky and Telescope, June1999.Segre, Emilio,From Falling Bodies to Radio Waves, W. H. Freeman and Company, NewYork, 1984.TechnicalArp, Halton, “U−BandB−VColors of Black Bodies,”The Astrophysical Journal,133,874, 1961.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics, Volume 1: Basic Stellar Obser-vations and Data, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989a.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics, Volume 2: Stellar Atmospheres,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989b.Cox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Harwit, Martin,Astrophysical Concepts, Third Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998.Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission, European Space Agency,http://astro.estec.esa.nl/Hipparcos/.Lang, Kenneth R.,Astrophysical Formulae, Third Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York,1999.Van Helden, Albert,Measuring the Universe, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,1985.The Continuous Spectrum of Light


<<<PAGE 102>>>

PROBLEM SET1In 1672, an international effort was made to measure the parallax angle of Mars at the time ofopposition, when it was closest to Earth; see the below  figure.(a)Consider two observers who are separated by a baseline equal to Earth’s diameter. If thedifference in their measurements of Mars’s angular position is 33.6′′, what is the distancebetween Earth and Mars at the time of opposition? Express your answer both in units of mand in AU.(b)If the distance to Mars is to be measured to within 10%, how closely must the clocks used bythe two observers be synchronized?Hint:Ignore the rotation of Earth. The average orbitalvelocities of Earth and Mars are 29.79 km s−1and 24.13 km s−1, respectively.The Continuous Spectrum of Light
117776345212233445566
Mars orbitEarth orbitSunThe retrograde motion of Mars as described by the Copernican model. Note that thelines of sight from Earth to Mars cross for positions 3, 4, and 5. This effect, combined with the slightlydifferingplanesofthetwoorbitsresultinretrogradepathsnearopposition.2At what distance from a 100-W light bulb is the radiant ﬂux equal to the solar irradiance?3The parallax angle for Sirius is 0.379′′.(a)Find the distance to Sirius in units of (i) parsecs; (ii) light-years; (iii) AU; (iv) m.(b)Determine the distance modulus for Sirius.4Using the information in Example 6.1 and Problem 3, determine the absolute bolometricmagnitude of Sirius and compare it with that of the Sun. What is the ratio of Sirius’s luminosityto that of the Sun?5 (a)The Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission was able to measure parallax angles down tonearly 0.001′′. To get a sense of that level of resolution, how far from a dime would you needto be to observe it subtending an angle of 0.001′′? (The diameter of a dime is approximately1.9 cm.)From Chapter 3 o  f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by sFIGURE
 ,

<<<PAGE 103>>>

6Derive the relationm=MSun−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggFF10,⊙/parenrightbigg.7A1.2×104kg spacecraft is launched from Earth and is to be accelerated radially away from theSun using a circular solar sail. The initial acceleration of the spacecraft is to be 1g. Assuming aﬂat sail, determine the radius of the sail if it is(a)black, so it absorbs the Sun’s light.(b)shiny, so it reﬂects the Sun’s light.Hint:The spacecraft, like Earth, is orbiting the Sun. Should you include the Sun’s gravity inyour calculation?8The average person has 1.4m2of skin at a skin temperature of roughly 306 K (92◦F). Considerthe average person to be an ideal radiator standing in a room at a temperature of 293 K (68◦F).(a)Calculate the energy per second radiated by the average person in the form of blackbodyradiation. Express your answer in watts.(b)Determine the peak wavelengthλmaxof the blackbody radiation emitted by the averageperson. In what region of the electromagnetic spectrum is this wavelength found?(c)A blackbody also absorbs energy from its environment, in this case from the 293-K room.The equation describing the absorption is the same as the equation describing the emissionof blackbody radiation, Eq. ( 16). Calculate the energy per second absorbed by the averageperson, expressed in watts.(d)Calculate the net energy per second lost by the average person via blackbody radiation.9Consider a model of the star Dschubba (δSco), the center star in the head of the constellationScorpius.Assume that Dschubba is a spherical blackbody with a surface temperature of 28,000 Kand a radius of 5.16×109m. Let this model star be located at a distance of 123 pc from Earth.Determine the following for the star:(a)Luminosity.L=AσT4.(16)
(b)Absolute bolometric magnitude.(c)Apparent bolometric magnitude.(d)Distance modulus.(e)Radiant ﬂux at the star’s surface.(f)Radiant ﬂux at Earth’s surface (compare this with the solar irradiance).(g)Peak wavelengthλmax.10 (a)Show that the Rayleigh–Jeans law (Eq. 20) is an approximation of the Planck functionBλin the limit ofλ≫hc/kT. (The ﬁrst-order expansionex≈1+xforx≪1 will beuseful.) Notice that Planck’s constant is not present in your answer. The Rayleigh–Jeanslaw is aclassicalresult, so the “ultraviolet catastrophe” at short wavelengths, produced bytheλ4in the denominator, cannot be avoided.(b)Assume that grass grows at the rate of 5 cm per week.i.How much does grass grow in one second?ii.How far from the grass would you need to be to see it grow at an angular rate of0.000004′′(4 microarcseconds) per second? Four microarcseconds is the estimatedangular resolution of SIM, NASA’s planned astrometric mission.The Continuous Spectrum of Light: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 104>>>

(b)Plot the Planck functionBλand the Rayleigh–Jeans law for the Sun (T⊙=5777 K) on thesame graph. At roughly what wavelength is the Rayleigh–Jeans value twice as large as thePlanck function?11Show that Wien’s expression for blackbody radiation (Eq. 21) follows directly from Planck’sfunction at short wavelengths.12Derive Wien’s displacement law, Eq. ( 15), by settingdBλ/dλ=0.Hint:You will encounteran equation that must be solved numerically, not algebraically.13 (a)Use Eq. ( 24) to ﬁnd an expression for the frequencyνmaxat which the Planck functionBνattains its maximum value. (Warning:νmax̸=c/λmax.)(b)What is the value ofνmaxfor the Sun?(c)Find the wavelength of a light wave having frequencyνmax. In what region of the electro-magnetic spectrum is this wavelength found?14 (a)Integrate Eq. ( 27) over all wavelengths to obtain an expression for the total luminosity ofa blackbody model star.Hint:/integraldisplay∞0u3dueu−1=π415.(b)Compare your result with the Stefan–Boltzmann equation ( 17), and show that the Stefan–Boltzmann constantσis given byσ=2π5k415c2h3.(c)Calculate the value ofσfrom this expression.15Use the data in Appendix: Stellar Data, to answer the following questions.(a)Calculate the absolute and apparent visual magnitudes,MVandV, for the Sun.(b)Determine the magnitudesMB,B,MU, andUfor the Sun.Bλ(T )≃aλ−5e−b/λT,(valid only ifλis short)(21)λmaxT=0.002897755 m K.(15)Bν(T )=2hν3/c2ehν/kT−1.(24)
=8π2R2hc2/λ5ehc/λkT−1dλ.(27)
L=4πR2σT4e.(17)Bλ(T )≃2ckTλ4,(valid only ifλis long)(20)The Continuous Spectrum of Light: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 105>>>

[i.e., ignore the constantCin Eq. ( 31)]. Assume thatthatS(λ)=0 outside the ﬁlter bandwidth.17Evaluate the constantCbolin Eq. (3.32) by usingmSun=−26.83.18Use the values of the constantsCU−BandCB−Vfound in Example 6.2to estimate the colorindicesU−BandB−Vfor the Sun.19Shaula (λScorpii) is a bright (V=1.62) blue-white subgiant star located at the tip of thescorpion’s tail. Its surface temperature is about 22,000 K.(a)Use the values of the constantsCU−BandCB−Vfound in Example 6.2indicesU−BandB−Vfor Shaula. CompareU−B=−0.90 andB−V=−0.23.(b)The Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission measured the parallax angle for Shaula to be0.00464′′. Determine the absolute visual magnitude of the star.(Shaula is a pulsating star, belonging to the class of Beta Cephei variables.Asits magnitude varies betweenV=1.59 andV=1.65 with a period of 5 hours 8 minutes, itscolor indices also change slightly.)16Use the ﬁlter bandwidths for theUBVsystem in  section 6 of The Continuous Spectrum of  9600 K for Vega to determine through which ﬁlter Vega(c)Locate the Sun and Sirius on the color–color diagram in Fig. 11. Refer to Example 6.1for the data on Sirius.
BlackbodyB0A0F0G0K0M0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0B – VU – B–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.5FIGURE 11Color–color diagram for main-sequence stars. The dashed line is for a blackbody.Light and the effective temperature ofwould appear brightest to a photometerS(λ)=1 inside the ﬁlter bandwidth and“”
The  Continuous Light”to estimate the colorThe continuous  “of  “ofspectrum of  Light”your answers with the measured values ofU=−2.5 log10/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay∞0FλSUdλ/parenrightbigg+CU,(31)The Continuous Spectrum of Light: Problem Set
Spectrum of  


<<<PAGE 106>>>

From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.The Theory of Special Relativity 
4by 

<<<PAGE 107>>>

The Theory of Special Relativity1The Failure of the Galilean Transformations2The Lorentz Transformations3Time and Space in Special Relativity4Relativistic Momentum and Energy1THE FAILURE OF THE GALILEAN TRANSFORMATIONSAwaveis a disturbance that travels through a medium. Water waves are disturbancestraveling through water, and sound waves are disturbances traveling through air. JamesClerk Maxwell predicted that light consists of “modulations of the same medium which isthe cause of electric and magnetic phenomena,” but what was the medium through whichlight waves traveled? At the time, physicists believed that light waves moved through amedium called theluminiferous ether. This idea of an all-pervading ether had its roots inthe science of early Greece. In addition to the four earthly elements of earth, air, ﬁre, andwater, the Greeks believed that the heavens were composed of a ﬁfth perfect element: theether. Maxwell echoed their ancient belief when he wrote:There can be no doubt that the interplanetary and interstellar spaces are notempty, but are occupied by a material substance or body, which is certainly thelargest, and probably the most uniform body of which we have any knowledge.This modern reincarnation of the ether had been proposed for the sole purpose of transportinglight waves; an object moving through the ether would experience no mechanical resistance,so Earth’s velocity through the ether could not be directly measured.The Galilean TransformationsIn fact,nomechanical experiment is capable of determining the absolute velocity of an ob-server. It is impossible to tell whether you are at rest or in uniform motion (not accelerating).This general principle was recognized very early. Galileo described a laboratory completelyenclosedbelowthedeckofasmoothlysailingshipandarguedthatnoexperimentthisuniformlymovinglaboratorycouldmeasuretheship’svelocity.Toseewhy,considertwoinertial reference frames,SandS′.ni n e r t i a lr e f e r e n c eframe may be thought of as a laboratory in which Newton’s ﬁrst law is valid: An object atrest will remain at rest, and an object in motion will remain in motion in a straight line atAdone  in


<<<PAGE 108>>>

ClockMeter stickFIGURE 1Inertial reference frame.constant speed, unless acted upon by an external force. As shown in Fig. 1, the laboratoryconsists of (in principle) an inﬁnite collection of meter sticks and synchronized clocks thatcan record the position and time of any event that occurs in the laboratory,at the location ofthat event; this removes the time delay involved in relaying information about an event toa distant recording device. With no loss of generality, the frameS′can be taken as movingin the positivex-direction (relative to the frameS) with constant velocityu, as shown inFig. 2.1Furthermore, the clocks in the two frames can be started when the origins of thecoordinate systems,OandO′, coincide at timet=t′=0.Observers in the two framesSandS′measure the same moving object, recording itspositions(x, y, z)and(x′,y′,z′)at timetandt′, respectively. An appeal to common senseand intuition leads to the conclusion that these measurements are related by theGalileantransformation equations:x′=x−ut(1)y′=y(2)z′=z(3)t′=t.(4)1This doesnotimply that the frameSis at rest and thatS′is moving.S′could be at rest whileSmoves in thenegativex′-direction, or both frames could be moving. The point of the following argument is that there isno wayto tell; only therelative velocityuis meaningful.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 109>>>

zxx'z'OuO'yy'SS'
FIGURE 2Inertial reference framesSandS′.Taking time derivatives with respect to eithertort′(since they are always equal) showshow the components of the object’s velocityvandv′measured in the two frames are related:v′x=vx−uv′y=vyv′z=vz,or, in vector form,v′=v−u.(5)Sinceuis constant, another time derivative shows that thesameacceleration is obtainedfor the object as measured in both reference frames:a′=a.ThusF=ma=ma′for the object of massm; Newton’s laws are obeyed in both referenceframes. Whether a laboratory is located in the hold of Galileo’s ship or anywhere else inthe universe, no mechanical experiment can be done to measure the laboratory’s absolutevelocity.The Michelson–Morley ExperimentMaxwell’s discovery that electromagnetic waves move through the ether with a speed ofc≃3×108ms−1seemed to open the possibility of detecting Earth’sabsolutemotionthrough the ether by measuring the speed of light from Earth’s frame of reference andcomparing it with Maxwell’s theoretical value ofc. In 1887 two Americans, the physicistAlbert A. Michelson (1852–1931) and his chemist colleague Edward W. Morley (1838–1923), performed a classic experiment that attempted this measurement of Earth’s absolutevelocity. Although Earth orbits the Sun at approximately 30 km s−1, the results of theMichelson–Morley experiment were consistent with a velocity of Earth through the etherThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 110>>>

ofzero!2Furthermore, as Earth spins on its axis and orbits the Sun, a laboratory’s speedthrough the ether should be constantly changing. The constantly shifting “ether wind”should easily be detected. However, all of the many physicists who have since repeatedthe Michelson–Morley experiment with increasing precision have reported the same nullresult. Everyone measuresexactlythe same value for the speed of light, regardless of thevelocity of the laboratory on Earth or the velocity of the source of the light.On the other hand, Eq. ( 5) implies that two observers moving with a relative veloc-ityushould obtaindifferentvalues for the speed of light. The contradiction between thecommonsense expectation of Eq. ( 5) and the experimentally determined constancy ofthe speed of light means that this equation, and the equations from which it was derived(theGalileantransformationequations,1– 4), cannot be correct. Although the Galileantransformations adequately describe the familiar low-speed world of everyday life wherev/c≪1, they are in sharp disagreement with the results of experiments involving velocitiesnear the speed of light. A crisis in the Newtonian paradigm was developing.2THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATIONSThe young Albert Einstein (1875–1955; see Fig. 3) enjoyed discussing a puzzle with hisfriends: What would you see if you looked in a mirror while moving at the speed of light?Would you see your image in the mirror, or not? This was the beginning of Einstein’s searchfor a simple, consistent picture of the universe, a quest that would culminate in his theories
FIGURE 3Albert Einstein (1875–1955). (Courtesy of Yerkes Observatory.)2Strictly speaking, a laboratory on Earth is not in an inertial frame of reference, because Earth both spins on its axisand accelerates as it orbits the Sun. However, these noninertial effects are unimportant for the Michelson–Morleyexperiment.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 111>>>

of relativity. After much reﬂection, Einstein ﬁnally rejected the notion of an all-pervadingether.Einstein’s PostulatesIn 1905 Einstein introduced his two postulates of special relativity3in a remarkable paper,“On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.”The phenomena of electrodynamics as well as of mechanics possess no prop-erties corresponding to the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather that …the same laws of electrodynamics and optics will be valid for all frames ofreference for which the equations of mechanics hold good. We will raise thisconjecture (the purport of which will hereafter be called the “Principle of Rela-tivity”) to the status of a postulate, and also introduce another postulate, whichis only apparently irreconcilable to the former, namely, that light is alwayspropagated in empty space with a deﬁnite speedcwhich is independent of thestate of motion of the emitting body.In other words,Einstein’s postulatesareThe Principle of RelativityThe laws of physics are the same in all inertialreference frames.The Constancy of the Speed of LightLight moves through a vacuum at aconstant speedcthat is independent of the motion of the light source.The Derivation of the Lorentz TransformationsEinstein then went on to derive the equations that lie at the heart of his theory of specialrelativity, theLorentz transformations.4For the two inertial reference frames shown inFig. 2, the most general set of linear transformation equations between the space and timecoordinates(x, y, z, t)and(x′,y′,z′,t′)of thesame eventmeasured fromSandS′arex′=a11x+a12y+a13z+a14t(6)y′=a21x+a22y+a23z+a24t(7)z′=a31x+a32y+a33z+a34t(8)t′=a41x+a42y+a43z+a44t.(9)If the transformation equations were not linear, then the length of a moving object or thetime interval between two events would depend on the choice of origin for the framesSandS′. This is unacceptable, since the laws of physics cannot depend on the numericalcoordinates of an arbitrarily chosen coordinate system.3The theory ofspecialrelativity deals only with inertial reference frames, whereas thegeneraltheory includesaccelerating frames.4These equations were ﬁrst derived by Hendrik A. Lorentz (1853–1928) of the Netherlands but were applied to adifferent situation involving a reference frame at absolute rest with respect to the ether.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 112>>>

1 m1 muSS'y
x/H11032xy'
FIGURE 4Paint brush demonstration thaty′=y.The coefﬁcientsaijcan be determined by using Einstein’s two postulates and somesimple symmetry arguments. Einstein’s ﬁrst postulate, the Principle of Relativity, impliesthat lengthsperpendiculartou, the velocity of frameSrelative toS′, are unchanged. Tosee this, imagine that each frame has a meter stick oriented along they- andy′-axes, withone end of each meter stick located at the origin of its respective frame; see Fig. 4. Paintbrushes are mounted perpendicular at both ends of each meter stick, and the frames areseparated by a sheet of glass that extends to inﬁnity in thex–yplane. Each brush paints aline on the glass sheet as the two frames pass each other. Let’s say that frameSuses bluepaint, and frameS′uses red paint. If an observer in frameSmeasures the meter stick inframeS′to be shorter than his own meter stick, he will see the red lines paintedinsidehisblue lines on the glass. But by the Principle of Relativity, an observer in frameS′wouldmeasure the meter stick in frameSas being shorter than her own meter stick and wouldsee the blue lines paintedinsideher red lines. Both color lines cannot lie inside the other;the only conclusion is that blue and red lines must overlap. The lengths of the meter sticks,perpendicular tou, are unchanged. Thusy′=yandz′=z, so thata22=a33=1, whereasa21,a23,a24,a31,a32, anda34are all zero.Another simpliﬁcation comes from requiring that Eq. ( 9) give the same result ifyisreplaced by−yorzis replaced by−z. This must be true because rotational symmetry aboutthe axis parallel to the relative velocityuimplies that a time measurement cannot dependon the side of thex-axis on which an event occurs. Thusa42=a43=0.Finally, consider the motion of the originO′of frameS′. Since the frames’ clocks areassumed to be synchronized att=t′=0 when the originsOandO′coincide, thex-coordinate ofO′is given byx=utin frameSand byx′=0 in frameS′. Thus Eq. ( 6)becomes0=a11ut+a12y+a13z+a14t,The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 113>>>

which implies thata12=a13=0 anda11u=−a14. Collecting the results found thus farreveals that Eqs. ( 6– 9) have been reduced tox′=a11(x−ut)(10)y′=y(11)z′=z(12)t′=a41x+a44t.(13)At this point, these equations would be consistent with the commonsense Galilean transfor-mation equations ( 1– 4) ifa11=a44=1 anda41=0. However, only one of Einstein’spostulates has been employed in the derivation thus far: the Principle of Relativity cham-pioned by Galileo himself.Now the argument introduces the second of Einstein’s postulates: Everyone measuresexactly the same value for the speed of light. Suppose that when the originsOandO′coincide at timet=t′=0, a ﬂashbulb is set off at the common origins. At a later timet,an observer in frameSwill measure a spherical wavefront of light with radiusct, movingaway from the originOwith speedcand satisfyingx2+y2+z2=(ct)2.(14)Similarly, at a timet′, an observer in frameS′will measure a spherical wavefront of lightwith radiusct′, moving away from the originO′with speedcand satisfyingx′2+y′2+z′2=/parenleftbigct′/parenrightbig2.(15)Inserting Eqs. ( 10– 13) into Eq. ( 15) and comparing the result with Eq. ( 14) reveal thata11=a44=1/slashbig/radicalbig1−u2/c2anda41=−ua11/c2. Thus the Lorentz transformation equa-tions linking the space and time coordinates(x, y, z, t)and(x′,y′,z′,t′)of thesame eventmeasured fromSandS′arex′=x−ut/radicalbig1−u2/c2y′=yz′=zt′=t−ux/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(16)(17)(18)(19)Whenever the Lorentz transformations are used, you should be certain that the situation isconsistent with the geometry of Fig. 2, where the inertial reference frameS′is moving inThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 114>>>

0123456/H9253 = (1 – u2/c2)–1/2
0.0 0.1 0.20.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0u/cFIGURE 5The Lorentz factorγ.the positivex-direction with velocityurelative to the frameS. The ubiquitous factor ofγ≡1/radicalbig1−u2/c2,(20)called theLorentz factor, may be used to estimate the importance of relativistic effects.Roughly speaking, relativity differs from Newtonian mechanics by 1% (γ=1.01) whenu/c≃1/7 and by 10% whenu/c≃5/12; see Fig. 5. In the low-speed Newtonian world,the Lorentz transformations reduce to the Galilean transformation equations ( 1– 4). Asimilar requirement holds for all relativistic formulas; they must agree with the Newtonianequations in the low-speed limit ofu/c→0.The inverse Lorentz transformations can be derived algebraically, or they can be obtainedmore easily by switching primed and unprimed quantities and by replacinguwith−u. (Besure you understand the physical basis for these substitutions.) Either way, the inversetransformations are found to bex=x′+ut′/radicalbig1−u2/c2(21)y=y′(22)z=z′(23)t=t′+ux′/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(24)The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 115>>>

Four-Dimensional SpacetimeThe Lorentz transformation equations form the core of the theory of special relativity, andthey have many surprising and unusual implications. The most obvious surprise is theintertwining roles of spatial and temporal coordinates in the transformations. In the wordsof Einstein’s professor, Hermann Minkowski (1864–1909), “Henceforth space by itself,and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of unionbetween the two will preserve an independent reality.” The drama of the physical worldunfolds on the stage of a four-dimensionalspacetime, where events are identiﬁed by theirspacetime coordinates(x, y, z, t).3TIME AND SPACE IN SPECIAL RELATIVITYSuppose an observer in frameSmeasures two ﬂashbulbs going off at thesame timetbutatdifferentx-coordinatesx1andx2. Then an observer in frameS′would measure the timeintervalt′1−t′2between the ﬂashbulbs going off to be (see Eq. 9)t′1−t′2=(x2−x1) u/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(25)According to the observer in frameS′,i fx1̸=x2, then the ﬂashbulbs do not go off at thesame time!Events that occur simultaneously in one inertial reference frame do not occursimultaneously in all other inertial reference frames. There is no such thing as two eventsthat occur at different locations happeningabsolutelyat the same time. Equation ( 25)shows that ifx1<x2, thent′1−t′2>0 for positiveu; ﬂashbulb 1 is measured to go offafterﬂashbulb 2. An observer moving at the same speed in the opposite direction (uchangedto−u) will come to the opposite conclusion: Flashbulb 2 goes offafterﬂashbulb 1. Thesituation is symmetric; an observer in frameS′will conclude that the ﬂashbulb he or shepasses ﬁrst goes offafterthe other ﬂashbulb. It is tempting to ask, “Which observer isreallycorrect?” However, this question is meaningless and is equivalent to asking, “Whichobserver isreallymoving?” Neither question has an answer because “really” has no meaningin this situation. There is no absolute simultaneity, just as there is no absolute motion. Eachobserver’s measurement is correct, as made from his or her own frame of reference.The implications of thisdownfall of universal simultaneityare far-reaching. The ab-sence of a universal simultaneity means that clocks in relative motion will not stay syn-chronized. Newton’s idea of an absolute universal time that “of itself and from its ownnature ﬂows equably without regard to anything external” has been overthrown. Differentobservers in relative motion will measuredifferenttime intervals between thesametwoevents!Proper Time and Time DilationImagine that a strobe light located at rest relative to frameS′produces a ﬂash of light every/Delta1t′seconds; see Fig. 6. If one ﬂash is emitted at timet′1, then the next ﬂash will be emittedat timet′2=t′1+/Delta1t′, as measured by a clock in frameS′. Using Eq. ( 24) withx′1=x′2,1The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 116>>>

zxx'z'OuO'yy'SS'Strobe lightx'1 = x'2FIGURE 6A strobe light at rest (x′=constant) in frameS′.the time interval/Delta1t≡t2−t1between thesametwo ﬂashes measured by a clock in frameSist2−t1=(t′2−t′1)+(x′2−x′1) u/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2or/Delta1t=/Delta1t′/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(26)Because the clock in frameS′isat restrelative to the strobe light,/Delta1t′will be called/Delta1trest. FrameS′is called the clock’srest frame. Similarly, because the clock in frameSismovingrelative to the strobe light,/Delta1twill be called/Delta1tmoving. Thus Eq. ( 26) becomes/Delta1tmoving=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(27)This equation shows the effect oftime dilationon a moving clock. It says that thetime interval between two events is measured differently by different observers in relativemotion. Theshortest time intervalis measured by a clockat restrelative to the two events.This clock measures theproper timebetween the two events. Any other clock movingrelative to the two events will measure a longer time interval between them.The effect of time dilation is often described by the phrase “moving clocks run slower”without explicitly identifying the two events involved. This easily leads to confusion, sincethe moving and rest subscripts in Eq. ( 27) mean “moving” or “at rest”relative to the twoevents. To gain insight into this phrase, imagine that you are holding clockCwhile it ticksonce each second and, at the same time, are measuring the ticks of an identical clockC′moving relative to you. The two events to be measured are consecutive ticks of clockC′.Since clockC′is at rest relative to itself, it measures a time/Delta1trest=1 s between its ownThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 117>>>

ticks. However, using your clockC, you measure a time/Delta1tmoving=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2=1s/radicalbig1−u2/c2>1sbetween the ticks of clockC′. Because you measure clockC′to be ticking slower than onceper second, you conclude that clockC′, which is moving relative to you, is running moreslowly than your clockC. Very accurate atomic clocks have been ﬂown around the worldon jet airliners and have conﬁrmed that moving clocks do indeed run slower, in agreementwith relativity.5Proper Length and Length ContractionBoth time dilation and the downfall of simultaneity contradict Newton’s belief in absolutetime. Instead, the time measured between two events differs for different observers inrelative motion. Newton also believed that “absolute space, in its own nature, withoutrelation to anything external, remains always similar and immovable.” However, the Lorentztransformation equations require that different observers in relative motion will measurespace differently as well.Imagine that a rod lies along thex′-axis of frameS′, at rest relative to that frame;S′isthe rod’s rest frame (see Fig. 7). Let the left end of the rod have coordinatex′1, and let theright end of the rod have coordinatex′2. Then the length of the rod as measured in frameS′isL′=x′2−x′1. What is the length of the rod measured fromS? Because the rod is movingrelative toS, care must be taken to measure thex-coordinatesx1andx2of the ends ofthe rodat the same time. Then Eq. ( 16), witht1=t2, shows that the lengthL=x2−x1measured inSmay be found fromx′2−x′1=(x2−x1)−u(t2−t1)/radicalbig1−u2/c2
zxx'z'OuO'yy'SS'L' = x'2 – x'1x'1x'2FIGURE 7A rod at rest in frameS′.5See Hafele and Keating (1972a, 1972b) for the details of this test of time dilation.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 118>>>

orL′=L/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(28)Because the rod isat restrelative toS′,L′will be calledLrest. Similarly, because the rod ismovingrelative toS,Lwill be calledLmoving. Thus Eq. ( 28) becomesLmoving=Lrest/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(29)This equation shows the effect oflength contractionon a moving rod. It says that lengthor distance is measured differently by two observers in relative motion. If a rod is movingrelative to an observer, that observer will measure a shorter rod than will an observer atrest relative to it. Thelongest length, called the rod’sproper length, is measured in therod’s rest frame. Only lengths or distancesparallelto the direction of the relative motionare affected by length contraction; distances perpendicular to the direction of the relativemotion are unchanged (cf. Eqs. 17– 18).Time Dilation and Length Contraction Are ComplementaryTime dilation and length contraction are not independent effects of Einstien’s new way oflooking at the universe. Rather, they are complementary; the magnitude of either effectdepends on the motion of the event being observed relative to the observer.Example 3.1.Cosmic rays from space collide with the nuclei of atoms in Earth’s upperatmosphere, producing elementary particles calledmuons. Muons are unstable and decayafter an average lifetimeτ=2.20µs, as measured in a laboratory where the muons are atrest. That is, the number of muons in a given sample should decrease with time accordingtoN(t)=N0e−t/τ, whereN0is the number of muons originally in the sample at timet=0. At the top of Mt. Washington in New Hampshire, a detector counted 563 muons hr−1moving downward at a speedu=0.9952c. At sea level, 1907 m below the ﬁrst detector,another detector counted 408 muons hr−1.6The muons take(1907 m)/(0.9952c)=6.39µs to travel from the top of Mt. Washingtonto sea level. Thus it might be expected that the number of muons detected per hour at sealevel would have beenN=N0e−t/τ=(563 muons hr−1)e−(6.39µs)/(2.20µs)=31 muons hr−1.This is much less than the 408 muons hr−1actually measured at sea level! How did themuons live long enough to reach the lower detector? The problem with the precedingcalculation is that the lifetime of 2.20µs is measured in the muon’s rest frame as/Delta1trest, butthe experimenter’s clocks on Mt. Washington and below are moving relative to the muons.continued6Details of this experiment can be found in Frisch and Smith (1963).The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 119>>>

Muon(a)(b)FIGURE 8Muons moving downward past Mt. Washington. (a) Mountain frame. (b) Muon frame.They measure the muon’s lifetime to be/Delta1tmoving=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2=2.20µs/radicalbig1−(0.9952)2=22.5µs,more thantentimes a muon’s lifetime when measured in its own rest frame. The movingmuons’clocks run slower, so more of them survive long enough to reach sea level. Repeatingthe preceding calculation using the muon lifetime as measured by the experimenters givesN=N0e−t/τ=(563 muons hr−1)e−(6.39µs)/(22.5µs)=424 muons hr−1.When the effects of time dilation are included, the theoretical prediction is in excellentagreement with the experimental result.From a muon’s rest frame, its lifetime is only 2.20µs. How would an observer ridingalong with the muons, as shown in Fig. 8, explain their ability to reach sea level? Theobserver would measure a severely length-contracted Mt. Washington (in the direction ofthe relative motion only). The distance traveled by the muons would not beLrest=1907 mbut, rather, would beLmoving=Lrest/radicalbig1−u2/c2=(1907 m)/radicalbig1−(0.9952)2=186.6m.Thus it would take(186.6m)/(0.9952c)=0.625µs for the muons to travel the length-contracted distance to the detector at sea level, as measured by an observer in the muons’rest frame. That observer would then calculate the number of muons reaching the lowerdetector to beN=N0e−t/τ=(563 muons hr−1)e−(0.625µs)/(2.20µs)=424 muons hr−1,in agreement with the previous result. This shows that an effect due to time dilation asmeasured in one frame may instead be attributed to length contraction as measured inanother frame.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 120>>>

The effects of time dilation and length contraction are both symmetric between twoobservers in relative motion. Imagine two identical spaceships that move in opposite direc-tions, passing each other at some relativistic speed. Observers aboard each spaceship willmeasure the other ship’s length as being shorter than their own, and the other ship’s clocksas running slower.Both observers are right, having made correct measurements from theirrespective frames of reference.You should not think of these effects as being due to some sort of “optical illusion” causedby light taking different amounts of time to reach an observer from different parts of a movingobject. The language used in the preceding discussions has involved themeasurementofan event’s spacetime coordinates(x, y, z, t)using meter sticks and clocks locatedat thatevent, so there is no time delay. Of course, no actual laboratory has an inﬁnite collectionof meter sticks and clocks, and the time delays caused by ﬁnite light-travel times must betaken into consideration. This will be important in determining the relativistic Doppler shiftformula, which follows.The Relativistic Doppler ShiftIn 1842 the Austrian physicist Christian Doppler showed that as a source of sound movesthrough a medium (such as air), the wavelength is compressed in the forward direction andexpanded in the backward direction. This change in wavelength of any type of wave causedby the motion of the source or the observer is called aDoppler shift. Doppler deduced thatthe difference between the wavelengthλobsobserved for a moving source of sound and thewavelengthλrestmeasured in the laboratory for a reference source at rest is related to theradial velocityvr(the component of the velocity directly toward or away from the observerof the source through the medium byλobs−λrestλrest=/Delta1λλrest=vrvs,(30)wherevsis the speed of sound in the medium. However, this expression cannot be pre-cisely correct for light. Experimental results such as those of Michelson and Morley ledEinstein to abandon the ether concept, and they demonstrated that no medium is involvedin the propagation of light waves. The Doppler shift for light is a qualitatively differentphenomenon from its counterpart for sound waves.Consider a distant source of light that emits a light signal at timetrest,1and another signalat timetrest,2=trest,1+/Delta1trestas measured by a clockat restrelative to the source. If thislight source is moving relative to an observer with velocityu, as shown in Fig. 9, then thetime between receiving the light signals at the observer’s location will depend on both theeffect of time dilation and the different distances traveled by the signals from the source tothe observer. (The light source is assumed to be sufﬁciently far away that the signals travelalong parallel paths to the observer.) Using Eq. ( 27), we ﬁnd that the time between theemission of the light signals as measured in the observer’s frame is/Delta1trest/slashbig/radicalbig1−u2/c2.I nthis time, the observer determines that the distance to the light source has changed by anamountu/Delta1trestcosθ/slashbig/radicalbig1−u2/c2. Thus the time interval/Delta1tobsbetween the arrival of theThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 121>>>

u/H9258uDtrest÷1 – u2/c2uDtrest cos /H92581st signal2nd signalTo observer÷1 – u2/c2FIGURE 9Relativistic Doppler shift.two light signals at the observer’s location is/Delta1tobs=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2[1+(u/c)cosθ].(31)If/Delta1trestis taken to be the time between the emission of the light wave crests, and if/Delta1tobsis the time between their arrival, then the frequencies of the light wave areνrest=1//Delta1trestandνobs=1//Delta1tobs. The equation describing therelativistic Doppler shiftis thusνobs=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+(u/c)cosθ=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+vr/c,(32)wherevr=ucosθis theradial velocityof the light source. If the light source is movingdirectly away from the observer (θ=0◦,vr=u) or toward the observer (θ=180◦,vr=−u), then the relativistic Doppler shift reduces toνobs=νrest/radicalBigg1−vr/c1+vr/c(radial motion).(33)There is also atransverse Doppler shiftfor motion perpendicular to the observer’s line ofsight (θ=90◦,vr=0). This transverse shift is entirely due to the effect of time dilation.Note that, unlike formulas describing the Doppler shift for sound, Eqs. ( 32) and ( 33)do not distinguish between the velocity of the source and the velocity of the observer. Onlythe relative velocity is important.When astronomers observe a star or galaxy moving away from or toward Earth, the wave-length of the light they receive is shifted toward longer or shorter wavelengths, respectively.If the source of light is movingawayfrom the observer (vr>0), thenλobs>λrest. Thisshift to a longer wavelength is called aredshift. Similarly, if the source is movingtowardthe observer (vr<0), then there is a shift to a shorter wavelength, ablueshift.7Because7Doppler himself maintained that all stars would be white if they were at rest and that the different colors ofthe stars were due to their Doppler shifts. However, the stars move much too slowly for their Doppler shifts tosigniﬁcantly change their colors.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 122>>>

most of the objects in the universe outside of our own Milky Way Galaxy are moving awayfrom us, redshifts are commonly measured by astronomers. Aredshift parameterzis usedto describe the change in wavelength; it is deﬁned asz≡λobs−λrestλrest=/Delta1λλrest.(34)The observed wavelengthλobsis obtained from Eq. (33) andc=λν,λobs=λrest/radicalBigg1+vr/c1−vr/c(radial motion),(35)and the redshift parameter becomesz=/radicalBigg1+vr/c1−vr/c−1 (radial motion).(36)In general, Eq. (34), together withλ=c/ν, shows thatz+1=/Delta1tobs/Delta1trest.(37)This expression indicates that if the luminosity of an astrophysical source with redshiftparameterz>0 (receding) is observed to vary during a time/Delta1tobs, then the change inluminosity occurred over ashortertime/Delta1trest=/Delta1tobs/(z+1)in the rest frame of thesource.Example 3.2.In its rest frame, the quasar SDSS 1030+0524 produces a hydrogen emis-sion line of wavelengthλrest=121.6 nm. On Earth, this emission line is observed to havea wavelength ofλobs=885.2 nm. The redshift parameter for this quasar is thusz=λobs−λrestλrest=6.28.Using Eq. (36), we may calculate the speed of recession of the quasar:z=/radicalBigg1+vr/c1−vr/c−1vrc=(z+1)2−1(z+1)2+1(38)=0.963.continuedThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 123>>>

Quasar SDSS 1030+0524 appears to be moving away from us at more than 96% of the speedof light! However, objects that are enormously distant from us, such as quasars, have largeapparent recessional speeds due to the overall expansion of the universe. In these cases theincrease in the observed wavelength is actually due tothe expansion of space itself(whichstretches the wavelength of light) rather than being due to the motion of the object throughspace! Thiscosmological redshiftis a consequence of the Big Bang.This quasar was discovered as a product of the massive Sloan Digital Sky Survey; seeBecker, et al. (2001) for further information about this object.Suppose the speeduof the light source is small compared to that of light (u/c≪1).Using the expansion (to ﬁrst order)(1+vr/c)±1/2≃1±vr2c,together with Eqs. (34) and (35) for radial motion, then shows that for low speeds,z=/Delta1λλrest≃vrc,(39)wherevr>0 for a receding source (/Delta1λ >0) andvr<0 for an approaching source (/Delta1λ <0). Although this equation is similar to Eq. ( 30), you should bear in mind that Eq. ( 39)is anapproximation, valid only for low speeds. Misapplying this equation to the relativisticquasar SDSS 1030+0524 discussed in Example 3.2 would lead to the erroneous conclusionthat the quasar is moving away from us at 6.28 times the speed of light!The Relativistic Velocity TransformationBecause space and time intervals are measured differently by different observers in relativemotion, velocities must be transformed as well. The equations describing the relativistictransformation of velocities may be easily found from the Lorentz transformation equations( 16– 19) by writing them as differentials. Then dividing thedx′,dy′, anddz′equationsby thedt′equation gives therelativistic velocity transformations:v′x=vx−u1−uvx/c2v′y=vy/radicalbig1−u2/c21−uvx/c2v′z=vz/radicalbig1−u2/c21−uvx/c2.(40)(41)(42)As with the inverse Lorentz transformations, the inverse velocity transformations may beobtained by switching primed and unprimed quantities and by replacinguwith−u. It is leftas an exercise to show that these equations do satisfy the second of Einstein’s postulates:Light travels through a vacuum at a constant speed that is independent of the motion of thelight source. From Eqs. ( 40– 42), ifvhas a magnitude ofc, so doesv′(see Problem 12).The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 124>>>

Example 3.3.As measured in the reference frameS′, a light source is at rest and radiateslight equally in all directions. In particular, half of the light is emitted into the forward(positivex′) hemisphere. Is this situation any different when viewed from frameS, whichmeasures the light source traveling in the positivex-direction with a relativistic speedu?Consider a light ray whose velocity components measured inS′arev′x=0,v′y=c, andv′z=0. This ray travels along the boundary between the forward and backward hemispheresof light as measured inS′. However, as measured in frameS, this light ray has the velocitycomponents given by the inverse transformations of Eqs. (40–42):vx=v′x+u1+uv′x/c2=uvy=v′y/radicalbig1−u2/c21+uv′x/c2=c/radicalbig1−u2/c2vz=v′z/radicalbig1−u2/c21+uv′x/c2=0.As measured in frameS, the light ray is not traveling perpendicular to thex-axis; seeFig. 10.In fact, foru/cclose to 1, the angleθmeasured between the light ray and thex-axis maybe found from sinθ=vy/v, wherev=/radicalBigv2x+v2y+v2z=cis the speed of the light ray measured in frameS. Thussinθ=vyv=/radicalbig1−u2/c2=γ−1,(43)
/H9258sin /H9258 = /H9253–1yy'xx'(a) S(b) S'FIGURE 10Relativistic headlight effect. (a) FrameS. (b) FrameS′.continuedThe Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 125>>>

whereγis the Lorentz factor deﬁned by Eq. ( 20). For relativistic speedsu≈c, implyingthatγis very large, so sinθ(and henceθ) becomes very small.All of the light emitted into theforward hemisphere, as measured inS′, is concentrated into a narrow cone in the directionof the light source’s motion when measured in frameS. Called theheadlight effect, thisresult plays an important role in many areas of astrophysics. For example, as relativisticelectrons spiral around magnetic ﬁeld lines, they emit light in the form ofsynchrotronradiation. The radiation is concentrated in the direction of the electron’s motion and isstrongly plane-polarized. Synchrotron radiation is an important electromagnetic radiationprocess in the Sun, Jupiter’s magnetosphere, pulsars, and active galaxies.4RELATIVISTIC MOMENTUM AND ENERGYUp to this point, only relativistic kinematics has been considered. Einstein’s theory ofspecial relativity also requires new deﬁnitions for the concepts of momentum and energy.The ideas of conservation of linear momentum and energy are two of the cornerstones ofphysics. According to the Principle of Relativity, if momentum is conserved in one inertialframe of reference, then it must be conserved in all inertial frames. At the end of thissection, it is shown that this requirement leads to a deﬁnition of therelativistic momentumvector p:p=mv/radicalbig1−v2/c2=γmv,(44)whereγis the Lorentz factor deﬁned by Eq. ( 20).Warning:Some authors prefer to separatethe “m” and the “v” in this formula by deﬁning a “relativistic mass,”m/slashbig/radicalbig1−v2/c2. Thereis no compelling reason for this separation, and it can be misleading. In this text, the massmof a particle is taken to be the same value inallinertial reference frames; it isinvariantunder a Lorentz transformation, and so there is no reason to qualify the term as a “rest mass.”Thus the mass of a moving particledoes notincrease with increasing speed, although itsmomentumapproaches inﬁnity asv→c. Also note that the “v” in the denominator is themagnitude of the particle’s velocity relative to the observer,notthe relative velocityubetween two arbitrary frames of reference.The Derivation ofE=mc2Using Eq. ( 44) and the relation between kinetic energywecanderiveanexpressionfortherelativistickineticenergy.ThestartingpointisNewton’ssecondlaw,F=dp/dt,appliedtoaparticleofmassmthat is initially at rest.8Consider aforce of magnitudeFthatactsontheparticleinthex-direction.Theparticle’sﬁnalkineticenergyKequalsthetotalworkdonebytheforceontheparticleasittravelsfromitsinitial8It is left as an exercise to show thatF=maisnot correct, since at relativistic speeds the force and the accelerationneednotbe in the same direction!,The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 126>>>

positionxito its ﬁnal positionxf:K=/integraldisplayxfxiFd x=/integraldisplayxfxidpdtdx=/integraldisplaypfpidxdtdp=/integraldisplaypfpivd p ,wherepiandpfare the initial and ﬁnal momenta of the particle, respectively. Integratingthe last expression by parts and using the initial conditionpi=0 giveK=pfvf−/integraldisplayvf0pdv=mv2f/radicalBig1−v2f/c2−/integraldisplayvf0mv/radicalbig1−v2/c2dv=mv2f/radicalBig1−v2f/c2+mc2/parenleftbigg/radicalBig1−v2f/c2−1/parenrightbigg.If we drop thefsubscript, the expression for therelativistic kinetic energybecomesK=mc2/parenleftBigg1/radicalbig1−v2/c2−1/parenrightBigg=mc2(γ−1).(45)Although it is not apparent that this formula for the kinetic energy reduces to either of thefamiliar formsK=12mv2orK=p2/2min the low-speed Newtonian limit, both formsmust be true if Eq. (45) is to be correct. The proofs will be left as exercises.The right-hand side of this expression for the kinetic energy consists of the differencebetween two energy terms. The ﬁrst is identiﬁed as thetotal relativistic energyE,E=mc2/radicalbig1−v2/c2=γ mc2.(46)The second term is an energy that does not depend on the speed of the particle; the particlehas this energy even when it is at rest. The termmc2is called therest energyof the particle:Erest=mc2.(47)The particle’s kinetic energy is its total energy minus its rest energy. When the energy of aparticle is given as (for example) 40 MeV , the implicit meaning is that the particle’skineticenergyis 40 MeV; the rest energy is not included. Finally, there is a very useful expressionrelating a particle’s total energyE, the magnitude of its momentump, and its rest energymc2. It states thatE2=p2c2+m2c4.(48)The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 127>>>

such as photons.For asystemofnparticles, the total energyEsysof the system is the sum of the totalenergiesEiof the individual particles:Esys=/summationtextni=1Ei. Similarly, the vector momentumpsysof the system is the sum of the momentapiof the individual particles:psys=/summationtextni=1pi.I fthe momentum of the system of particles is conserved, then the total energy is also conserved,even for inelastic collisionsin which the kinetic energy of the system,Ksys=/summationtextni=1Ki,i sreduced. The kinetic energy lost in the inelastic collisions goes into increasing the restenergy, and hence the mass, of the particles. This increase in rest energy allows the totalenergy of the system to be conserved. Mass and energy are two sides of the same coin; onecan be transformed into the other.Example 4.1.In a one-dimensional completely inelastic collision, two identical parti-cles of massmand speedvapproach each other, collide head-on, and merge to form a singleparticle of massM. The initial energy of the system of particles isEsys,i=2mc2/radicalbig1−v2/c2.Since the initial momenta of the particles are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction,the momentum of the systempsys=0 before and after the collision. Thus after the collision,the particle is at rest and its ﬁnal energy isEsys,f=Mc2.Equating the initial and ﬁnal energies of the system shows that the massMof the conglom-erate particle isM=2m/radicalbig1−v2/c2.Thus the particle mass has increased by an amount/Delta1m=M−2m=2m/radicalbig1−v2/c2−2m=2m/parenleftBigg1/radicalbig1−v2/c2−1/parenrightBigg.The origin of this mass increase may be found by comparing the initial and ﬁnal values ofthe kinetic energy. The initial kinetic energy of the system isKsys,i=2mc2/parenleftBigg1/radicalbig1−v2/c2−1/parenrightBiggand the ﬁnal kinetic energyKsys,f=0. Dividing the kinetic energy lost in this inelasticcollision byc2equals the particle mass increase,/Delta1m.This equation is valid even for particles that have no mass,The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 128>>>

The Derivation of Relativistic Momentum (Eq. 44)To justify Eq. ( 44) for the relativistic momentum, we will consider a glancing elasticcollision between two identical particles of massm. This collision will be observed fromthree carefully chosen inertial reference frames, as shown in Fig. 11. When measured inan inertial reference frameS′′, the two particlesAandBhave velocities and momenta thatare equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, both before and after the collision. As aresult, the total momentum must be zero both before and after the collision; momentumis conserved. This collision can also be measured from two other reference frames,SandS′. From Fig. 11, ifSmoves in the negativex′′-direction with a velocity equal to thex′′-component of particleAinS′′, then as measured from frameS, the velocity of particleAhas only ay-component. Similarly, ifS′moves in the positivex′′-direction with a velocityequal to thex′′-component of particleBinS′′, then as measured from frameS′, the velocityof particleBhas only ay-component. Actually, the ﬁgures for framesSandS′would beidenticalif the ﬁgures for one of these frames were rotated by 180◦and theAandBlabelswere reversed. This means that the change in they-component of particleA’s momentumas measured in frameSis the same as the change in they′-component of particleB’smomentum as measured in the frameS′, except for a change in sign (due to the 180◦rotation):/Delta1pA,y=−/Delta1p′B,y. On the other hand, momentum must be conserved in framesSandS′, just as it is in frameS′′. This means that, measured in frameS′, the sum of the changesin they′-components of particleA’s andB’s momenta must be zero:/Delta1p′A,y+/Delta1p′B,y=0.Combining these results gives/Delta1p′A,y=/Delta1pA,y.(49)
Timeyy''y'yy''y'yy''y'xx''x'xx''x'xx''x'ABBBAA
(a) S(b) S''(c) S'FIGURE 11An elastic collision measured in frames (a)S, (b)S′′, and (c)S′. As observed fromframeS′′, frameSmoves in the negativex′′-direction, along with particleA, and frameS′moves inthe positivex′′-direction, along with particleB. For each reference frame, a vertical sequence of threeﬁgures shows the situation before (top), during, and after the collision.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 129>>>

So far, the argument has been independent of a speciﬁc formula for the relativisticmomentum vectorp. Let’s assume that the relativistic momentum vector has the formp=fmv, wherefis a relativistic factor that depends on themagnitudeof the particle’svelocity, but not its direction. As the particle’s speedv→0, it is required that the factorf→1 to obtain agreement with the Newtonian result.9A second assumption allows the relativistic factorfto be determined: They- andy′-components of each particle’s velocity are chosen to be arbitrarily small compared to thespeed of light. Thus they- andy′-components of particleA’s velocity in framesSandS′are extremely small, and thex′-component of particleA’s velocity in frameS′is taken tobe relativistic. Sincev′A=/radicalBigv′2A,x+v′2A,y≈cin frameS′, the relativistic factorf′for particleAin frameS′is not equal to 1, whereasin frameS,fis arbitrarily close to unity. IfvA,yis the ﬁnaly-component of particleA’svelocity, and similarly forv′A,y, then Eq. (49) becomes2f′mv′A,y=2mvA,y.(50)The relative velocityuof framesSandS′is needed to relatev′A,yandvA,yusing Eq. ( 41).BecausevA,x=0 in frameS, Eq. ( 40) shows thatu=−v′A,x; that is, the relative velocityuof frameS′relative to frameSis just the negative of thex′-component of particleA’svelocity in frameS′. Furthermore, because they′-component of particleA’s velocity isarbitrarily small, we can setv′A,x=v′A, the magnitude of particleA’s velocity as measuredin frameS′, and so useu=−v′A. Inserting this into Eq. ( 41) withvA,x=0 givesv′A,y=vA,y/radicalBig1−v′2A/c2.Finally, inserting this relation betweenv′A,yandvA,yinto Eq. ( 50) and canceling termsreveals the relativistic factorfto bef=1/radicalBig1−v′2A/c2,as measured in frameS′. Dropping the prime superscript and theAsubscript (which merelyidentify the reference frame and particle involved) givesf=1/radicalbig1−v2/c2.The formula for therelativistic momentum vector p=fmvis thusp=mv/radicalbig1−v2/c2=γmv.9There is no requirement that relativistic formulas appear similar to their low-speed Newtonian counterparts (cf.Eq. 45). However, this simple argument produces the correct result.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 130>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralFrench, A. P. (ed.),Einstein: A Centenary Volume, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,MA, 1979.Gardner, Martin,The Relativity Explosion, Vintage Books, New York, 1976.TechnicalBecker, Robert H. et al., “Evidence for Reionization atZ∼6: Detection of a Gunn–PetersonTrough in aZ=6.28 Quasar,”The Astronomical Journal, preprint, 2001.Bregman, Joel N. et al., “Multifrequency Observations of the Optically Violent VariableQuasar 3C 446,”The Astrophysical Journal,331, 746, 1988.Frisch, David H., and Smith, James H., “Measurement of the Relativistic Time DilationUsingµ-Mesons,”American Journal of Physics,31, 342, 1963.Hafele, J. C., and Keating, Richard E., “Around-the-World Atomic Clocks: Predicted Rel-ativistic Time Gains,”Science,177, 166, 1972a.Hafele, J. C., and Keating, Richard E., “Around-the-World Atomic Clocks: ObservedRelativistic Time Gains,”Science,177, 168, 1972b.McCarthy, Patrick J. et al., “Serendipitous Discovery of a Redshift 4.4 QSO,”The Astro-physical Journal Letters,328, L29, 1988.Sloan Digital Sky Survey,http://www.sdss.orgResnick, Robert, and Halliday, David,Basic Concepts in Relativity and Early QuantumTheory, Second Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1985.Taylor, Edwin F., and Wheeler, JohnA.,Spacetime Physics, Second Edition, W. H. Freeman,San Francisco, 1992.The Theory of Special Relativity


<<<PAGE 131>>>



<<<PAGE 132>>>

PROBLEM SET1Use Eqs. ( 14) and ( 15) to derive the Lorentz transformation equations from Eqs. ( 10– 13).
2Because there is no such thing as absolute simultaneity, two observers in relative motion maydisagree on which of two eventsAandBoccurred ﬁrst. Suppose, however, that an observer inreference frameSmeasures that eventAoccurred ﬁrst andcausedeventB. For example, eventAmight be pushing a light switch, and eventBmight be a light bulb turning on. Prove thatan observer in another frameS′cannot measure eventB(the effect) occurring before eventA(the cause). The temporal order of cause and effect is preserved by the Lorentz transformationequations.Hint:For eventAto cause eventB, information must have traveled fromAtoB,and the fastest thatanythingcan travel is the speed of light.3Consider the speciallight clockshown in Fig. 12. The light clock is at rest in frameS′andconsists of two perfectly reﬂecting mirrors separated by a vertical distanced. As measured byan observer in frameS′, a light pulse bounces vertically back and forth between the two mirrors;the time interval between the pulse leaving and subsequently returning to the bottom mirror is/Delta1t′. However, an observer in frameSsees a moving clock and determines that the time intervalThe Theory of Special Relativity
dy
xx'y'u (mirrors)u (reference frame)
(a) S(b) S'FIGURE 12(a) A light clock that is moving in frameS, and (b) at rest in frameS′.between the light pulse leaving and returning to the bottom mirror is/Delta1t. Use the fact that bothobservers must measure that the light pulse moves with speedc, plus some simple geometry, toderive the time-dilation equation (27).x′=a11(x−ut)(10)y′=y(11)z′=z(12)t′=a41x+a44t.(13)x2+y2+z2=(ct)2.(14)x′2+y′2+z′2=/parenleftbigct′/parenrightbig2.(15)
From Chapter 4 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 byPearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.,

<<<PAGE 133>>>

4Arod moving relative to an observer is measured to have its lengthLmovingcontracted to one-halfof its length when measured at rest. Find the value ofu/cfor the rod’s rest frame relative to theobserver’s frame of reference.5An observerPstands on a train station platform as a high-speed train passes by atu/c=0.8.The observerP, who measures the platform to be 60 m long, notices that the front and backends of the train line up exactly with the ends of the platform at the same time.(a)How long does it take the train to passPas he stands on the platform, as measured by hiswatch?(b)According to a riderTon the train, how long is the train?(c)According to a riderTon the train, what is the length of the train station platform?(d)According to a riderTon the train, how much time does it take for the train to pass observerPstanding on the train station platform?(e)According to a riderTon the train, the ends of the train willnotsimultaneously line upwith the ends of the platform. What time interval doesTmeasure between when the frontend of the train lines up with the front end of the platform, and when the back end of thetrain lines up with the back end of the platform?6An astronaut in a starship travels toαCentauri, a distance of approximately 4 ly as measuredfrom Earth, at a speed ofu/c=0.8.(a)How long does the trip toαCentauri take, as measured by a clock on Earth?(b)How long does the trip toαCentauri take, as measured by the starship pilot?(c)What is the distance between Earth andαCentauri, as measured by the starship pilot?(d)A radio signal is sent from Earth to the starship every 6 months, as measured by a clock onEarth. What is the time interval between reception of one of these signals and reception ofthe next signal aboard the starship?(e)A radio signal is sent from the starship to Earth every 6 months, as measured by a clockaboard the starship. What is the time interval between reception of one of these signals andreception of the next signal on Earth?(f)If the wavelength of the radio signal sent from Earth isλ=15 cm, to what wavelengthmust the starship’s receiver be tuned?7Upon reachingαCentauri, the starship in Problem 6 immediately reverses direction and travelsback to Earth at a speed ofu/c=0.8. (Assume that the turnaround itself takeszerotime.) BothEarth and the starship continue to emit radio signals at 6-month intervals, as measured by theirrespective clocks. Make a table for the entire trip showing at what times Earth receives thesignals from the starship. Do the same for the times when the starship receives the signals fromEarth. Thus an Earth observer and the starship pilot will agree that the pilot has aged 4 yearsless than the Earth observer during the round-trip voyage toαCentauri.8In its rest frame, quasar Q2203+29 produces a hydrogen emission line of wavelength 121.6 nm.Astronomers on Earth measure a wavelength of 656.8 nm for this line. Determine the redshiftparameter and the apparent speed of recession for this quasar. (For more information about thisquasar, see McCarthy et al. 1988.)9Quasar 3C 446 is violently variable; its luminosity at optical wavelengths has been observed tochange by a factor of 40 in as little as 10 days. Using the redshift parameterz=1.404 measuredfor 3C 446, determine the time for the luminosity variation as measured in the quasar’s restframe. (For more details, see Bregman et al. 1988.)/Delta1tmoving=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(27)The Theory of Special Relativity: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 134>>>

10Use the Lorentz transformation equations ( 16– 19) to derive the velocity transformationequations ( 40– 42).
11Thespacetime interval,/Delta1s, between two events with coordinates(x1,y1,z1,t1)and(x2,y2,z2,t2)is deﬁned by(/Delta1s)2≡(c/Delta1t)2−(/Delta1x)2−(/Delta1y)2−(/Delta1z)2.(a)Use the Lorentz transformation equations ( 16– 19) to show that/Delta1shas the same valuein all reference frames. The spacetime interval is said to beinvariantunder a Lorentztransformation.x′=x−ut/radicalbig1−u2/c2y′=yz′=zt′=t−ux/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(16)(17)(18)(19)v′x=vx−u1−uvx/c2v′y=vy/radicalbig1−u2/c21−uvx/c2v′z=vz/radicalbig1−u2/c21−uvx/c2.(40)(41)(42)
x′=x−ut/radicalbig1−u2/c2y′=yz′=zt′=t−ux/c2/radicalbig1−u2/c2.(16)(17)(18)(19)(b)If(/Delta1s)2>0, then the interval istimelike. Show that in this case,/Delta1τ≡/Delta1scis the proper time between the two events. Assuming thatt1<t2, could the ﬁrst eventpossibly have caused the second event?(c)If(/Delta1s)2=0, then the interval islightlikeornull. Show that only light could have traveledbetween the two events. Could the ﬁrst event possibly have caused the second event?The Theory of Special Relativity: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 135>>>

(a)Show thatv=/radicalBigv2x+v2y+v2z=c.(b)Use the velocity transformation equations to show that, as measured in reference frameS′,v′=/radicalBigv′2x+v′2y+v′2z=c,and so conﬁrm that the speed of light has the constant valuecin all frames of reference.13StarshipAmoves away from Earth with a speed ofvA/c=0.8. StarshipBmoves away fromEarth in the opposite direction with a speed ofvB/c=0.6. What is the speed of starshipAasmeasured by starshipB? What is the speed of starshipBas measured by starshipA?14Use Newton’s second law,F=dp/dt, and the formula for relativistic momentum, Eq. ( 44),to show that the acceleration vectora=dv/dtproduced by a forceFacting on a particle ofmassmisa=Fγm−vγ mc2(F·v),whereF·vis the vector dot product between the forceFand the particle velocityv. Thus theacceleration depends on the particle’s velocity and is not in general in the same direction as theforce.15Suppose a constant force of magnitudeFacts on a particle of massminitially at rest.(a)Integrate the formula for the acceleration found in Problem 14 to show that the speed ofthe particle after timetis given byvc=(F/m)t/radicalbig(F/m)2t2+c2.(b)Rearrange this equation to express the timetas a function ofv/c. If the particle’s initialacceleration at timet=0i sa=g=9.80 m s−2, how much time is required for the particleto reach a speed ofv/c=0.9?v/c=0.99?v/c=0.999?v/c=0.9999?v/c=1?16Find the value ofv/cwhen a particle’s kinetic energy equals its rest energy.17Prove that in the low-speed Newtonian limit ofv/c≪1, Eq. ( 45) does reduce to the familiarformK=12mv2.p=mv/radicalbig1−v2/c2=γmv(44)(d)If(/Delta1s)2<0, then the interval isspacelike. What is the physical signiﬁcance of/radicalbig−(/Delta1s)2?Could the ﬁrst event possibly have caused the second event?12General expressions for the components of a light ray’s velocity as measured in reference frameSarevx=csinθcosφvy=csinθsinφvz=ccosθ,whereθandφare the angular coordinates in a spherical coordinate system.The Theory of Special Relativity: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 136>>>

18Show that the relativistic kinetic energy of a particle can be written asK=p2(1+γ )m,wherepis the magnitude of the particle’s relativistic momentum. This demonstrates that in thelow-speed Newtonian limit ofv/c≪1,K=p2/2m(as expected).19Derive Eq. ( 48).K=mc2/parenleftBigg1/radicalbig1−v2/c2−1/parenrightBigg=mc2(γ−1).(45)
E2=p2c2+m2c4.(48)The Theory of Special Relativity: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 137>>>



<<<PAGE 138>>>

The Interaction of Lightand Matter1Spectral Lines2Photons3The Bohr Model of the Atom4Quantum Mechanics and Wave–Particle Duality1SPECTRAL LINESIn 1835 a French philosopher, Auguste Comte (1798–1857), considered the limits of humanknowledge. In his bookPositive Philosophy, Comte wrote of the stars, “We see how wemay determine their forms, their distances, their bulk, their motions, but we can never knowanything of their chemical or mineralogical structure.” Thirty-three years earlier, however,William Wollaston (1766–1828), like Newton before him, passed sunlight through a prismto produce a rainbow-like spectrum. He discovered that a number of darkspectral lineswere superimposed on the continuous spectrum where the Sun’s light had been absorbedat certain discrete wavelengths. By 1814, the German optician Joseph von Fraunhofer(1787–1826) had cataloged 475 of these dark lines (today calledFraunhofer lines)i nt h esolar spectrum. While measuring the wavelengths of these lines, Fraunhofer made the ﬁrstobservation capable of proving Comte wrong. Fraunhofer determined that the wavelengthof one prominent dark line in the Sun’s spectrum corresponds to the wavelength of theyellow light emitted when salt is sprinkled in a ﬂame. The new science ofspectroscopywasborn with the identiﬁcation of this sodium line.Kirchhoff’s LawsThe foundations of spectroscopy were established by Robert Bunsen (1811–1899), a Ger-man chemist, and by Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887), a Prussian theoretical physicist. Bun-sen’s burner produced a colorless ﬂame that was ideal for studying the spectra of heatedsubstances. He and Kirchhoff then designed aspectroscopethat passed the light of a ﬂamespectrum through a prism to be analyzed. The wavelengths of light absorbed and emittedby an element were found to be the same; Kirchhoff determined that 70 dark lines in thesolar spectrum correspond to 70 bright lines emitted by iron vapor. In 1860 Kirchhoff andBunsen published their classic workChemical Analysis by Spectral Observations, in whichthey developed the idea that every element produces its own pattern of spectral lines andthus may be identiﬁed by its unique spectral line “ﬁngerprint.” Kirchhoff summarized theproduction of spectral lines in three laws, which are now known asKirchhoff’s laws:From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.5by 

<<<PAGE 139>>>

• A hot, dense gas or hot solid object produces a continuous spectrum with no darkspectral lines.1• A hot, diffuse gas produces bright spectral lines (emission lines).• Acool, diffuse gas in front of a source of a continuous spectrum produces dark spectrallines (absorption lines) in the continuous spectrum.Applications of Stellar Spectra DataAn immediate application of these results was the identiﬁcation of elements found in theSun and other stars. A new element previously unknown on Earth,helium,2was discoveredspectroscopically on the Sun in 1868; it was not found on Earth until 1895. Figure 1shows the visible portion of the solar spectrum, and Table 1 lists some of the elementsresponsible for producing the dark absorptionequation lines.Another rich line of investigation was pursued by measuring the Doppler shifts of spectrallines. For individual stars,vr≪c, and so thelow-speed approximationof the following λobs−λrestλrest=/Delta1λλrest=vrc,(1)can be utilized to determine their radial velocities. By 1887 the radial velocities of Sirius,Procyon, Rigel, and Arcturus had been measured with an accuracy of a few kilometers persecond.Example 1.1.The rest wavelengthλrestfor an important spectral line of hydrogen(known as Hα) is 656.281 nm when measured in air. However, the wavelength of theHαabsorption line in the spectrum of the star Vega in the constellation Lyra is measured tobe 656.251 nm at a ground-based telescope. Equation ( 1) shows that the radial velocityof Vega isvr=c( λobs−λrest)λrest=−13.9 km s−1;theminussignmeansthatVegaisapproachingtheSun.starsalsohaveapropermotion,µ,perpendiculartothelineofsight.Vega’sangularpositionintheskychangesbyµ=0.35077′′yr−1. At a distance ofr=7.76 pc, this propermotionisrelatedtothestar’stransversevelocity,vθExpressingrin metersandµinradianspersecondresultsinvθ=rµ=12.9 km s−1.1In the ﬁrst of Kirchhoff’s laws, “hot” actually means any temperature above 0 K. However, according to Wien’sdisplacementlawatemperatureofseveralthousanddegreesKisrequiredforλmaxtofallinthevisibleportion of the electromagnetic spectrum.t is the opacity oroptical depthof thegasthatisresponsibleforthecontinuousblackbodyspectrum.2The nameheliumcomes fromHelios, a Greek Sun god.However,.
I,The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 140>>>

This transverse velocity is comparable to Vega’s radial velocity. Vega’s speed through spacerelative to the Sun is thusv=/radicalBigv2r+v2θ=19.0 km s−1.The average speed of stars in the solar neighborhood is about 25 km s−1. In reality, themeasurement of a star’s radial velocity is complicated by the 29.8 km s−1motion of Eartharound the Sun, which causes the observed wavelengthλobsof a spectral line to varysinusoidally over the course of a year. This effect of Earth’s speed may be easily compensatedfor by subtracting the component of Earth’s orbital velocity along the line of sight from thestar’s measured radial velocity.SpectrographsModern methods can measure radial velocities with an accuracy of better than±3ms−1!Today astronomers usespectrographsto measure the spectra of stars and galaxies; seeFig. 2.3After passing through a narrow slit, the starlight is collimated by a mirror anddirected onto adiffraction grating. A diffraction grating is a piece of glass onto whichnarrow, closely spaced lines have been evenly ruled (typically several thousand lines permillimeter); the grating may be made to transmit the light (atransmission grating) or reﬂectthe light (areﬂection grating). In either case, the grating acts like a long series of neighboringdouble slits. Different wavelengths of light have their maxima occurring at different anglesθgiven by the following e q u a t i o ndsinθ=nλ (n=0,1,2,... ) ,wheredis the distance between adjacent lines of the grating,nis the order of the spectrum,andθis measured from the line normal (or perpendicular) to the grating. (n=0 correspondstoθ=0 for all wavelengths, so the light is not dispersed into a spectrum in this case.) Thespectrum is then focused onto a photographic plate or electronic detector for recording.The ability of a spectrograph to resolve two closely spaced wavelengths separated by anamount/Delta1λdepends on the order of the spectrum,n, and the total number of lines of thegrating that are illuminated,N. The smallest difference in wavelength that the grating canresolve is/Delta1λ=λnN,(2)whereλis either of the closely spaced wavelengths being measured. The ratioλ//Delta1λis theresolving powerof the grating.43massesof the stars to be determined. The same methods have now been used to detect numerous extrasolar planets.4In some cases, the resolving power of a spectrograph may be determined by other factors—for example, the slitwidth.Measuring the radial velocities of stars in binary star systems allows the:The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 141>>>

FIGURE 1The solar spectrum with Fraunhofer lines. Note that the wavelengths are expressedin angstroms (1 Å=0.1 nm), a commonly used wavelength unit in astronomy. Modern depictions ofspectra are typically shown as plots of ﬂux as a function of wavelength(Courtesy of The Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington.).The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 142>>>

TABLE 1Wavelengths of some of the stronger Fraunhofer lines measured in air near sea level.The difference in wavelengths of spectral lines when measured in air versus invacuum are discussed in Example 3.1. (Data from Lang,Astrophysical Formulae, Third Edition,Springer, New York, 1999.)WavelengthEquivalent(nm) Name Atom Width (nm)385.992Fe I 0.155388.905H80.235393.368 K Ca II 2.025396.849 H Ca II 1.547404.582Fe I 0.117410.175 h, HδHI 0.313422.674 g Ca I 0.148434.048 G′,HγHI 0.286438.356 d Fe I 0.101486.134 F, HβHI 0.368516.733 b4Mg I 0.065517.270 b2Mg I 0.126518.362 b1Mg I 0.158588.997 D2Na I 0.075589.594 D1Na I 0.056656.281 C, HαHI 0.402Light fromtelescopeFocal planeSlit
Camera mirrorDetectorDiffractiongratingCollimatingmirror/H92611/H92611/H92611/H92612/H92612/H92612FIGURE 2Spectrograph.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 143>>>

Astronomers recognized the great potential for uncovering the secrets of the stars in theempirical rules that had been obtained for the spectrum of light: Wien’s law, the Stefan–Boltzmann equation, Kirchhoff’s laws, and the new science of spectroscopy. By 1880Gustav Wiedemann (1826–1899) found that a detailed investigation of the Fraunhofer linescould reveal the temperature, pressure, and density of the layer of the Sun’s atmospherethat produces the lines. The splitting of spectral lines by a magnetic ﬁeld was discovered byPieter Zeeman (1865–1943) of the Netherlands in 1897, raising the possibility of measuringstellar magnetic ﬁelds. But a serious problem blocked further progress: However impressive,these results lacked the solid theoretical foundation required for the interpretation of stellarspectra. For example, the absorption lines produced by hydrogen are much stronger forVega than for the Sun. Does this mean that Vega’s composition contains signiﬁcantly morehydrogen than the Sun’s? The answer is no, but how can this information be gleaned fromthe dark absorption lines of a stellar spectrum recorded on a photographic plate? The answerrequired a new understanding of the nature of light itself.2PHOTONSDespite Heinrich Hertz’s absolute certainty in the wave nature of light, the solution to theriddle of the continuous spectrum of blackbody radiation led to a complementary descrip-tion, and ultimately to new conceptions of matter and energy. Planck’s constanthisthebasisofthemoderndescriptionofmatterandenergyknownasquantummechanics. Todayhis recognized as a fundamental constant of nature, like the speed oflightcand the universal gravitational constantG. Although Planck himself was uncom-fortable with the implications of his discovery of energy quantization, quantum theory wasto develop into what is today a spectacularly successful description of the physical world.The next step forward was taken by Einstein, who convincingly demonstrated the realityof Planck’s quantum bundles of energy.The Photoelectric EffectWhen light shines on a metal surface, electrons are ejected from the surface, a result called thephotoelectric effect. The electrons are emitted with a range of energies, but those originatingclosest to the surface have the maximum kinetic energy,Kmax. A surprising feature of thephotoelectric effect is that the value ofKmaxdoesnotdepend on the brightness of the lightshining on the metal. Increasing the intensity of a monochromatic light source will ejectmoreelectrons but will not increase their maximum kinetic energy. Instead,Kmaxvaries with thefrequencyof the light illuminating the metal surface. In fact, each metal has a characteristiccutoff frequencyνcand a correspondingcutoff wavelengthλc=c/νc; electrons will beemitted only if the frequencyνof the light satisﬁesν>νc(or the wavelength satisﬁesλ<λc). This puzzling frequency dependence is nowhere to be found in Maxwell’s classicdescriptionofelectromagneticwaves.The equationforthePoyntingvectoradmits no  rolefor the frequency in describing the energy carried by a light wave.Einstein’s bold solution was to take seriously Planck’s assumption of the quantizedenergy of electromagnetic waves. According to Einstein’s explanation of the photoelectriceffect, the light striking the metal surface consists of a stream of massless particles calledThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 144>>>

photons.5The energy of a single photon of frequencyνand wavelengthλis just the energyof Planck’s quantum of energy:Ephoton=hν=hcλ.(3)Example 2.1.The energy of a single photon of visible light is small by everyday stan-dards. For red light of wavelengthλ=700 nm, the energy of a single photon isEphoton=hcλ≃1240 eV nm700 nm=1.77 eV.Here, the producthchas been expressed in the convenient units of (electron volts)×(nanometers); recall that 1 eV=1.602×10−19J. For a single photon of blue light withλ=400 nm,Ephoton=hcλ≃1240 eV nm400 nm=3.10 eV.How many visible photons (λ=500 nm) are emitted each second by a 100-W light bulb(assuming that it is monochromatic)? The energy of each photon isEphoton=hcλ≃1240 eV nm500 nm=2.48 eV=3.97×10−19J.This means that the 100-W light bulb emits 2.52×1020photons per second. As this hugenumber illustrates, with so many photons nature does not appear “grainy.” We see the worldas a continuum of light, illuminated by a ﬂood of photons.Einstein reasoned that when a photon strikes the metal surface in the photoelectric effect,its energy may be absorbed by a single electron. The electron uses the photon’s energy toovercome the binding energy of the metal and so escape from the surface. If theminimumbinding energy of electrons in a metal (called thework functionof the metal, usually a feweV) isφ, then the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electrons isKmax=Ephoton−φ=hν−φ=hcλ−φ.(4)SettingKmax=0, the cutoff frequency and wavelength for a metal are seen to beνc=φ/handλc=hc/φ, respectively.The photoelectric effect established the reality of Planck’s quanta. Albert Einstein wasawarded the 1921 Nobel Prize, not for his theories of special and general relativity, but“for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the5Only a massless particle can move with the speed of light, since a massive particle would have inﬁnite energyThe termphotonwas ﬁrst used in 1926 by the physicist G. N. Lewis (1875–1946)..The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 145>>>

photoelectric effect.”6Today astronomers take advantage of the quantum nature of light invariousinstrumentsanddetectors,suchas CCDs(charge-coupleddevices)The Compton EffectIn 1922, the American physicist Arthur Holly Compton (1892–1962) provided the mostconvincing evidence that light does in fact manifest its particle-like nature when interactingwith matter. Compton measured the change in the wavelength of X-ray photons as theywere scattered by free electrons. Because photons are massless particles that move at thespeedoflight,therelativisticenergyequation(withmassm=0forphotons),showsthattheenergyofaphotonisrelatedtoitsmomentumpbyEphoton=hν=hcλ=pc.(5)Compton considered the “collision” between a photon and a free electron, initially at rest.As shown in Fig. 3, the electron is scattered in the directionφand the photon is scatteredby an angleθ. Because the photon has lost energy to the electron, the wavelength of thephoton has increased.In this collision, both (relativistic) momentum and energy are conserved. It is left asan exercise to show that the ﬁnal wavelength of the photon,λf, is greater than its initial
/H9258/H9278ElectronScattered photonme/H9261i/H9261fIncident photon
FIGURE 3The Compton effect: The scattering of a photon by a free electron.θandφare thescattering angles of the photon and electron, respectively.6PartlyinrecognitionofhisdeterminationofanaccuratevalueofPlanck’sconstanththeAmericanphysicistRobertA.Millikan(1868–1953)alsoreceivedaNobelPrize(1923)forhisworkonthephotoelectriceffect..
,The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 146>>>

wavelength,λi, by an amount/Delta1λ=λf−λi=hmec(1−cosθ),(6)wheremeis the mass of the electron. Today, this change in wavelength is known as theCompton effect. The termh/mecin Eq. ( 6), called theCompton wavelength,λC,i sthe characteristic change in the wavelength of the scattered photon and has the valueλC=0.00243 nm, 30 times smaller than the wavelength of the X-ray photons used by Compton.Compton’s experimental veriﬁcation of this formula provided convincing evidence thatphotons are indeed massless particles that nonetheless carry momentum, as described byEq. ( 5). This is the physical basis for the force exerted by radiation upon matter.3THE BOHR MODEL OF THE ATOMThe pioneering work of Planck, Einstein, and others at the beginning of the twentiethcentury revealed thewave–particle dualityof light. Light exhibits its wave properties asitpropagatesthrough space, as demonstrated by its double-slit interference pattern. Onthe other hand, light manifests its particle nature when itinteractswith matter, as in thephotoelectric and Compton effects. Planck’s formula describing the energy distribution ofblackbody radiation explained many of the features of the continuous spectrum of lightemitted by stars. But what physical process was responsible for the dark absorption linesscattered throughout the continuous spectrum of a star, or for the bright emission linesproduced by a hot, diffuse gas in the laboratory?The Structure of the AtomIn the very last years of the nineteenth century, Joseph John Thomson (1856–1940) discov-ered theelectronwhile working at Cambridge University’s Cavendish Laboratory. Becausebulk matter is electrically neutral, atoms were deduced to consist of negatively charged elec-trons and an equal positive charge of uncertain distribution. Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937)of New Zealand, working at England’s University of Manchester, discovered in 1911 thatan atom’s positive charge was concentrated in a tiny, massive nucleus. Rutherford directedhigh-speed alpha particles (now known to be helium nuclei) onto thin metal foils. He wasamazed to observe that a few of the alpha particles were bounced backward by the foilsinstead of plowing through them with only a slight deviation. Rutherford later wrote: “Itwas quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in my life. It was almostas incredible as if you ﬁred a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back andhit you.” Such an event could occur only as the result of a single collision of the alphaparticle with a minute, massive, positively charged nucleus. Rutherford calculated that theradius of the nucleus was 10,000 times smaller than the radius of the atom itself, showingthat ordinary matter is mostly empty space! He established that an electrically neutral atomconsists ofZelectrons (whereZis an integer), withZpositive elementary charges conﬁnedThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 147>>>

to the nucleus. Rutherford coined the termprotonto refer to the nucleus of the hydrogenatom (Z=1), 1836 times more massive than the electron. But how were these chargesarranged?The Wavelengths of HydrogenThe experimental data were abundant. The wavelengths of 14 spectral lines of hydrogenhad been precisely determined. Those in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrumare 656.3 nm (red, Hα), 486.1 nm (turquoise, Hβ), 434.0 nm (blue, Hγ), and 410.2 nm(violet, Hδ). In 1885 a Swiss school teacher, Johann Balmer (1825–1898), had found, bytrial and error, a formula to reproduce the wavelengths of these spectral lines of hydrogen,today called theBalmer seriesorBalmer lines:1λ=RH/parenleftbigg14−1n2/parenrightbigg,(7)wheren=3,4,5,..., andRH=1.09677583×107±1.3m−1is the experimentally de-termined Rydberg constant for hydrogen.7Balmer’s formula was very accurate, to withina fraction of a percent. Insertingn=3 gives the wavelength of the HαBalmer line,n=4gives Hβ, and so on. Furthermore, Balmer realized that since 22=4, his formula could begeneralized to1λ=RH/parenleftbigg1m2−1n2/parenrightbigg,(8)withm<n(both integers). Many nonvisible spectral lines of hydrogen were found later,just as Balmer had predicted. Today, the lines corresponding tom=1 are calledLymanlines. The Lyman series of lines is found in the ultraviolet region of the electromagneticspectrum. Similarly, insertingm=3 into Eq. ( 8) produces the wavelengths of thePaschenseries of lines, which lie entirely in the infrared portion of the spectrum. The wavelengthsof important selected hydrogen lines are given in Table 2.Yet all of this was sheer numerology, with no foundation in the physics of the day. Physi-cists were frustrated by their inability to construct a model of even this simplest of atoms. Aplanetary model of the hydrogen atom, consisting of a central proton and one electron heldtogether by their mutual electrical attraction, should have been most amenable to analysis.However, a model consisting of a single electron and proton moving around their commoncenter of mass suffers from a basic instability. According to Maxwell’s equations of elec-tricity and magnetism, an accelerating electric charge emits electromagnetic radiation. Theorbiting electron should thus lose energy by emitting light with a continuously increasingfrequency (the orbital frequency) as it spirals down into the nucleus. This theoretical predic-tion of a continuous spectrum disagreed with the discrete emission lines actually observed.Even worse was the calculated timescale: The electron should plunge into the nucleus inonly 10−8s. Obviously, matter is stable over much longer periods of time!7RHis named in honor of Johannes Rydberg (1854–1919), a Swedish spectroscopist.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 148>>>

TABLE 2The wavelengths of selected hydrogen spectral lines in air. (Based on Cox, (ed.),Allen’s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer, New York, 2000.)Series Name Symbol Transition Wavelength (nm)Lyman Lyα2↔1 121.567Lyβ3↔1 102.572Lyγ4↔17 9.254Lylimit∞↔19 1.18Balmer Hα3↔2 656.281Hβ4↔2 486.134Hγ5↔2 434.048Hδ6↔2 410.175Hϵ7↔2 397.007H88↔2 388.905Hlimit∞↔3 364.6Paschen Paα4↔3 1875.10Paβ5↔3 1281.81Paγ6↔3 1093.81Palimit∞↔3 820.4Bohr’s Semiclassical AtomTheoretical physicists hoped that the answer might be found among the new ideas of pho-tons and quantized energy. A Danish physicist, Niels Bohr (1885–1962; see Fig. 4) cameto the rescue in 1913 with a daring proposal. The dimensions of Planck’s constant, J×s,are equivalent to kg×ms−1×m, the units of angular momentum. Perhaps the angularmomentum of the orbiting electron was quantized. This quantization had been previouslyintroduced into atomic models by the British astronomer J. W. Nicholson. Although Bohrknew that Nicholson’s models were ﬂawed, he recognized the possible signiﬁcance of thequantization of angular momentum. Just as an electromagnetic wave of frequencyνcouldhave the energy of only an integral number of quanta,E=nhν, suppose that the valueof the angular momentum of the hydrogen atom could assume only integral multiples ofPlanck’s constant divided by 2π:L=nh/2π=n/planckover2pi1.8Bohr hypothesized that in orbits withprecisely these allowed values of the angular momentum, the electron would be stable andwould not radiatein spite of its centripetal acceleration. What would be the result of sucha bold departure from classical physics?To analyze the mechanical motion of the atomic electron–proton system, we start withthe mathematical description of their electrical attraction given byCoulomb’s law. For twochargesq1andq2separated by a distancer, the electric force on charge 2 due to charge 1has the familiar formF=14πϵ0q1q2r2ˆr,(9)8The quantity/planckover2pi1≡h/2π=1.054571596×10−34J s and is pronounced “h-bar.”The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 149>>>

FIGURE 4Niels Bohr (1885–1962). (Courtesy of The Niels Bohr Archive, Copenhagen.)whereϵ0=8.854187817...×10−12Fm−1is thepermittivity of free space9andˆris a unitvector directed from charge 1 toward charge 2.Consider an electron of massmeand charge−eand a proton of massmpand charge+ein circular orbits around their common center of mass, under the inﬂuence of their mutualelectrical attraction,ebeing thefundamental charge,e=1.602176462×10−19C.problem by using the reduced massµ=mempme+mp=(me)(1836.15266me)me+1836.15266me=0.999455679meand the total massM=me+mp=me+1836.15266me=1837.15266me=1.0005446mpof the system. SinceM≃mpandµ≃me, the hydrogen atom may be thought of as beingcomposed of a proton of massMthat is at rest and an electron of massµthat follows acircular orbit of radiusraround the proton; see Fig. 5. The electrical attraction between theelectron and the proton produces the electron’s centripetal accelerationv2/r, as describedby Newton’s second law:F=µa,implying14πϵ0q1q2r2ˆr=−µv2rˆr,9Formally,ϵ0isdeﬁnedasϵ0≡1/µ0c2, whereµ0≡4π×10−7NA−2is thepermeability of free spaceandc≡2.99792458×108ms−1is the deﬁned speed of light.This two-body problem may be treated as an equivalent one-bodyThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 150>>>

ve+e–ProtonElectronr
FIGURE 5The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom.or−14πϵ0e2r2ˆr=−µv2rˆr.Canceling the minus sign and the unit vectorˆr, this expression can be solved for the kineticenergy,12µv2:K=12µv2=18πϵ0e2r.(10)Now the electrical potential energyUof the Bohr atom is10U=−14πϵ0e2r=−2K.Thus the total energyE=K+Uof the atom isE=K+U=K−2K=−K=−18πϵ0e2r.(11)Note that the relation between the kinetic, potential, and total energies is in accordancewith the virial theorem for an inverse-square force,E=12U=−K. Because the kinetic energy must be positive, the total energyEis negative.This merely indicates that the electron and the proton arebound.T oionizethe atom (thatis, to remove the proton and electron to an inﬁnite separation), an amount of energy ofmagnitude|E|(or more) must be added to the atom.Thus far the derivation has been completely classical in nature. At this point, however,we can use Bohr’s quantization of angular momentum,L=µvr=n/planckover2pi1,(12)10ThisisfoundfromaderivationanalogoustotheoneleadingtothegravitationalresultThe zero ofpotentialenergyistakentobezeroatr=∞..The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 151>>>

to rewrite the kinetic energy, Eq. (10).18πϵ0e2r=12µv2=12(µvr)2µr2=12(n/planckover2pi1)2µr2.Solving this equation for the radiusrshows that the only values allowed by Bohr’s quan-tization condition arern=4πϵ0/planckover2pi12µe2n2=a0n2,(13)wherea0=5.291772083×10−11m=0.0529 nm is known as theBohr radius. Thus theelectron can orbit at a distance ofa0,4a0,9a0,...from the proton, but no other separationsare allowed. According to Bohr’s hypothesis, when the electron is in one of these orbits,the atom is stable and emits no radiation.Inserting this expression forrinto Eq. ( 11) reveals that the allowed energies of theBohr atom areEn=−µe432π2ϵ20/planckover2pi121n2=−13.6 eV1n2.(14)The integern, known as theprincipal quantum number, completely determines the char-acteristics of each orbit of the Bohr atom. Thus, when the electron is in the lowest orbit (theground state), withn=1 andr1=a0, its energy isE1=−13.6 eV . With the electron inthe ground state, it would take at least 13.6 eV to ionize the atom. When the electron is intheﬁrst excited state, withn=2 andr2=4a0, its energy is greater than it is in the groundstate:E2=−13.6/4 eV=−3.40 eV .If the electron does not radiate in any of its allowed orbits, then what is the origin of thespectral lines observed for hydrogen? Bohr proposed that a photon is emitted or absorbedwhen an electron makes a transition from one orbit to another. Consider an electron as it“falls” from a higher orbit,nhigh, to a lower orbit,nlow, without stopping at any intermediateorbit. (This isnota fall in the classical sense; the electron isneverobserved between thetwo orbits.) The electron loses energy/Delta1E=Ehigh−Elow, and this energy is carried awayfrom the atom by a single photon. Equation ( 14) leads to an expression for the wavelengthof the emitted photon,Ephoton=Ehigh−Eloworhcλ=/parenleftBigg−µe432π2ϵ20/planckover2pi121n2high/parenrightBigg−/parenleftbigg−µe432π2ϵ20/planckover2pi121n2low/parenrightbigg,The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 152>>>

which gives1λ=µe464π3ϵ20/planckover2pi13c/parenleftBigg1n2low−1n2high/parenrightBigg.(15)Comparing this with Eqs. ( 7) and ( 8) reveals that Eq. ( 15) is just the generalizedBalmer formula for the spectral lines of hydrogen, withnlow=2 for the Balmer series.Inserting values into the combination of constants in front of the parentheses shows thatthis term is exactly the Rydberg constant for hydrogen:RH=µe464π3ϵ20/planckover2pi13c=10967758.3m−1.This value is in perfect agreement with the experimental value quoted following Eq. ( 7)for the hydrogen lines determined by Johann Balmer, and this agreement illustrates the greatsuccess of Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom.11Example 3.1.What is the wavelength of the photon emitted when an electron makes atransition from then=3t ot h en=2 orbit of the Bohr hydrogen atom? The energy lostby the electron is carried away by the photon, soEphoton=Ehigh−Elowhcλ=−13.6 eV1n2high−/parenleftbigg−13.6 eV1n2low/parenrightbigg=−13.6 eV/parenleftbigg132−122/parenrightbigg.Solving for the wavelength givesλ=656.469 nm in a vacuum. This result is within 0.03%of the measured value of the Hαspectral line, as quoted in Example 1.1 and Table 2.The discrepancy between the calculated and the observed values is due to the measure-ments being made in air rather than in vacuum. Near sea level, the speed of light is slowerthan in vacuum by a factor ofapproximately1.000297. Deﬁning theindex of refractionto ben=c/v, wherevis the measured speed of light in the medium,nair=1.000297.Given thatλν=vfor wave propagation, and sinceνcannot be altered in moving from onemedium to another without resulting in unphysical discontinuities in the electromagneticﬁeld of the light wave, the measured wavelength must be proportional to the wave speed.Thusλair/λvacuum=vair/c=1/nair. Solving for the measured wavelength of the Hαlinein air yieldsλair=λvacuum/nair=656.469 nm/1.000297=656.275 nm.continued11The slightly different Rydberg constant,R∞, found in many texts assumes an inﬁnitely heavy nucleus. Thereduced mass,µ, in the expression forRHis replaced by the electron mass,me, inR∞.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 153>>>

This result differs from the quoted value by only 0.0009%. The remainder of the discrepancyis due to the fact that the index of refraction is wavelength dependent. The index of refractionalso depends on environmental conditions such as temperature, pressure, and humidity.12Unless otherwise noted, throughout the remainder of this text, wavelengths will be as-sumed to be measured in air (from the ground).The reverse process may also occur. If a photon has an energy equal to thedifferencein energy between two orbits (with the electron in the lower orbit), the photon may beabsorbed by the atom. The electron uses the photon’s energy to make an upward transitionfrom the lower orbit to the higher orbit. The relation between the photon’s wavelength andthe quantum numbers of the two orbits is again given by Eq. (15).After the quantum revolution, the physical processes responsible for Kirchhoff’s laws(discussed in Section 1) ﬁnally became clear.• A hot, dense gas or hot solid object produces a continuous spectrum with no darkspectral lines. This is the continuous spectrum of blackbody radiation emitted at anytemperature above absolute zero and described by the Planck functionsBλ(T )andBν(T ). The wavelengthλmaxat which the Planck functionBλ(T )obtains its maximumvalue is given by Wien’s displacement law• A hot, diffuse gas produces bright emission lines. Emission lines are produced whenan electron makes a downward transition from a higher orbit to a lower orbit. Theenergy lost by the electron is carried away by a single photon. For example, thehydrogen Balmer emission lines are produced by electrons “falling” from higherorbits down to then=2 orbit; see Fig. 6(a).• A cool, diffuse gas in front of a source of a continuous spectrum produces darkabsorption lines in the continuous spectrum. Absorption lines are produced whenan electron makes a transition from a lower orbit to a higher orbit. If an incidentphoton in the continuous spectrum has exactly the right amount of energy, equal toH/H9252H/H9251n = 1n = 2n = 3n = 4H/H9252H/H9251n = 1n = 2n = 3n = 4(a)(b)FIGURE 6Balmer lines produced by the Bohr hydrogen atom. (a) Emission lines. (b) Absorptionlines.12See, for example, Lang,Astrophysical Formulae, 1999, page 185 for a ﬁtting formula forn(λ)..The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 154>>>

/H9251/H9252/H9253/H9254Lyman (Ly)/H9251/H9252/H9253/H9254Balmer (H)/H9251/H9252/H9253/H9254Paschen (Pa)n = •n = 4n = 3n = 2
n = 1....Absorption lineEmission line0–2–4–6–8–10–12–14Energy (eV)
FIGURE 7Energy level diagram for the hydrogen atom showing Lyman, Balmer, and Paschenlines (downward arrows indicate emission lines; upward arrow indicates absorption lines).the difference in energy between a higher orbit and the electron’s initial orbit, thephoton is absorbed by the atom and the electron makes an upward transition to thathigher orbit. For example, the hydrogen Balmer absorption lines are produced byatoms absorbing photons that cause electrons to make transitions from then=2orbit to higher orbits; see Figs. 6(b) and 7.Despite the spectacular successes of Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom, it is not quitecorrect. Although angular momentum is quantized, itdoes nothave the values assignedby Bohr.13Bohr painted asemiclassicalpicture of the hydrogen atom, a miniature SolarSystem with an electron circling the proton in a classical circular orbit. In fact, the electronorbits are not circular. They are not even orbits at all, in the classical sense of an electronat a precise location moving with a precise velocity. Instead, on an atomic level, nature is“fuzzy,” with an attendant uncertainty that cannot be avoided. It was fortunate that Bohr’smodel, with all of its faults, led to the correct values for the energies of the orbits and toa correct interpretation of the formation of spectral lines. This intuitive, easily imaginedmodel of the atom is what most physicists and astronomers have in mind when they visualizeatomic processes.4QUANTUM MECHANICS AND WAVE–PARTICLE DUALITYThe last act of the quantum revolution began with the musings of a French prince, Louis deBroglie (1892–1987; see Fig. 8). Wondering about the recently discovered wave–particleduality for light, he posed a profound question: If light (classically thought to be a wave)13As we will see in the next section, instead ofL=n/planckover2pi1, the actual values of the orbital angular momentum areL=√ℓ(ℓ+1)/planckover2pi1, whereℓ, an integer, is a new quantum number.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 155>>>

FIGURE 8Louis de Broglie (1892–1987). (Courtesy of AIP Niels Bohr Library.)could exhibit the characteristics of particles, might not particles sometimes manifest theproperties of waves?de Broglie’s Wavelength and FrequencyIn his 1927 Ph.D. thesis, de Broglie extended the wave–particle duality to all of nature.Photons carry both energyEand momentump, and these quantities are related to thefrequencyνand wavelengthλof the light wave by Eq. (5):ν=Ehλ=hp.(16)(17)de Broglie proposed that these equations be used to deﬁne a frequency and a wavelengthforallparticles. Thede Broglie wavelengthandfrequencydescribe not only massless pho-tons but massive electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms, molecules, people, planets, stars, andgalaxies as well. This seemingly outrageous proposal of matter waves has been conﬁrmedin countless experiments. Figure 9 shows the interference pattern produced byelectronsin a double-slit experiment. Just as Thomas Young’s double-slit experiment established thewave properties of light, the electron double-slit experiment can be explained only by thewave-like behavior of electrons, witheachelectron propagating throughbothslits.14Thewave–particle duality applies to everything in the physical world; everything exhibits itswave properties in itspropagationand manifests its particle nature in itsinteractions.14See Chapter 6 of Feynman (1965) for a fascinating description of the details and profound implications of theelectron double-slit experiment.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 156>>>

FIGURE 9Interference pattern from an electron double-slit experiment. (Figure from Jönsson,Zeitschrift für Physik,161, 454, 1961.)Example 4.1.Compare the wavelengths of a free electron moving at 3×106ms−1anda 70-kg man jogging at 3 m s−1. For the electron,λ=hp=hmev=0.242 nm,which is about the size of an atom and much shorter than the wavelength of visible light.Electron microscopes utilize electrons with wavelengths one million times shorter thanvisible wavelengths to obtain a much higher resolution than is possible with optical micro-scopes.The wavelength of the jogging man isλ=hp=hmmanv=3.16×10−36m,which is completely negligible on the scale of the everyday world, and even on atomic ornuclear scales. Thus the jogging gentleman need not worry about diffracting when returninghome through his doorway!Just what are the waves that are involved in the wave–particle duality of nature? Ina double-slit experiment, each photon or electron must pass throughbothslits, since theinterference pattern is produced by the constructive and destructive interference of the twowaves. Thus the wave cannot convey information about where the photon or electron is,but only about where itmaybe. The wave is one ofprobability, and its amplitude is denotedby the Greek letter/Psi1(psi). The square of the wave amplitude,|/Psi1|2, at a certain locationdescribes the probability of ﬁnding the photon or electron at that location. In the double-slitexperiment, photons or electrons are never found where the waves from slits 1 and 2 havedestructively interfered—that is, where|/Psi11+/Psi12|2=0.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 157>>>

Heisenberg’s Uncertainty PrincipleThe wave attributes of matter lead to some unexpected conclusions of paramount importancefor the science of astronomy. For example, consider Fig. 10(a). The probability wave,/Psi1, is a sine wave, with a precise wavelengthλ. Thus the momentump=h/λof theparticle described by this wave is known exactly. However, because|/Psi1|2consists of anumber of equally high peaks extending out tox=± ∞, the particle’s location is perfectlyuncertain. The particle’s position can be narrowed down if several sine waves with differentwavelengths are added together, so they destructively interfere with one another nearlyeverywhere. Figure 10(b) shows the resulting combination of waves,/Psi1, is approximatelyzero everywhere except at one location. Now the particle’s position may be determinedwith a greater certainty because|/Psi1|2is large only for a narrow range of values ofx.However, the value of the particle’s momentum has become more uncertain because/Psi1isnow a combination of waves of various wavelengths. This is nature’s intrinsic trade-off:The uncertainty in a particle’s position,/Delta1x, and the uncertainty in its momentum,/Delta1p, areinversely related. As one decreases, the other must increase. This fundamental inability of aparticle tosimultaneouslyhave a well-deﬁned position and a well-deﬁned momentum is adirect result of the wave–particle duality of nature. A German physicist, Werner Heisenberg(1901–1976), placed this inherent “fuzziness” of the physical world in a ﬁrm theoreticalframework. He demonstrated that the uncertainty in a particle’s position multiplied by theuncertainty in its momentum must beat leastas large as/planckover2pi1/2:/Delta1x /Delta1p≥12/planckover2pi1.(18)Today this is known asHeisenberg’s uncertainty principle. The equality is rarely realizedin nature, and the form often employed for making estimates is/Delta1x /Delta1p≈/planckover2pi1.(19)A similar statement relates the uncertainty of an energy measurement,/Delta1E, and the timeinterval,/Delta1t, over which the energy measurement is taken:/Delta1E /Delta1t≈/planckover2pi1.(20)
(a)(b)FIGURE 10Two examples of a probability wave,/Psi1: (a) a single sine wave and (b) a pulsecomposed of many sine waves.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 158>>>

As the time available for an energy measurement increases, the inherent uncertainty in theresult decreases.Example 4.2.Imagine an electron conﬁned within a region of space the size of a hy-drogen atom. We can estimate the minimum speed and kinetic energy of the electron usingHeisenberg’s uncertainty principle. Because we know only that the particle is within anatom-size region of space, we can take/Delta1x≈a0=5.29×10−11m. This implies that theuncertainty in the electron’s momentum is roughly/Delta1p≈/planckover2pi1/Delta1x=1.98×10−24kg m s−1.Thus, if the magnitude of the momentum of the electron were repeatedly measured, theresulting values would vary within a range±/Delta1paround some average (orexpected) value.Since this expected value, as well as the individual measurements, must be≥0, the expectedvalue must be at least as large as/Delta1p. Thus we can equate the minimum expected value ofthe momentum with its uncertainty:pmin≈/Delta1p. Usingpmin=mevmin, the minimum speedof the electron is estimated to bevmin=pminme≈/Delta1pme≈2.18×106ms−1.The minimum kinetic energy of the (nonrelativistic) electron is approximatelyKmin=12mev2min≈2.16×10−18J=13.5 eV.This is in good agreement with the kinetic energy of the electron in the ground state ofthe hydrogen atom. An electron conﬁned to such a small regionmustmove rapidly with atleast this speed and this energy.his subtle quantum effectisresponsibleforsupportingwhitedwarfandneutronstarsagainstthetremendousinwardpull of gravity.Quantum Mechanical TunnelingWhen a ray of light attempts to travel from a glass prism into air, it may undergototalinternal reﬂectionif it strikes the surface at an angle greater than the critical angleθc, wherethe critical angle is related to the indices of refraction of the glass and air bysinθc=nairnglass.This familiar result is nonetheless surprising because, even though the ray of light is totallyreﬂected, the index of refraction of the outside air appears in this formula. In fact, theelectromagnetic wave does enter the air, but it ceases to be oscillatory and instead diesaway exponentially. In general, when a classical wave such as a water or light wave enters aTThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 159>>>

YBarrierFIGURE 11Quantum mechanical tunneling (barrier penetration) of a particle traveling to theright.medium through which it cannot propagate, it becomesevanescentand its amplitude decaysexponentially with distance.This total internal reﬂection can in fact be frustrated by placing another prism next tothe ﬁrst prism so that their surfaces nearly (but not quite) touch. Then the evanescent wavein the air may enter the second prism before its amplitude has completely died away. Theelectromagnetic wave once again becomes oscillatory upon entering the glass, and so theray of light has traveled from one prism to another without passing through the air gapbetween the prisms. In the language of particles, photons havetunneledfrom one prism toanother without traveling in the space between them.The wave–particle duality of nature implies that particles can also tunnel through a regionof space (a barrier) in which they cannot exist classically, as illustrated in Fig. 11. Thebarrier must not be too wide (not more than a few particle wavelengths) if tunneling is to takeplace; otherwise, the amplitude of the evanescent wave will have declined to nearly zero.This is consistent with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, which implies that a particle’slocation cannot be determined with an uncertainty that is less than its wavelength. Thus, ifthe barrier is only a few wavelengths wide, the particle may suddenly appear on the otherside of the barrier.Barrier penetrationis extremely important in radioactive decay, wherealpha particles tunnel out of an atom’s nucleus; in modern electronics, where it is the basisfor the “tunnel diode”; and inside stars, where the rates of nuclear fusion reactions dependupon tunneling.Schrödinger’s Equation and the Quantum Mechanical AtomWhat are the implications for Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom? Heisenberg’s uncertaintyprinciple does not allow classical orbits, with their simultaneously precise values of theelectron’s position and momentum. Instead, the electronorbitalsmust be imagined as fuzzyclouds of probability, with the clouds being more “dense” in regions where the electron ismore likely to be found (see Fig. 12). In 1925 a complete break from classical physicswas imminent, one that would fully incorporate de Broglie’s matter waves.Maxwell’sThe Interaction of Light and Matter
equations of electricity andmagnetismcan bemanipulated to produce a wave equa-tion for the electromagnetic waves that describe the propagation of photons. Simi-larly, a wave equation discovered in 1926 by Erwin Schrödinger (1877–1961), an Austrian physicist, led to a true quantum mechanics, the quantum analog of the classical mechanics that originated with Galileo and Newton. The Schrödinger

<<<PAGE 160>>>

–10–50510z/a0
x/a0n = 2, , = 1, m, = 0
–10 –505 1 0–10–50510z/a0
x/a0n = 2, , = 0, m, = 0
–10 –505 1 0–10–50510z/a0
x/a0n = 2, , = 1, m, = +–1
–10 –505 1 0
FIGURE 12 Electron orbitals of the hydrogen atom. Left: 2 sorbital. Middle: 2 porbital with
mℓ=0. Right: 2 porbital with mℓ=± 1. The quantum numbers n,ℓ, and mℓare described in the
text.
equation can be solved for the probability waves that describe the allowed values of a par-
ticle’s energy, momentum, and so on, as well as the particle’s propagation through space.
In particular, the Schrödinger equation can be solved analytically for the hydrogen atom,
giving exactly the same set of allowed energies as those obtained by Bohr (cf. Eq. 11).
However, in addition to the principal quantum number n, Schrödinger found that two addi-
tional quantum numbers, ℓandmℓ, are required for a complete description of the electron
orbitals. These additional numbers describe the angular momentum vector, L, of the atom.
Instead of the quantization used by Bohr, L=n/planckover2pi1, the solution to the Schrödinger equation
shows that the permitted values of the magnitude of the angular momentum Lare actually
L=/radicalbig
ℓ(ℓ+1)/planckover2pi1, (21)
where ℓ=0,1,2,...,n −1, and nis the principal quantum number that determines the
energy.
Note that it is common practice to refer to the angular momentum quantum numbers by
their historical spectroscopic designations s,p,d,f,g,h, and so on, corresponding to ℓ=0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. When the associated principle quantum number is used in combination
with the angular momentum quantum number, the principle quantum number precedes the
spectroscopic designation. For example, ( n=2,ℓ=1) corresponds to 2 p, and ( n=3,
ℓ=2) is given as 3 d. This notation was used in the caption of Fig. 12 and is also used in
Fig. 13.
The z-component of the angular momentum vector, Lz, can assume only the values
Lz=mℓ/planckover2pi1, with mℓequal to any of the 2 ℓ+1 integers between −ℓand+ℓinclusive. Thus
the angular momentum vector can point in 2 ℓ+1 different directions. For our purposes, the
important point is that the values of the energy of an isolated hydrogen atom do not depend
onℓandmℓ. In the absence of a preferred direction in space, the direction of the angular
momentum has no effect on the atom’s energy. Different orbitals, labeled by different values
ofℓandmℓ(see Fig. 12), are said to be degenerate if they have the same value of the
principal quantum number nand so have the same energy. Electrons making a transition
from a given orbital to one of several degenerate orbitals will produce the same spectral
line, because they experience the same change in energy.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 161>>>

DEDEm, = +1m, = 0m, = –12p
1sField offField on
FIGURE 13Splitting of absorption lines by the Zeeman effect.However, the atom’s surroundings may single out one spatial direction as being differentfrom another. For example, an electron in an atom will feel the effect of an external magneticﬁeld. The magnitude of this effect will depend on the 2ℓ+1 possible orientations of theelectron’s motion, as given bymℓ, and the magnetic ﬁeld strength,B, where the unitsofBare teslas (T).15As the electron moves through the magnetic ﬁeld, the normallydegenerate orbitals acquire slightly different energies. Electrons making a transition betweenthese formerly degenerate orbitals will thus produce spectral lines with slightly differentfrequencies. The splitting of spectral lines in a weak magnetic ﬁeld is called theZeemaneffectand is shown in Fig. 13. The three frequencies of the split lines in the simplest case(called thenormal Zeeman effect) areν=ν0andν0±eB4πµ,(22)whereν0is the frequency of the spectral line in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld andµis thereduced mass. Although the energy levels are split into 2ℓ+1 components, electron transi-tions involving these levels produce just three spectral lines with different polarizations.16Viewed from different directions, it may happen that not all three lines will be visible. Forexample, when looking parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld (as when looking down on a sunspot),the unshifted line of frequencyν0is absent.Thus the Zeeman effect gives astronomers a probe of the magnetic ﬁelds observedaround sunspots and on other stars. Even if the splitting of the spectral line is too small tobe directly detected, the different polarizations across the closely spaced components canstill be measured and the magnetic ﬁeld strength deduced.Example 4.3.Interstellar clouds may contain very weak magnetic ﬁelds, as small asB≈2×10−10T. Nevertheless, astronomers have been able to measure this magneticﬁeld. Using radio telescopes, they detect the variation in polarization that occurs across the15Another commonly used unit of magnetic ﬁeld strength is gauss, where 1 G=10−4T.Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld isroughly 0.5 G, or 5×10−5T.16See the ection,  The Complex Spectra of Atoms ,  concerning selection rules.,,,,SThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 162>>>

blended Zeeman components of the absorption lines that are produced by these interstellarclouds of hydrogen gas. The change in frequency,/Delta1ν, produced by a magnetic ﬁeld of thismagnitude can be calculated from Eq. ( 22) by using the mass of the electron,me, for thereduced massµ:/Delta1ν=eB4πme=2.8 Hz,a minute change. The total difference in frequency from one side of this blended line tothe other is twice this amount, or 6 Hz. For comparison, the frequency of the radio waveemitted by hydrogen withλ=21 cm isν=c/λ=1.4×109Hz, 250 million times larger!Spin and the Pauli Exclusion PrincipleAttempts to understand more complicated patterns of magnetic ﬁeld splitting (theanomalousZeeman effect), usually involving an even number of unequally spaced spectral lines, ledphysicists in 1925 to discover afourthquantum number. In addition to its orbital motion,the electron possesses aspin. This isnota classical top-like rotation but purely a quantumeffect that endows the electron with aspin angular momentumS.Sis a vector of constantmagnitudeS=/radicalBigg12/parenleftbigg12+1/parenrightbigg/planckover2pi1=√32/planckover2pi1,with az-componentSz=ms/planckover2pi1. The only values of the fourth quantum number,ms, are±12.With each orbital, orquantum state, labeled by four quantum numbers, physicists won-dered how many electrons in a multielectron atom could occupy the same quantum state.The answer was supplied in 1925 by an Austrian theoretical physicist, Wolfgang Pauli(1900–1958): No two electrons can occupy the same quantum state. ThePauli exclusionprinciple, thatno two electrons can share the same set of four quantum numbers, explainedthe electronic structure of atoms, thereby providing an explanation of the properties of theperiodic table of the elements, the well-known chart from any introductory chemistry text.Despite this success, Pauli was unhappy about the lack of a ﬁrm theoretical understandingof electron spin. Spin was stitched onto quantum theory in an ad hoc manner, and the seamsshowed. Pauli lamented this patchwork theory and asked, “How can one avoid despondencyif one thinks of the anomalous Zeeman effect?”The ﬁnal synthesis arrived in 1928 from an unexpected source. A brilliant English the-oretical physicist, Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac (1902–1984), was working at Cambridge tocombine Schrödinger’s wave equation with Einstein’s theory of special relativity. When heﬁnally succeeded in writing a relativistic wave equation for the electron, he was delightedto see that the mathematical solution automatically included the spin of the electron. It alsoexplained and extended the Pauli exclusion principle by dividing the world of particles intotwo fundamental groups: fermions and bosons.Fermions17are particles such as electrons,17The fermion is named after the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954).The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 163>>>

protons, and neutrons18that have a spin of12/planckover2pi1(or an odd integer times12/planckover2pi1, such as32/planckover2pi1,52/planckover2pi1,...). Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle, so no two fermions of the same typecan have the same set of quantum numbers. The exclusion principle for fermions, alongwith Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation, explains the structure of white dwarfs and neutronstarsBosons19are particles such as photons that haveanintegralspinof0,/planckover2pi1,2/planckover2pi1,3/planckover2pi1,....BosonsdonotobeythePauliexclusionprinciple,soanynumberofbosonscanoccupythesamequantumstate.As a ﬁnal bonus, the Dirac equation predicted the existence of antiparticles.Aparticle andits antiparticle are identical except for their opposite electric charges and magnetic moments.Pairs of particles and antiparticles may be created from the energy of gamma-ray photons(according toE=mc2). Conversely, particle–antiparticle pairs may annihilate each other,with their mass converted back into the energy of two gamma-ray photons.holes.The Complex Spectra of AtomsWith the full list of four quantum numbers (n,ℓ,mℓ, andms) that describe the detailedstate an each electron in an atom, the number of possible energy levels increases rapidlywith the number of electrons. When we take into account the additional complications ofexternal magnetic ﬁelds, and the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons them-selves and between the electrons and the nucleus, the spectra can become very complicatedindeed. Figure 14 shows some of the available energy levels for the two electrons in theneutral helium atom.20Imagine the complexity of the relatively abundant iron atom withits 26 electrons!Although energy levels exist for electrons with various combinations of quantum num-bers, it is not always easy for an electron to make a transition from one quantum state witha speciﬁc set of quantum numbers to another quantum state. In particular, Nature imposesa set ofselection rulesthat restrict certain transitions. For example, a careful investigationof Fig. 14 will show that only transitions involving/Delta1ℓ=±1 are shown (from1Pto1S,or from1Fto1D, for instance). These transitions are referred to asallowedtransitions andcan happen spontaneously on timescales of 10−8s. On the other hand, transitions that donot satisfy the requirement that/Delta1ℓ=±1 are known asforbiddentransitions.In the case of the Zeeman effect ﬁrst discussed on page 134, it was pointed out that onlythree transitions could occur between the 1sand 2penergy levels (recall Fig. 13). Thisis because of another set of selection rules requiring that/Delta1mℓ=0 or±1 and forbiddingtransitions between orbitals if both orbitals havemℓ=0.Although forbidden transitions may occur, they require much longer times if they are tooccur with any signiﬁcant probability. Since collisions between atoms trigger transitionsand can compete with spontaneous transitions, very low gas densities are required formeasurable intensities to be observed from forbidden transitions. Such environments doexist in astronomy, such as in the diffuse interstellar medium or in the outer atmospheres18The neutron was not discovered until 1932 by James Chadwick (1891–1974), the same year that the positron(antimatter electron) was discovered by Carl Anderson (1905–1991).19The boson is named in honor of the Indian physicist S. N. Bose (1894–1974).20Figure 14 is known as a Grotrian diagram..
Pair creation and annihilation play a major role in the evaporation of blackThe Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 164>>>

242220181614121086420Energy (eV)n = 2
n = 1n = 2n = 2n = 2334n = 3n = 41S1P1D1F3S3P3D3F
FIGURE 14Some of the electronic energy levels of the helium atom. A small number of possibleallowed transitions are also indicated. (Data courtesy of the National Institute of Standards andTechnology.)of stars. (It is beyond the scope of this text to discuss the detailed physics that underlies theexistence of selection rules.)The revolution in physics started by Max Planck culminated in the quantum atom andgave astronomers their most powerful tool: a theory that would enable them to analyze thespectral lines observed for stars, galaxies, and nebulae.21Different atoms, and combina-tions of atoms in molecules, have orbitals of distinctly different energies; thus they can beidentiﬁed by their spectral line “ﬁngerprints.” The speciﬁc spectral lines produced by anatom or molecule depend on which orbitals are occupied by electrons. This, in turn, dependson its surroundings: the temperature, density, and pressure of its environment. These andother factors, such as the strength of a surrounding magnetic ﬁeld, may be determined bya careful examination of spectral lines.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralFeynman, Richard,The Character of Physical Law, The M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA,1965.French,A. P., and Kennedy, P. J. (eds.),Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, MA, 1985.Hey, Tony, and Walters, Patrick,The New Quantum Universe, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2003.21Nearly all of the physicists mentioned in this chapter won the Nobel Prize for physics or chemistry in recognitionof their work.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 165>>>

Pagels, Heinz R.,The Cosmic Code, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1982.Segre, Emilio,From X-Rays to Quarks, W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1980.TechnicalCox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer, New York,2000.Harwit, Martin,Astrophysical Concepts, Third Edition, Springer, New York, 1998.Lang, Kenneth R.,Astrophysical Formulae, Third Edition, Springer, New York, 1999.Marcy, Geoffrey W., et al, “Two Substellar Companions Orbiting HD 168443,”Astrophys-ical Journal,555, 418, 2001.Resnick, Robert, and Halliday, David,Basic Concepts in Relativity and Early QuantumTheory, Second Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1985.Shu, Frank H.,The Physics of Astrophysics, University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA,1991.The Interaction of Light and Matter


<<<PAGE 166>>>

PROBLEM
1Barnard’s star, named after the American astronomer Edward E. Barnard (1857–1923), is
an orange star in the constellation Ophiuchus. It has the largest known proper motion ( µ=
10.3577′′yr−1) and the fourth-largest parallax angle ( p=0.54901′′). Only the stars in the
triple system αCentauri have larger parallax angles. In the spectrum of Barnard’s star, the
Hαabsorption line is observed to have a wavelength of 656.034 nm when measured from
the ground.
(a)Determine the radial velocity of Barnard’s star.
(b)Determine the transverse velocity of Barnard’s star.
(c)Calculate the speed of Barnard’s star through space.
2When salt is sprinkled on a ﬂame, yellow light consisting of two closely spaced wavelengths,
588.997 nm and 589.594 nm, is produced. They are called the sodium D lines and were observed
by Fraunhofer in the Sun’s spectrum.
(a)If this light falls on a diffraction grating with 300 lines per millimeter, what is the angle
between the second-order spectra of these two wavelengths?
(b)How many lines of this grating must be illuminated for the sodium D lines to just be
resolved?
3Show that hc≃1240 eV nm.
4The photoelectric effect can be an important heating mechanism for the grains of dust found
in interstellar clouds (see Section 12.1). The ejection of an electron leaves the grain with a
positive charge, which affects the rates at which other electrons and ions collide with and stick
to the grain to produce the heating. This process is particularly effective for ultraviolet photons
(λ≈100 nm) striking the smaller dust grains. If the average energy of the ejected electron is
about 5 eV , estimate the work function of a typical dust grain.
5The Interaction of Light
and Matter
Ephoton =hν=hc
λ=pc. (5)
/Delta1λ=λf−λi=h
mec(1−cosθ), (6)
6Consider the case of a “collision” between a photon and a free proton, initially at rest. What
is the characteristic change in the wavelength of the scattered photon in units of nanometers?
How does this compare with the Compton wavelength, λC?
7Verify that the units of Planck’s constant are the units of angular momentum.
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.5SET
,Use Eq. (5) for the momentum of a photon, plus the conservation of relativistic momentum and 
energy, to derive Eq. (6) for the change in wavelength of the scattered photon in the Compton 
effect.


<<<PAGE 167>>>

8A one-electron atom is an atom withZprotons in the nucleus and with all but one of its electronslost to ionization.(a)Starting with Coulomb’s law, determine expressions for the orbital radii and energies for aBohr model of the one-electron atom withZprotons.(b)Find the radius of the ground-state orbit, the ground-state energy, and the ionization energyof singly ionized helium (He II).(c)Repeat part (b) for doubly ionized lithium (Li III).9To demonstrate the relative strengths of the electrical and gravitational forces of attractionbetween the electron and the proton in the Bohr atom, suppose the hydrogen atom were heldtogethersolelyby the force of gravity. Determine the radius of the ground-state orbit (in unitsof nm and AU) and the energy of the ground state (in eV).10Calculate the energies and vacuum wavelengths of all possible photons that are emitted whenthe electron cascades from then=3 to then=1 orbit of the hydrogen atom.11Find the shortest vacuum-wavelength photon emitted by a downward electron transition in theLyman, Balmer, and Paschen series. These wavelengths are known as theseries limits. In whichregions of the electromagnetic spectrum are these wavelengths found?12An electron in a television set reaches a speed of about 5×107ms−1before it hits the screen.What is the wavelength of this electron?13Consider the de Broglie wave of the electron in the Bohr atom. The circumference of theelectron’s orbit must be an integral number of wavelengths,nλ; see Fig. 15. Otherwise, theelectron wave will ﬁnd itselfout of phaseand suffer destructive interference. Show that thisrequirement leads to Bohr’s condition for the quantization of angular momentum, Eq. ( 12).
r/H9261FIGURE 15Three de Broglie wavelengths spanning an electron’s orbit in the Bohr atom.L=µvr=n/planckover2pi1,(12)
14A white dwarf is a very dense star, with its ions and electrons packed extremely close together.Each electron may be considered to be located within a region of size/Delta1x≈1.5×10−12m. UseHeisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Eq. ( 19), to estimate the minimum speed of the electron.Do you think that the effects of relativity will be important for these stars?15An electron spends roughly 10−8s in the ﬁrst excited state of the hydrogen atom before makinga spontaneous downward transition to the ground state.(a)Use Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (Eq. 20) to determine the uncertainty/Delta1Ein theenergy of the ﬁrst excited state./Delta1E /Delta1t≈/planckover2pi1.(20)/Delta1x /Delta1p≈/planckover2pi1.(19)The Interaction of Light and Matter: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 168>>>

16Each quantum state of the hydrogen atom is labeled by a set of four quantum numbers:{n, ℓ, mℓ,ms}.(a)List the sets of quantum numbers for the hydrogen atom havingn=1,n=2, andn=3.(b)Show that the degeneracy of energy levelnis 2n2.17The members of a class of stars known as Ap stars are distinguished by their strong globalmagnetic ﬁelds (usually a few tenths of one tesla). The star HD215441 has an unusuallystrong magnetic ﬁeld of 3.4 T. Find the frequencies and wavelengths of the three componentsof the Hαspectral line produced by the normal Zeeman effect for this magnetic ﬁeld.COMPUTER PROBLEM18One of the most important ideas of the physics of waves is thatanycomplex waveform canbe expressed as the sum of the harmonics of simple cosine and sine waves. That is, any wavefunctionf (x)can be written asf (x)=a0+a1cosx+a2cos 2x+a3cos 3x+a4cos 4x+···+b1sinx+b2sin 2x+b3sin 3x+b4sin 4x+···.The coefﬁcientsanandbntell how much of each harmonic goes into the recipe forf (x). Thisseries of cosine and sine terms is called theFourier seriesforf (x). In general, both cosine andsine terms are needed, but in this problem you will use only the sine terms; all of thean≡0., theprocessofconstructinga wave pulse by addingwas described. The Fourier sine series thatyouwill use to constructtheoddharmonics and is given by/Psi1=2N+1(sinx−sin 3x+sin 5x−sin 7x+···±sinNx)=2N+1N/summationdisplayn=1nodd(−1)(n−1)/2sinnx,whereNis an odd integer. The leading factor of 2/(N+1)does not change the shape of/Psi1butscales the wave for convenience so that its maximum value is equal to 1 for any choice ofN.(a)Graph/Psi1forN=5, using values ofx(in radians) between 0 andπ. What is the width,/Delta1x,of the wave pulse?(b)Repeat part (a) forN=11.(c)Repeat part (a) forN=21.(d)Repeat part (a) forN=41.(e)If/Psi1represents the probability wave of a particle, for which value ofNis the position ofthe particle known with the least uncertainty? For which value ofNis the momentum ofthe particle known with the least uncertainty?a series of sine wavesyour wave employs only(b)Calculate the uncertainty/Delta1λin the wavelength of the photon involved in a transition (eitherupward or downward) between the ground and ﬁrst excited states of the hydrogen atom.Why can you assume that/Delta1E=0 for the ground state?This increase in the width of a spectral line is callednatural broadening.
In section 4 of  The Interaction of Light and Matter“
  The letter A is the star’s spectral type, and the letter p stands for “peculiar.”The Interaction of Light and Matter: Problem Set
*
* ”


<<<PAGE 169>>>



<<<PAGE 170>>>

Telescopes1Basic Optics2Optical Telescopes3Radio Telescopes4Infrared, Ultraviolet, X-ray, and Gamma-Ray Astronomy5All-Sky Surveys and Virtual Observatories1BASIC OPTICS&ROMTHEBEGINNINGASTRONOMYHASBEENANOBSERVATIONALSCIENCE)NCOMPARISONWITHWHATWASPREVIOUSLYPOSSIBLEWITHTHENAKEDEYE'ALILEOSUSEOFTHENEWOPTICALDEVICEKNOWN!LTHOUGH OBSERVATIONAL ASTRONOMY NOW COVERS THE ENTIRE RANGE OF THE ELECTROMAGNETICSPECTRUM ALONG WITH MANY AREAS OF PARTICLE PHYSICS THE MOST FAMILIAR PART OF THE lELDREMAINSINTHEOPTICALREGIMEOFTHEHUMANEYEAPPROXIMATELYNMTONM	#ONSEQUENTLYTELESCOPESANDDETECTORSDESIGNEDTOINVESTIGATEOPTICALWAVELENGTHRADIATIONWILLBE DISCUSSED IN SOME DETAIL &URTHERMORE MUCH OF WHAT WE LEARN IN STUDYING TELESCOPESAND DETECTORS IN THE OPTICAL REGIME WILL APPLY TO OTHER WAVELENGTH REGIONS AS WELLRefraction and Reﬂection'ALILEOSTELESCOPEWASArefractingTELESCOPETHATMADEUSEOFLENSESTHROUGHWHICHLIGHTWOULD PASS ULTIMATELY FORMING AN IMAGE ,ATER .EWTON DESIGNED AND BUILT AreﬂectingTELESCOPE THAT MADE USE OF MIRRORS AS THE PRINCIPAL OPTICAL COMPONENT "OTH REFRACTORS ANDREmECTORS REMAIN IN USE TODAY4OUNDERSTANDTHEEFFECTSOFANOPTICALSYSTEMONTHELIGHTCOMINGFROMANASTRONOMICALOBJECT WE WILL FOCUS lRST ON REFRACTING TELESCOPES 4HE PATH OF A LIGHT RAY THROUGH A LENSCAN BE UNDERSTOOD USINGSnell’s lawOF REFRACTION 2ECALL THAT AS A LIGHT RAY TRAVELS FROMONETRANSPARENTMEDIUMTOANOTHERITSPATHISBENTATTHEINTERFACE4HEAMOUNTTHATTHERAYIS BENT DEPENDS ON THE RATIO OF THE WAVELENGTHDEPENDENT INDICES OF REFRACTIONnλ≡c/vλOF EACH MATERIAL WHEREvλREPRESENTS THE SPEED OF LIGHT WITHIN THE SPECIlC MEDIUM)Fθ)T IS ONLY IN A VACUUM THATvλ≡c INDEPENDENT OF WAVELENGTH 4HE SPEED OF LIGHT IS WAVELENGTHDEPENDENT INOTHER ENVIRONMENTS&ROM #HAPTER   OF An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBY AS THE TELESCOPE GREATLY IMPROVED OUR ABILITY TO OBSERVE THE UNIVERSE 4ODAY WE CONTINUE TO ENHANCE OUR ABILITY TO hSEEv FAINT OBJECTS AND TO RESOLVE THEM IN GREATER DETAIL !S A RESULT MODERN OBSERVATIONAL ASTRONOMY CONTINUES TO SUPPLY SCIENTISTS WITH MORE CLUES TO THE PHYSICAL NATURE OF OUR UNIVERSE


<<<PAGE 171>>>

/H9258/H9258n/H9261n/H9261FIGURE 13NELLS LAW OF REFRACTION
f/H9261f/H9261A	B	FIGURE 2A	!CONVERGING LENSfλ> B	!DIVERGING LENSfλ<ISTHEANGLEOFINCIDENCEMEASUREDWITHRESPECTTOTHENORMALTOTHEINTERFACEBETWEENTHETWO MEDIA ANDθIS THE ANGLE OF REFRACTION ALSO MEASURED RELATIVE TO THE NORMAL TO THEINTERFACE SEE &IG 	 THEN 3NELLS LAW IS GIVEN BYnλSINθ=nλSINθ.	)F THE SURFACES OF THE LENS ARE SHAPED PROPERLY A BEAM OF LIGHT RAYS OF A GIVEN WAVELENGTHORIGINALLY TRAVELING PARALLEL TO THE AXIS OF SYMMETRY OF THE LENS CALLED THEoptical axisOF THE SYSTEM	 CAN BE BROUGHT TO A FOCUS AT A POINT ALONG THAT AXIS BY AconvergingLENS;&IG A	=!LTERNATIVELYTHELIGHTCANBEMADETODIVERGEBYAdivergingLENSANDTHELIGHTRAYS WILL APPEAR TO ORIGINATE FROM A SINGLE POINT ALONG THE AXIS ;&IG B	= 4HE UNIQUEPOINTINEITHERCASEISREFERREDTOASTHEfocal pointOFTHELENSANDTHEDISTANCETOTHATPOINTFROMTHECENTEROFTHELENSISKNOWNASTHEfocal lengthf&ORACONVERGINGLENSTHEFOCALLENGTH IS TAKEN TO BE POSITIVE AND FOR A DIVERGING LENS THE FOCAL LENGTH IS NEGATIVE4HEFOCALLENGTHOFAGIVENTHINLENSCANBECALCULATEDDIRECTLYFROMITSINDEXOFREFRACTIONANDGEOMETRY)FWEASSUMETHATBOTHSURFACESOFTHELENSARESPHEROIDALTHENITCANBESHOWNTHAT THE FOCAL LENGTHfλIS GIVEN BY THElensmaker’s formulafλ=(nλ−)/parenleftbiggR+R/parenrightbigg,	WHEREnλIS THE INDEX OF REFRACTION OF THE LENS ANDRANDRARE THE RADII OF CURVATUREOF EACH SURFACE TAKEN TO BE POSITIVE IF THE SPECIlC SURFACE IS CONVEX AND NEGATIVE IF IT ISCONCAVE SEE &IG 	)T IS WORTH NOTING THAT MANY AUTHORS CHOOSE TO DElNE THE SIGN CONVENTION FOR THE RADII OF CURVATURE IN TERMS OFTHEDIRECTIONOFTHEINCIDENTLIGHT4HISCHOICEMEANSTHAT%Q 	MUSTBEEXPRESSEDINTERMSOFTHEdifferenceINTHE RECIPROCALS OF THE RADII OF CURVATURETelescopes


<<<PAGE 172>>>

RRRRA	B	FIGURE 34HE SIGN CONVENTION FOR THE RADII OF CURVATURE OF A LENS IN THE LENSMAKERS FORMULAA	R>R> B	R<R</H9258/H9258FIGURE 44HE LAW OF REmECTIONθ=θ
ffA	B	FIGURE 5A	!CONVERGING MIRRORf> B	!DIVERGING MIRRORf<&OR MIRRORSfIS WAVELENGTHINDEPENDENT SINCE REmECTION DEPENDS ONLY ON THE FACTTHAT THE ANGLE OF INCIDENCE ALWAYS EQUALS THE ANGLE OF REmECTION θ=θ SEE &IG 	&URTHERMOREINTHECASEOFASPHEROIDALMIRROR&IG 	THEFOCALLENGTHBECOMESf=R/WHERERIS THE RADIUS OF CURVATURE OF THE MIRROR EITHER POSITIVE CONVERGING	 OR NEGATIVEDIVERGING	 A FACT THAT CAN BE DEMONSTRATED BY SIMPLE GEOMETRY #ONVERGING MIRRORS AREGENERALLYUSEDASTHEMAINMIRRORSINREmECTINGTELESCOPESALTHOUGHEITHERDIVERGINGORmATMIRRORS MAY BE USED IN OTHER PARTS OF THE OPTICAL SYSTEMThe Focal Plane&ORANEXTENDEDOBJECTTHEIMAGEWILLALSONECESSARILYBEEXTENDED)FAPHOTOGRAPHICPLATEOR SOME OTHER DETECTOR IS TO RECORD THIS IMAGE THE DETECTOR MUST BE PLACED IN THE FOCALPLANE OF THE TELESCOPE 4HEfocal planeIS DElNED AS THE PLANE PASSING THROUGH THE FOCALPOINT AND ORIENTED PERPENDICULAR TO THE OPTICAL AXIS OF THE SYSTEM 3INCE FOR ALL PRACTICALPURPOSES ANY ASTRONOMICAL OBJECT CAN REASONABLY BE ASSUMED TO BE LOCATED INlNITELY FARTelescopes


<<<PAGE 173>>>

/H9258/H9258yfFIGURE 64HE PLATE SCALE DETERMINED BY THE FOCAL LENGTH OF THE OPTICAL SYSTEMFROM THE TELESCOPEALL OF THE RAYS COMING FROM THAT OBJECT ARE ESSENTIALLY PARALLEL TO ONEANOTHERALTHOUGHNOTNECESSARILYPARALLELTOTHEOPTICALAXIS)FTHERAYSARENOTPARALLELTOTHEOPTICALAXISDISTORTIONOFTHEIMAGECANRESULTTHISISJUSTONEOFMANYFORMSOFaberrationDISCUSSED LATER4HEIMAGESEPARATIONOFTWOPOINTSOURCESONTHEFOCALPLANEISRELATEDTOTHEFOCALLENGTHOFTHELENSBEINGUSED&IGURE SHOWSTHERAYSOFTWOPOINTSOURCESTHEDIRECTIONOFONESOURCE BEING ALONG THE OPTICAL AXIS OF A CONVERGING LENS AND THE OTHER BEING AT AN ANGLEθWITHRESPECTTOTHEOPTICALAXIS!TTHEPOSITIONOFTHEFOCALPLANETHERAYSFROMTHEONAXISSOURCE WILL CONVERGE AT THE FOCAL POINT WHILE THE RAYS FROM THE OTHER WILLapproximatelyMEET AT A DISTANCEyFROM THE FOCAL POINT .OW FROM SIMPLE GEOMETRYyIS GIVEN BYy=fTANθTHEWAVELENGTHDEPENDENCEOFfISIMPLICITLYASSUMED	)FITISASSUMEDTHATTHElELDOFVIEWOF THE TELESCOPE IS SMALL THENθMUST ALSO BE SMALL 5SING THE SMALLANGLE APPROXIMATIONTANθ≃θ FORθEXPRESSED IN RADIANS WE lNDy=fθ.	4HIS IMMEDIATELY LEADS TO THE DIFFERENTIAL RELATION KNOWN AS THEplate scaledθ/dydθdy=f,	WHICH CONNECTS THE ANGULAR SEPARATION OF THE OBJECTS WITH THE LINEAR SEPARATION OF THEIRIMAGES AT THE FOCAL PLANE!S THE FOCAL LENGTH OF THE LENS IS INCREASED THE LINEAR SEPARATIONOF THE IMAGES OF TWO POINT SOURCES SEPARATED BY AN ANGLEθALSO INCREASESResolution and the Rayleigh Criterion5NFORTUNATELYTHEABILITYTOhSEEvTWOOBJECTSINSPACETHATHAVEASMALLANGULARSEPARATIONθISNOTSIMPLYAMATTEROFCHOOSINGAFOCALLENGTHSUFlCIENTLYLONGTOPRODUCETHENECESSARYPLATESCALE!FUNDAMENTALLIMITEXISTSINOURABILITYTOresolveTHOSEOBJECTS4HISLIMITATIONISDUETODIFFRACTIONPRODUCEDBYTHEADVANCINGWAVEFRONTSOFLIGHTCOMINGFROMTHOSEOBJECTS4ECHNICALLY THIS IMPLIES THAT THE DISTANCE TO THE ASTRONOMICAL OBJECT IS MUCH GREATER THAN THE FOCAL LENGTH OF THETELESCOPETelescopes


<<<PAGE 174>>>

/H9258/H92580ATH DIFFERENCE  D	 SIN /H9258LDyFIGURE 7&OR A MINIMUM TO OCCUR THE PATH DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PAIRED RAYS MUST BE A HALFWAVELENGTH4HISPHENOMENONISCLOSELYRELATEDTOTHEWELLKNOWNSINGLESLITDIFFRACTIONPATTERNWHICHIS SIMILAR TO THE9OUNG DOUBLESLIT INTERFERENCE 4OUNDERSTANDSINGLESLITDIFFRACTIONCONSIDERASLITOFWIDTHDSEE&IG 	!SSUMINGTHATTHEADVANCINGWAVEFRONTSARECOHERENTANYRAYPASSINGTHROUGHTHEOPENINGORaper-ture	ANDARRIVINGATASPECIlCPOINTINTHEFOCALPLANECANBETHOUGHTOFASBEINGASSOCIATEDWITH ANOTHER RAY PASSING THROUGH THE APERTURE EXACTLY ONEHALF OF A SLIT WIDTH AWAY ANDARRIVINGATTHESAMEPOINT)FTHETWORAYSAREONEHALFWAVELENGTHλ/	OUTOFPHASETHENDESTRUCTIVE INTERFERENCE WILL OCCUR4HIS LEADS TO THE RELATIONDSINθ=λ,ORSINθ=λD.7E CAN NEXT CONSIDER DIVIDING THE APERTURE INTO FOUR EQUAL SEGMENTS AND PAIRING UP A RAYFROM THE EDGE OF THE OPENING WITH ONE PASSING THROUGH A POINT ONEQUARTER OF A SLIT WIDTHAWAY &OR DESTRUCTIVE INTERFERENCE TO OCCUR IN THIS CASE IT IS NECESSARY THATDSINθ=λ,WHICH GIVESSINθ=λD.4HIS ANALYSIS MAY BE CONTINUED BY CONSIDERING THE APERTURE AS BEING DIVIDED INTO SIX SEGMENTS THEN EIGHT SEGMENTS THEN TEN SEGMENTS AND SO ON7E SEE THEREFORE THAT THE CONDITIONFORMINIMATOOCCURASARESULTOFDESTRUCTIVEINTERFERENCEFROMLIGHTPASSINGTHROUGHA SINGLE SLIT IS GIVEN IN GENERAL BYSINθ=mλD,	 PATTERNTelescopes


<<<PAGE 175>>>


mn n n    I / I
FIGURE 84HEDIFFRACTIONPATTERNPRODUCEDBYASINGLESLIT0HOTOGRAPHFROM#AGNET&RANCONAND4HRIERRAtlas of Optical Phenomena 3PRINGER6ERLAG "ERLIN 	
FIGURE 94HECIRCULARAPERTUREDIFFRACTIONPATTERNOFAPOINTSOURCE0HOTOGRAPHFROM#AGNET&RANCON AND4HRIERRAtlas of Optical Phenomena 3PRINGER6ERLAG "ERLIN 	WHEREm=,,,...FOR DARK FRINGES4HEINTENSITYPATTERNPRODUCEDBYTHELIGHTPASSINGTHROUGHASINGLESLITISSHOWNIN&IG4HE ANALYSIS FOR LIGHT PASSING THROUGH A CIRCULAR APERTURE SUCH AS A TELESCOPE IS SIMILARALTHOUGHSOMEWHATMORESOPHISTICATED$UETOTHESYMMETRYOFTHEPROBLEMTHEDIFFRACTIONPATTERNAPPEARSASCONCENTRICRINGSSEE&IG 	4OEVALUATETHISTWODIMENSIONALPROBLEMITISNECESSARYTOPERFORMADOUBLEINTEGRALOVERTHEAPERTURECONSIDERINGTHEPATHDIFFERENCESOFALLPOSSIBLEPAIRSOFRAYSPASSINGTHROUGHTHEAPERTURE4HESOLUTIONWASlRSTOBTAINEDINBY3IR'EORGE!IRYn	!STRONOMER2OYALOF%NGLANDTHECENTRALBRIGHTSPOTOFTHEDIFFRACTIONPATTERNISKNOWNASTHEAiry disk%QUATION 	REMAINSAPPROPRIATEFORDESCRIBINGTHELOCATIONSOFbothTHEMAXIMAANDTHEMINIMABUTmISNOLONGERANINTEGERTelescopes


<<<PAGE 176>>>

TABLE 14HE LOCATIONS AND INTENSITY MAXIMA OF THE DIFFRACTION RINGS PRODUCED BY A CIRCULARAPERTURE2INGmI/I#ENTRAL MAXIMUM&IRST MINIMUM3ECOND MAXIMUM3ECOND MINIMUM4HIRD MAXIMUM4HIRD MINIMUM
A	B	FIGURE 104HE SUPERIMPOSED DIFFRACTION PATTERNS FROM TWO POINT SOURCES A	 4HE SOURCES AREEASILY RESOLVED B	4HE TWO SOURCES ARE BARELY RESOLVABLE 0HOTOGRAPHS FROM #AGNET &RANCON AND4HRIERRAtlas of Optical Phenomena 3PRINGER6ERLAG "ERLIN 	4ABLE LISTSTHEVALUESOFmALONGWITHTHERELATIVEINTENSITIESOFTHEMAXIMAFORTHElRSTTHREE ORDERS!SCANBESEENIN&IG WHENTHEDIFFRACTIONPATTERNSOFTWOSOURCESARESUFlCIENTLYCLOSE TOGETHER EG THERE IS A VERY SMALL ANGULAR SEPARATIONθMIN	 THE DIFFRACTION RINGSARE NO LONGER CLEARLY DISTINGUISHED AND IT BECOMES IMPOSSIBLE TO RESOLVE THE TWO SOURCES4HE TWO IMAGES ARE SAID TO BE UNRESOLVED WHEN THE CENTRAL MAXIMUM OF ONE PATTERN FALLSINSIDETHELOCATIONOFTHElRSTMINIMUMOFTHEOTHER4HISarbitraryRESOLUTIONCONDITIONISREFERREDTOASTHERayleigh criterion!SSUMINGTHATθMINISQUITESMALLANDINVOKINGTHESMALLANGLEAPPROXIMATIONSINθMIN≃θMINWHEREθMINISEXPRESSEDINRADIANSTHE2AYLEIGH"Y UNDERTAKING A CAREFUL ANALYSIS OF THE DIFFRACTION PATTERNS OF THE SOURCES IT IS POSSIBLE TO RESOLVE OBJECTS THATARE SOMEWHAT MORE CLOSELY SPACED THAN ALLOWED BY THE 2AYLEIGH CRITERIONTelescopes


<<<PAGE 177>>>

CRITERION IS GIVEN BYθMIN=.λD	FOR A CIRCULAR APERTURE 4HEREFORE THE RESOLUTION OF A TELESCOPE IMPROVES WITH INCREASINGAPERTURE SIZE AND WHEN SHORTER WAVELENGTHS ARE OBSERVED JUST AS EXPECTED FOR DIFFRACTIONPHENOMENASeeing5NFORTUNATELYDESPITETHEIMPLICATIONSOF%Q 	THERESOLUTIONOFGROUNDBASEDOPTICALTELESCOPES DOES NOT IMPROVE WITHOUT LIMIT AS THE SIZE OF THE PRIMARY LENS OR MIRROR ISINCREASEDUNLESSCERTAINCOMPLEXREALTIMEADJUSTMENTSAREMADETOTHEOPTICALSYSTEM4HIS CONSEQUENCE IS DUE TO THE TURBULENT NATURE OF %ARTHS ATMOSPHERE ,OCALCHANGES IN ATMOSPHERIC TEMPERATURE AND DENSITY OVER DISTANCES RANGING FROM CENTIMETERSTO METERS CREATE REGIONS WHERE THE LIGHT IS REFRACTED IN NEARLY RANDOM DIRECTIONS CAUSINGTHE IMAGE OF A POINT SOURCE TO BECOME BLURRED 3INCE VIRTUALLY ALL STARS EFFECTIVELY APPEARASPOINTSOURCESEVENWHENVIEWEDTHROUGHTHELARGESTTELESCOPESATMOSPHERICTURBULENCEPRODUCESTHEWELLKNOWNhTWINKLINGvOFSTELLARIMAGES4HEQUALITYOFTHEIMAGEOFASTELLARPOINTSOURCEATAGIVENOBSERVINGLOCATIONATASPECIlCTIMEISREFERREDTOASseeing3OMEOFTHEBESTSEEINGCONDITIONSFOUNDANYWHEREINTHEWORLDAREATMauna Kea ObservatoriesIN(AWAIILOCATEDMFEET	ABOVESEALEVELWHERETHERESOLUTIONISBETWEEN.′′AND.′′APPROXIMATELYOFTHETIMEIMPROVINGTO.′′ONTHEBESTNIGHTS&IG 	/THERLOCATIONSKNOWNFORTHEIREXCELLENTSEEINGAREKitt Peak National ObservatoryNEAR4UCSON !RIZONATenerifeANDLa PalmaOF THE #ANARY )SLANDS AND SEVERAL SITES IN THE#HILEAN!NDES-OUNTAINS;CerroTololo Inter-American ObservatoryTHECerro La SillaANDCerro ParanalSITES OF THEEuropean Southern Observatory ANDCerro PachónLOCATION OF 'EMINI 3OUTH 'EMINI .ORTH IS ON -AUNA +EA	=!S A RESULT THESE SITES HAVEBECOME LOCATIONS WHERE SIGNIlCANT COLLECTIONS OF OPTICAL TELESCOPES ANDOR LARGEAPERTUREOPTICAL TELESCOPES HAVE BEEN BUILT)TISINTERESTINGTONOTETHATSINCETHEANGULARSIZEOFMOSTPLANETSISACTUALLYLARGERTHANTHESCALEOFATMOSPHERICTURBULENCEDISTORTIONSTENDTOBEAVERAGEDOUTOVERTHESIZEOFTHEIMAGE AND THE hTWINKLINGv EFFECT IS REMOVEDExample 1.1.!FTER MANY YEARS OF DELAYS THEHubble Space Telescope(34	 WASlNALLY PLACED IN AN ORBIT  KM  MILES	 HIGH BY THE 3PACE 3HUTTLEDiscoveryIN!PRIL ;SEE &IG A	=!T THIS ALTITUDE (34 IS ABOVE THE OBSCURING ATMOSPHERE OF %ARTHYET STILL ACCESSIBLE FOR NEEDED REPAIRS INSTRUMENT UPGRADES OR REPLACEMENT OR A BOOST INITS CONSTANTLY DECAYING ORBIT(34 IS THE MOST AMBITIOUS AND AT A COST OF APPROXIMATELY BILLION THE MOST EXPENSIVE SCIENTIlC PROJECT EVER COMPLETEDcontinued$ECAYING ORBITS ARE CAUSED BY THE DRAG PRODUCED BY %ARTHS EXTENDED RESIDUAL ATMOSPHERE 4HE EXTENT OF THEATMOSPHERE IS DETERMINED IN PART BY THE HEATING ASSOCIATED WITH THE SOLAR CYCLE
Telescopes


<<<PAGE 178>>>

A	
B	
FIGURE 11A	 4HE -AUNA +EA /BSERVATORIES IN (AWAII!MONG THE TELESCOPES VISIBLE IN THISVIEW ARE 'EMINI .ORTH OPEN SILVER DOME LEFT OF CENTER  M OPTICAL)2 OPERATED BY A SEVENCOUNTRY CONSORTIUM	 THE #ANADA&RANCE(AWAII4ELESCOPE FRONT CENTER  M OPTICAL	 TWIN7 -+ECK4ELESCOPESBACKRIGHTTWOMOPTICAL#ALTECHAND5NIVERSITYOF#ALIFORNIA5NITED3TATES	AND*APANS3UBARU4ELESCOPELEFTOF+ECK)AND+ECK))MOPTICAL)2	#OPYRIGHT2ICHARD7AINSCOAT	 B	 +ECK ) AND +ECK )) 4HESE TELESCOPES CAN BE OPERATED AS AN OPTICAL INTERFEROMETER#OPYRIGHT  2ICHARD7AINSCOAT	Telescopes


<<<PAGE 179>>>

(34 HAS A M INCH	 PRIMARY MIRROR 7HEN WE OBSERVE AT THE ULTRAVIOLET WAVELENGTHOFTHEHYDROGEN,YMANALPHA,Yα	LINENMTHE2AYLEIGHCRITERIONIMPLIESARESOLUTION LIMIT OFθ=./parenleftbigg. NM.M/parenrightbigg=.×−RAD=.′′.4HIS IS ROUGHLY THE EQUIVALENT OF THE ANGLE SUBTENDED BY A QUARTER FROM  KM AWAY )TWAS PROJECTED THAT (34 WOULD NOT QUITE BE hDIFFRACTIONLIMITEDv IN THE ULTRAVIOLET REGIONDUE TOextremelySMALL IMPERFECTIONS IN THE SURFACES OF THE MIRRORS 3INCE RESOLUTION ISPROPORTIONAL TO WAVELENGTH AND MIRROR DEFECTS BECOME LESS SIGNIlCANT AS THE WAVELENGTHINCREASES (34 SHOULD HAVE BEEN NEARLY DIFFRACTIONLIMITED AT THE RED END OF THE VISIBLESPECTRUM 5NFORTUNATELY BECAUSE OF AN ERROR IN THE GRINDING OF THE PRIMARY MIRROR ANOPTIMALSHAPEWASNOTOBTAINED#ONSEQUENTLYTHOSEINITIALEXPECTATIONSWERENOTREALIZEDUNTIL CORRECTIVE OPTICS PACKAGES WERE INSTALLED DURING A REPAIR MISSION IN $ECEMBER ;&IG B	=Aberrations"OTHLENSANDMIRRORSYSTEMSSUFFERFROMINHERENTIMAGEDISTORTIONSKNOWNASaberrations/FTEN THESE ABERRATIONS ARE COMMON TO BOTH TYPES OF SYSTEMS BUTchromatic aberrationIS UNIQUE TO REFRACTING TELESCOPES 4HE PROBLEM STEMS FROM THE FACT THAT THE FOCAL LENGTHOF A LENS IS WAVELENGTHDEPENDENT %QUATION  	 SHOWS THAT SINCE THE INDEX OF REFRACTIONVARIESWITHWAVELENGTHTHEANGLEOFREFRACTIONATTHEINTERFACEBETWEENTWODIFFERENTMEDIAMUSTALSODEPENDONWAVELENGTH4HISTRANSLATESINTOAWAVELENGTHDEPENDENTFOCALLENGTH%Q 	ANDASARESULTAFOCALPOINTFORBLUELIGHTTHATDIFFERSFROMTHATFORREDLIGHT4HEPROBLEMOFCHROMATICABERRATIONCANBEDIMINISHEDSOMEWHATBYTHEADDITIONOFCORRECTINGLENSES4HE DEMONSTRATION OF THIS PROCEDURE IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE3EVERAL ABERRATIONS RESULT FROM THE SHAPE OF THE REmECTING OR REFRACTING SURFACES	 !LTHOUGHITISEASIERANDTHEREFORECHEAPERTOGRINDLENSESANDMIRRORSINTOSPHEROIDSNOTALLAREAS OF THESE SURFACES WILL FOCUS A PARALLEL SET OF LIGHT RAYS TO A SINGLE POINT 4HIS EFFECTKNOWNASspherical aberrationCANBEOVERCOMEBYPRODUCINGCAREFULLYDESIGNEDOPTICALSURFACES PARABOLOIDS	4HECAUSEOF(34SINITIALIMAGINGPROBLEMSISACLASSICCASEOFSPHERICALABERRATION!MISTAKETHATWASMADEWHILEGRINDINGTHEPRIMARYLEFTTHECENTEROFTHEMIRRORTOOSHALLOWBYAPPROXIMATELYTWOMICRONS4HERESULTOFTHISMINUTEERRORWASTHATLIGHTREmECTEDFROMNEAR THE EDGE OF THE MIRROR CAME TO A FOCUS ALMOST  CM BEHIND LIGHT REmECTED FROM THECENTRAL PORTION 7HEN THE BEST POSSIBLE COMPROMISE FOCAL PLANE WAS USED THE IMAGE OF APOINT SOURCE SUCH AS A DISTANT STAR	 HAD A DElNABLE CENTRAL CORE AND AN EXTENDED DIFFUSEHALO!LTHOUGHTHECENTRALCOREWASQUITESMALL.′′RADIUS	UNFORTUNATELYITCONTAINEDONLYOFTHEENERGY4HEHALOINCLUDEDMORETHANHALFOFTHETOTALENERGYANDHADADIAMETEROF ABOUT .′′TYPICAL OF TRADITIONALLY DESIGNED GROUNDBASED TELESCOPES	 4HE REMAINDEROF THE ENERGY APPROXIMATELY 	 WAS SPREAD OUT OVER AN EVEN LARGER AREA 3OME OF(34SORIGINALSPHERICALABERRATIONWASCOMPENSATEDFORBYTHEUSEOFCOMPUTERPROGRAMSDESIGNEDTOANALYZETHEIMAGESPRODUCEDBYTHEmAWEDOPTICALSYSTEMANDMATHEMATICALLYTelescopes


<<<PAGE 180>>>

A	B	
FIGURE 12A	 4HE  LAUNCH OF THE (UBBLE 3PACE 4ELESCOPE ABOARD THE 3PACE 3HUTTLEDis-coveryB	(34ANDTHE3PACE3HUTTLEEndeavourDURINGTHE$ECEMBERREPAIRMISSIONTOINSTALLOPTICAL SYSTEMS TO COMPENSATE FOR A MISSHAPEN PRIMARY MIRROR #OURTESY OF .!3!	CREATECORRECTEDVERSIONS)NADDITIONDURINGTHEREPAIRMISSIONINSPECIALCORRECTIVEOPTICS PACKAGES WERE INSTALLED IN THE TELESCOPE4ODAY THE SPHERICAL ABERRATION PROBLEM OF(34IS ONLY A BAD MEMORY OF WHAT CAN GO WRONG%VENWHENPARABOLOIDSAREUSEDMIRRORSARENOTNECESSARILYFREEFROMABERRATIONSComaPRODUCES ELONGATED IMAGES OF POINT SOURCES THAT LIE OFF THE OPTICAL AXIS BECAUSE THE FOCALLENGTHS OF PARABOLOIDS ARE A FUNCTION OFθ THE ANGLE BETWEEN THE DIRECTION OF AN INCOMINGLIGHT RAY AND THE OPTICAL AXISAstigmatismIS A DEFECT THAT DERIVES FROM HAVING DIFFERENTPARTSOFALENSORMIRRORCONVERGEANIMAGEATSLIGHTLYDIFFERENTLOCATIONSONTHEFOCALPLANE7HEN A LENS OR MIRROR IS DESIGNED TO CORRECT FOR ASTIGMATISMcurvature of ﬁeldCAN THENBEAPROBLEM#URVATUREOFlELDISDUETOTHEFOCUSINGOFIMAGESONACURVERATHERTHANONA PLANE 9ET ANOTHER POTENTIAL DIFlCULTY OCCURS WHEN THE PLATE SCALE %Q 	 DEPENDS ONTHE DISTANCE FROM THE OPTICAL AXIS THIS EFFECT IS REFERRED TO ASdistortion of ﬁeldThe Brightness of an Image)N ADDITION TO RESOLUTION AND ABERRATION ISSUES TELESCOPE DESIGN MUST ALSO CONSIDER THEDESIREDbrightnessOF AN IMAGE )T MIGHT BE ASSUMED THAT THE BRIGHTNESS OF AN EXTENDEDRESOLVED	 IMAGE WOULD INCREASE WITH THE AREA OF THE TELESCOPE LENS SINCE MORE PHOTONSARE COLLECTED AS THE APERTURE SIZE INCREASES HOWEVER THIS ASSUMPTION IS NOT NECESSARILYCORRECT 4O UNDERSTAND THE BRIGHTNESS OF AN IMAGE WE BEGIN BY CONSIDERING THEintensityOF THE RADIATION 3OME OF THE ENERGY RADIATED FROM AN INlNITESIMAL PORTION OF THE SURFACEOF THE SOURCE OF AREAdσ;SHOWN IN &IG A	= WILL ENTER A CONE OF DIFFERENTIALsolidangled/Omega1≡dA⊥/rWHEREdA⊥ISANINlNITESIMALAMOUNTOFSURFACEAREATHATISLOCATEDADISTANCErFROMdσANDORIENTEDPERPENDICULARTOTHEPOSITIONVECTORr;&IG B	=4HE4HE UNIT OF SOLID ANGLE IS THE STERADIAN SR )T IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE TO SHOW THAT/Omega1TOT=/contintegraltextd/Omega1=πSR THE TOTALSOLID ANGLE ABOUT A POINTP RESULTING FROM AN INTEGRATION OVER A CLOSED SURFACE CONTAINING THAT POINT IS πSRTelescopes


<<<PAGE 181>>>

d/H9268dW
PrdA^
A	B	FIGURE 13A	4HE GEOMETRY OF INTENSITY B	4HE DElNITION OF SOLID ANGLEINTENSITYISGIVENBYTHEAMOUNTOFENERGYPERUNITTIMEINTERVALdtANDPERUNITWAVELENGTHINTERVALdλ RADIATED FROMdσINTO A DIFFERENTIAL SOLID ANGLEd/Omega1 THE UNITS OF INTENSITY ARE7M−NM−SR−#ONSIDERANOBJECTLOCATEDATADISTANCErFARFROMATELESCOPEOFFOCALLENGTHf!SSUMINGTHATTHEOBJECTISEFFECTIVELYINlNITELYFARAWAYIEr≫f	THEIMAGEINTENSITYIiMAYBEDETERMINEDFROMGEOMETRY)FANINlNITESIMALAMOUNTOFSURFACEAREAdAOFTHEOBJECTHASA SURFACE INTENSITY GIVEN BYI THEN THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY PER SECOND PER UNIT WAVELENGTHINTERVALRADIATEDINTOTHESOLIDANGLEDElNEDBYTHETELESCOPESAPERTUREd/Omega1T,ISGIVENBYId/Omega1T,dA=I/parenleftbiggATr/parenrightbiggdA,WHEREATISTHEAREAOFTHETELESCOPESAPERTURE;SEE&IG A	=3INCEANIMAGEWILLFORMFROMTHEPHOTONSEMITTEDBYTHEOBJECTALLOFTHEPHOTONSCOMINGFROMdAWITHINTHESOLIDANGLEd/Omega1T,MUST STRIKE AN AREAdAiON THE FOCAL PLANE4HEREFOREId/Omega1T,dA=Iid/Omega1T ,idAi,WHEREd/Omega1T ,iIS THE SOLID ANGLE DElNED BY THE TELESCOPES APERTURE AS SEEN FROM THE IMAGEORI/parenleftbiggATr/parenrightbiggdA=Ii/parenleftbiggATf/parenrightbiggdAi.3OLVING FOR THE IMAGE INTENSITY GIVESIi=I/parenleftbiggdA/rdAi/f/parenrightbigg.(OWEVERASCANBESEENIN&IG B	THESOLIDANGLEd/Omega1,TCONTAININGTHEENTIREOBJECTAS SEEN FROM THE CENTER OF THE TELESCOPES APERTURE MUST EQUAL THE SOLID ANGLEd/Omega1i,TOF THE!SSUMING OF COURSE THAT NO PHOTONS ARE ABSORBED OR SCATTERED OUT OF THE BEAM IN TRANSITTelescopes


<<<PAGE 182>>>

dWTdWTidA^/BJECT)MAGErfrfdWTdWiTdAdAi/BJECT)MAGEA	B	FIGURE 144HEEFFECTOFTELESCOPESONIMAGEINTENSITYr≫f	A	4HESOLIDANGLESSUBTENDEDBY THE TELESCOPE AS MEASURED FROM THE OBJECT AND THE IMAGE B	 4HE SOLID ANGLE SUBTENDED BY THEOBJECT AND THE IMAGE AS MEASURED FROM THE CENTER OF THE TELESCOPEENTIRE IMAGE ALSO SEEN FROM THE TELESCOPE CENTER ORd/Omega1,T=d/Omega1i,T4HIS IMPLIES THATdAr=dAif.3UBSTITUTING INTO THE EXPRESSION FOR THE IMAGE INTENSITY GIVES THE RESULT THATIi=I;THEIMAGEINTENSITYISIDENTICALTOTHEOBJECTINTENSITYINDEPENDENTOFTHEAREAOFTHEAPERTURE4HISRESULTISCOMPLETELYANALOGOUSTOTHESIMPLEOBSERVATIONTHATAWALLDOESNOTAPPEARTOGET BRIGHTER WHEN THE OBSERVER WALKS TOWARD IT4HE CONCEPT THAT DESCRIBES THE EFFECT OF THE LIGHTGATHERING POWER OF TELESCOPES IS THEilluminationJ THE AMOUNT OF LIGHT ENERGY PER SECOND FOCUSED ONTO A UNIT AREA OF THERESOLVED IMAGE 3INCE THE AMOUNT OF LIGHT COLLECTED FROM THE SOURCE IS PROPORTIONAL TOTHEAREAOFTHEAPERTURETHEILLUMINATIONJ∝π(D/)=πD/WHEREDISTHEDIAMETEROF THE APERTURE 7E HAVE ALSO SHOWN THAT THE LINEAR SIZE OF THE IMAGE IS PROPORTIONAL TOTHE FOCAL LENGTH OF THE LENS %Q 	 THEREFORE THE IMAGE AREA MUST BE PROPORTIONAL TOfANDCORRESPONDINGLYTHEILLUMINATIONMUSTBEINVERSELYPROPORTIONALTOf#OMBININGTHESERESULTSTHEILLUMINATIONMUSTBEPROPORTIONALTOTHESQUAREOFTHERATIOOFTHEAPERTUREDIAMETERTOTHEFOCALLENGTH4HEINVERSEOFTHISRATIOISOFTENREFERREDTOASTHEfocal ratioF≡fD.	4HUS THE ILLUMINATION IS RELATED TO THE FOCAL RATIO BYJ∝F.	3INCETHENUMBEROFPHOTONSPERSECONDSTRIKINGAUNITAREAOFPHOTOGRAPHICPLATEORSOMEOTHER DETECTOR IS DESCRIBED BY THE ILLUMINATION THE ILLUMINATION INDICATES THE AMOUNT OFTIMEREQUIREDTOCOLLECTTHEPHOTONSNEEDEDTOFORMASUFlCIENTLYBRIGHTIMAGEFORANALYSISTelescopes


<<<PAGE 183>>>

Example 1.2.4HETWINMULTIMIRRORTELESCOPESOFTHEKeck ObservatoryAT-AUNA+EAHAVE PRIMARY MIRRORS  M IN DIAMETER WITH FOCAL LENGTHS OF  M 4HE FOCAL RATIOS OFTHESE MIRRORS AREF=fD=..)TISSTANDARDTOEXPRESSFOCALRATIOSINTHEFORMf/FWHEREf/SIGNIlESTHATTHEFOCALRATIOIS BEING REFERENCED 5SING THIS NOTATION THE +ECK TELESCOPES HAVE Mf/. PRIMARYMIRRORS7E NOW SEE THAT THE SIZE OF THE APERTURE OF A TELESCOPE IS CRITICAL FOR TWO REASONS !LARGERAPERTUREBOTHIMPROVESRESOLUTIONANDINCREASESTHEILLUMINATION/NTHEOTHERHANDA LONGER FOCAL LENGTH INCREASES THE LINEAR SIZE OF THE IMAGE BUT DECREASES THE ILLUMINATION&OR AﬁxedFOCAL RATIO INCREASING THE DIAMETER OF THE TELESCOPE RESULTS IN GREATER SPATIALRESOLUTION BUT THE ILLUMINATION REMAINS CONSTANT 4HE PROPER DESIGN OF A TELESCOPE MUSTTAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE PRINCIPAL APPLICATIONS THAT ARE INTENDED FOR THE INSTRUMENT2OPTICAL TELESCOPES)N THE LAST SECTION WE STUDIED SOME OF THE FUNDAMENTAL ASPECTS OF OPTICS IN THE CONTEXTOF ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVING 7E NOW BUILD ON THOSE CONCEPTS TO CONSIDER DESIGN FEATURESOF OPTICAL TELESCOPESRefracting Telescopes4HE MAJOR OPTICAL COMPONENT OF A REFRACTING TELESCOPE IS THE PRIMARY ORobjectiveLENS OFFOCAL LENGTHfOBJ 4HE PURPOSE OF THE OBJECTIVE LENS IS TO COLLECT AS MUCH LIGHT AS POSSIBLEAND WITH THE GREATEST POSSIBLE RESOLUTION BRINGING THE LIGHT TO A FOCUS AT THE FOCAL PLANE!PHOTOGRAPHIC PLATE OR OTHER DETECTOR MAY BE PLACED AT THE FOCAL PLANE TO RECORD THE IMAGEOR THE IMAGE MAY BE VIEWED WITH AN EYEPIECE WHICH SERVES AS A MAGNIFYING GLASS 4HEEYEPIECE WOULD BE PLACED AT A DISTANCE FROM THE FOCAL PLANE EQUAL TO ITS FOCAL LENGTHfEYECAUSINGTHELIGHTRAYSTOBEREFOCUSEDATINlNITY&IGURE SHOWSTHEPATHOFRAYSCOMINGFROMAPOINTSOURCELYINGOFFTHEOPTICALAXISATANANGLEθ4HERAYSULTIMATELYEMERGEFROMTHE EYEPIECE AT AN ANGLEφFROM THE OPTICAL AXIS4HEangular magniﬁcationPRODUCED BYTHIS ARRANGEMENT OF LENSES CAN BE SHOWN TO BE 0ROBLEM 	m=fOBJfEYE.	#LEARLY EYEPIECES OF DIFFERENT FOCAL LENGTHS CAN PRODUCE DIFFERENT ANGULAR MAGNIlCATIONS6IEWING A LARGE IMAGE REQUIRES A LONG OBJECTIVE FOCAL LENGTH IN COMBINATION WITH A SHORTFOCAL LENGTH FOR THE EYEPIECE2ECALLHOWEVERTHATTHEILLUMINATIONDECREASESWITHTHESQUAREOFTHEOBJECTIVESFOCALLENGTH%Q 	4OCOMPENSATEFORTHEDIMINISHEDILLUMINATIONALARGERDIAMETEROBJECTIVEIS NEEDED 5NFORTUNATELY SIGNIlCANT PRACTICAL LIMITATIONS EXIST FOR THE SIZE OF THE OBJECTIVETelescopes


<<<PAGE 184>>>

/H9258/H9258/H9278/H9278
fOBJfEYEFIGURE 15!REFRACTING TELESCOPE IS COMPOSED OF AN OBJECTIVE LENS AND AN EYEPIECELENS OF A REFRACTING TELESCOPE "ECAUSE LIGHT MUST PASS THROUGH THE OBJECTIVE LENS IT ISPOSSIBLETOSUPPORTTHELENSONLYFROMITSEDGES!SARESULTWHENTHESIZEANDWEIGHTOFTHELENSAREINCREASEDDEFORMATIONINITSSHAPEOCCURSBECAUSEOFGRAVITY4HESPECIlCFORMOFTHEDEFORMATIONDEPENDSONTHEPOSITIONOFTHEOBJECTIVEWHICHCHANGESASTHEORIENTATIONOF THE TELESCOPE CHANGES!NOTHERPROBLEMRELATEDTOSIZEISTHEDIFlCULTYINCONSTRUCTINGALENSTHATISSUFlCIENTLYFREE OF DEFECTS 3INCE LIGHT MUST PASS THROUGH THE LENS ITS ENTIREvolumeMUST BE NEARLYOPTICALLYPERFECT&URTHERMOREbothSURFACESOFTHELENSMUSTBEGROUNDWITHGREATPRECISION3PECIlCALLY ANY DEFECTS IN THE MATERIAL FROM WHICH THE LENS IS MADE AND ANY DEVIATIONSFROM THE DESIRED SHAPE OF THE SURFACE MUST BE KEPT TO LESS THAN SOME SMALL FRACTION OF THEWAVELENGTHTYPICALLYλ/7HENOBSERVINGATNMTHISIMPLIESTHATANYDEFECTSMUSTBE SMALLER THAN APPROXIMATELY  NM 2ECALL THAT THE DIAMETER OF AN ATOM IS ON THE ORDEROF  NM	9ET ANOTHER DIFlCULTY WITH A LARGE OBJECTIVE LENS OCCURS BECAUSE OF ITS SLOW THERMALRESPONSE7HENTHEDOMEISOPENEDTHETEMPERATUREOFTHETELESCOPEMUSTADJUSTTOITSNEWSURROUNDINGS4HISPRODUCESTHERMALLYDRIVENAIRCURRENTSAROUNDTHETELESCOPESIGNIlCANTLYAFFECTING SEEING 4HE SHAPE OF THE TELESCOPE WILL ALSO CHANGE AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THERMALEXPANSION MAKING IT ADVANTAGEOUS TO MINIMIZE THE hTHERMAL MASSv OF THE TELESCOPE ASMUCH AS POSSIBLE! MECHANICAL PROBLEM ALSO ARISES WITH LONG FOCALLENGTH REFRACTORS $UE TO THE LONGLEVER ARM INVOLVED PLACING A MASSIVE DETECTOR ON THE END OF THE TELESCOPE WILL CREATE ALARGE AMOUNT OF TORQUE THAT REQUIRES COMPENSATION7E HAVE ALREADY DISCUSSED THE UNIQUE PROBLEM OF CHROMATIC ABERRATION IN LENSES ACOMPLICATIONNOTSHAREDBYMIRRORS#ONSIDERINGALLOFTHECHALLENGESINHERENTINTHEDESIGNAND CONSTRUCTION OF REFRACTING TELESCOPES THE VAST MAJORITY OF ALL LARGE MODERN TELESCOPESAREREmECTORS4HELARGESTREFRACTINGTELESCOPEINUSETODAYISATTHEYerkes ObservatoryIN7ILLIAMS "AY7ISCONSIN &IG  ON THE FOLLOWING PAGE	 )T WAS BUILT IN  AND HAS AIN M	 OBJECTIVE WITH A FOCAL LENGTH OF  MReﬂecting Telescopes7ITH THE EXCEPTION OF CHROMATIC ABERRATION MOST OF THE BASIC OPTICAL PRINCIPLES ALREADYDISCUSSEDAPPLYEQUALLYWELLTOREmECTORSANDREFRACTORS!REmECTINGTELESCOPEISDESIGNEDBYTelescopes


<<<PAGE 185>>>

FIGURE 164HE IN M	 TELESCOPE AT 9ERKES /BSERVATORY WAS BUILT IN  AND IS THELARGEST REFRACTOR IN THE WORLD #OURTESY OF9ERKES /BSERVATORY	REPLACINGTHEOBJECTIVELENSWITHAMIRRORSIGNIlCANTLYREDUCINGORCOMPLETELYELIMINATINGMANYOFTHEPROBLEMSALREADYDISCUSSED"ECAUSETHELIGHTDOESNOTPASSTHROUGHAMIRRORONLY THEoneREmECTING SURFACE NEEDS TO BE GROUND WITH PRECISION!LSO THE WEIGHT OF THEMIRROR CAN BE MINIMIZED BY CREATING A HONEYCOMB STRUCTURE BEHIND THE REmECTING SURFACEREMOVINGALARGEAMOUNTOFUNNECESSARYMASS)NFACTBECAUSETHEMIRRORISSUPPORTEDFROMBEHINDRATHERTHANALONGITSEDGESITISPOSSIBLETODESIGNANACTIVESYSTEMOFPRESSUREPADSTHATCANHELPTOELIMINATEDISTORTIONSINTHEMIRRORSSHAPEPRODUCEDBYTHERMALEFFECTSANDTHECHANGESINTHEGRAVITATIONALFORCEONTHEMIRRORASTHETELESCOPEMOVESAPROCESSKNOWNASactive optics	2EmECTINGTELESCOPESARENOTCOMPLETELYFREEOFDRAWBACKSHOWEVER3INCETHEOBJECTIVEMIRRORREmECTSLIGHTBACKALONGTHEDIRECTIONFROMWHICHITCAMETHEFOCALPOINTOFTHEMIRRORKNOWNASTHEprime focusISINTHEPATHOFTHEINCOMINGLIGHT;SEE&IG A	=!NOBSERVERORADETECTORCANBEPLACEDATTHISPOSITIONBUTTHENSOMEOFTHEINCIDENTLIGHTISCUTOFFSEE&IG 	 )F THE DETECTOR IS TOO LARGE A SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT OF LIGHT WILL BE LOST)SAAC .EWTON lRST FOUND A SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM BY PLACING A SMALL mAT MIRROR IN THEREmECTEDLIGHTSPATHCHANGINGTHELOCATIONOFTHEFOCALPOINTTHISARRANGEMENTISDEPICTEDIN &IG B	 /F COURSE THE PRESENCE OF THIS SECONDARY MIRROR DOES BLOCK SOME OF THEINCOMINGLIGHTFROMTHEPRIMARYBUTIFTHERATIOOFTHEAREASOFTHEPRIMARYANDSECONDARYISSUFlCIENTLYLARGETHEEFFECTOFTHELOSTLIGHTCANBEMINIMIZED!NewtonianTELESCOPEDESIGNSUFFERS FROM THE DRAWBACK THAT THE EYEPIECE OR DETECTOR	 MUST BE PLACED AT A SIGNIlCANTDISTANCEFROMTHECENTEROFMASSOFTHETELESCOPE)FAMASSIVEDETECTORWEREUSEDITWOULDEXERT A SIGNIlCANT TORQUE ON THE TELESCOPETelescopes


<<<PAGE 186>>>

A	B	C	D	FIGURE 173CHEMATICDRAWINGSOFVARIOUSTELESCOPEOPTICALSYSTEMSA	0RIMEFOCUSB	.EWTONIAN C	 #ASSEGRAIN D	 COUD£
FIGURE 18%DWIN (UBBLE n	 WORKING AT THE PRIME FOCUS OF THE (ALE REmECTING TELESCOPE ON -OUNT 0ALOMAR #OURTESY OF 0ALOMAR#ALTECH	3INCETHEREGIONOFTHEPRIMARYMIRRORLOCATEDBEHINDTHESECONDARYISEFFECTIVELYUSELESSANYWAYITISPOSSIBLETOBOREAHOLEINTHEPRIMARYANDUSETHESECONDARYTOREmECTTHELIGHTBACK THROUGH THE HOLE 4HISCassegrainDESIGN ;&IG C	= MAKES IT POSSIBLE TO PLACEHEAVYINSTRUMENTPACKAGESNEARTHECENTEROFMASSOFTHETELESCOPEANDPERMITSANOBSERVERTOSTAYNEARTHEBOTTOMOFTHETELESCOPERATHERTHANNEARTHETOPASISTHECASEFOR.EWTONIANS)NTHISTYPEOFDESIGNTHESECONDARYMIRRORISUSUALLYCONVEXEFFECTIVELYINCREASINGTHEFOCALLENGTH OF THE SYSTEMTelescopes


<<<PAGE 187>>>

4HE CLASSICAL #ASSEGRAIN DESIGN USES A PARABOLIC PRIMARY MIRROR (OWEVER AN IMPORTANT MODIlCATION TO THE #ASSEGRAIN DESIGN KNOWN AS ARitchey–ChrétienDESIGN USES AHYPERBOLIC PRIMARY MIRROR RATHER THAN A PARABOLIC ONE)F THE INSTRUMENT PACKAGE IS TOO MASSIVE IT IS OFTEN MORE EFFECTIVE TO BRING THE LIGHTDIRECTLY TO A SPECIAL LABORATORY IN WHICH THE DETECTOR IS LOCATED !coudé telescope;&IG D	= USES A SERIES OF MIRRORS TO REmECT THE LIGHT DOWN THE TELESCOPES MOUNTTO Acoudé roomLOCATED BELOW THE TELESCOPE "ECAUSE OF THE EXTENDED OPTICAL PATH IT ISPOSSIBLE TO CREATE A VERY LONG FOCAL LENGTH WITH A COUD£ TELESCOPE4HIS CAN BE PARTICULARLYUSEFULINHIGHRESOLUTIONWORKORINHIGHDISPERSIONSPECTRALLINESTUDIES!UNIQUE INSTRUMENT IS THESchmidtTELESCOPE SPECIlCALLY DESIGNED TO PROVIDE A WIDEANGLE lELD OF VIEW WITH LOW DISTORTION 3CHMIDT TELESCOPES ARE GENERALLY USED AS CAMERASWITH THE PHOTOGRAPHIC PLATE LOCATED AT THE PRIME FOCUS 4O MINIMIZE COMA A SPHEROIDALPRIMARY MIRROR IS USED COMBINED WITH A hCORRECTINGv LENS TO HELP REMOVE SPHERICAL ABERRATION7HEREASALARGE#ASSEGRAINTELESCOPEMAYHAVEAlELDOFVIEWOFAFEWARCMINUTESACROSS A 3CHMIDT CAMERA HAS A lELD OF VIEW OF SEVERAL DEGREES 4HESE INSTRUMENTS PROVIDE IMPORTANT SURVEY STUDIES OF LARGE REGIONS OF THE SKY &OR EXAMPLE SKY SURVEY PLATESFROMTHE0ALOMARAND5+3CHMIDTTELESCOPESHAVEBEENSCANNEDTOPRODUCETHE'UIDE3TAR#ATALOGUE )) CONTAINING  OBJECTS AS FAINT AS  MAGNITUDES4HE STELLAR DATAIN THIS CATALOG ARE BEING USED TO SUPPLY THE REFERENCE ORguide	 STARS NEEDED TO ORIENT THE(UBBLE 3PACE4ELESCOPETelescope Mounts0RODUCING HIGHRESOLUTION DEEPSKY IMAGES OF FAINT OBJECTS REQUIRES THAT THE TELESCOPEBE POINTED AT A lXED REGION OF THE SKY FOR AN EXTENDED PERIOD OF TIME 4HIS IS NECESSARYSO THAT ENOUGH PHOTONS WILL BE COLLECTED TO ENSURE THAT THE DESIRED OBJECT CAN BE SEEN3UCHtime integrationREQUIRESCAREFULguidingORPOSITIONALCONTROL	OFTHETELESCOPEWHILECOMPENSATING FOR THE ROTATION OF %ARTH)NORDERTOACCOUNTFOR%ARTHSROTATIONPERHAPSTHEMOSTCOMMONTYPEOFTELESCOPEMOUNTESPECIALLY FOR SMALLER TELESCOPES	 IS THEequatorial mount )T INCORPORATES A POLAR AXISTHATISALIGNEDTOTHENORTHCELESTIALPOLEANDTHETELESCOPESIMPLYROTATESABOUTTHATAXISTOCOMPENSATEFORTHECHANGINGALTITUDEANDAZIMUTHOFTHEOBJECTOFINTEREST7ITHANEQUATORIALMOUNTITISASIMPLEMATTERTOADJUSTTHEPOSITIONOFTHETELESCOPEINBOTHRIGHTASCENSIONANDDECLINATION 5NFORTUNATELY FOR A MASSIVE TELESCOPE AN EQUATORIAL MOUNT CAN BE EXTREMELYEXPENSIVE AND DIFlCULT TO BUILD !N ALTERNATIVE MORE EASILY CONSTRUCTED MOUNT FOR LARGETELESCOPES THEaltitude–azimuth mount PERMITS MOTION BOTH PARALLEL AND PERPENDICULARTOTHEHORIZON)NTHISCASEHOWEVERTHETRACKINGOFACELESTIALOBJECTREQUIRESTHECONTINUOUSCALCULATION OF ITS ALTITUDE AND AZIMUTH FROM KNOWLEDGE OF THE OBJECTS RIGHT ASCENSION ANDDECLINATIONCOMBINEDWITHKNOWLEDGEOFTHELOCALSIDEREALTIMEANDLATITUDEOFTHETELESCOPE!SECONDDIFlCULTYWITHALTITUDEnAZIMUTHMOUNTSISTHEEFFECTOFTHECONTINUOUSROTATIONOFIMAGE lELDS 7ITHOUT PROPER ADJUSTMENT THIS CAN CREATE COMPLICATIONS WHEN GUIDING THETELESCOPEDURINGANEXTENDEDEXPOSUREORWHENASPECTRUMISOBTAINEDBYPASSINGTHELIGHTTHROUGHALONGSLIT&ORTUNATELYRAPIDCOMPUTERCALCULATIONSCANCOMPENSATEFORALLOFTHESEEFFECTS4HE COUNT OF OBJECTS IN '3# )) QUOTED HERE WAS EFFECTIVE IN -AY OF Telescopes


<<<PAGE 188>>>

TABLE 2/PTICAL ANDOR NEARINFRARED TELESCOPES WITH APERTURES OF  METERS OR MORE.AME3IZE M	3ITE&IRST ,IGHT'EMINI .ORTH-AUNA +EA (AWAII'EMINI 3OUTH#ERRO 0ACHN #HILE3UBARU-AUNA +EA (AWAII6ERY ,ARGE4ELESCOPE 6,4n!NTUa#ERRO 0ARANAL #HILE6ERY ,ARGE4ELESCOPE 6,4	n+UEYENa#ERRO 0ARANAL #HILE6ERY ,ARGE4ELESCOPE 6,4	n-ELIPALa#ERRO 0ARANAL #HILE6ERY ,ARGE4ELESCOPE 6,4	n9EPUNa#ERRO 0ARANAL #HILE,ARGE "INOCULAR4ELESCOPE ,"4	b.×-T 'RAHAM!RIZONA(OBBYn%BERLY4ELESCOPE (%4	c-C$ONALD /BSERVATORY4EXAS+ECK )d-AUNA +EA (AWAII+ECK ))d-AUNA +EA (AWAII'RAN4ELESCOPIO #ANARIAS '4#	,A 0ALMA #ANARY )SLANDS3OUTHERN!FRICAN ,ARGE4ELESCOPE 3!,4	e3UTHERLAND 3OUTH!FRICAa4HE FOUR M6,4TELESCOPES TOGETHER WITH THREE M AUXILIARY TELESCOPES CAN SERVE AS ANOPTICAL)2 INTERFEROMETERb4HE TWO M MIRRORS WILL SIT ON A SINGLE MOUNT WITH AN EFFECTIVE COLLECTING AREA OF AN MAPERTUREc-OUNTED WITH A lXED ALTITUDE ANGLE OF ◦4HE MIRROR MEASURES  M BY  M WITH AN EFFECTIVEAPERTURE OF  Md4HE TWO M +ECK TELESCOPES TOGETHER WITH FOUR M OUTRIGGER TELESCOPES CAN SERVE AS AN OPTICAL)2INTERFEROMETERe-OUNTED WITH A lXED ALTITUDE ANGLE OF ◦Large-Aperture Telescopes)NADDITIONTOLONGINTEGRATIONTIMESLARGEAPERTURESIZESPLAYANIMPORTANTROLEINOBTAININGA SUFlCIENT NUMBER OF PHOTONS TO STUDY A FAINT SOURCE RECALL THAT THE ILLUMINATION IS PROPORTIONALTOTHEDIAMETEROFTHEPRIMARYMIRROROFTHETELESCOPE%Q 	7ITHTREMENDOUSIMPROVEMENTSINTELESCOPEDESIGNANDAIDEDBYTHEDEVELOPMENTOFHIGHSPEEDCOMPUTERSIT HAS BECOME POSSIBLE TO BUILD VERY LARGEAPERTURE TELESCOPES 4ABLE  CONTAINS A LIST OFOPTICALANDORNEARINFRAREDTELESCOPESWITHAPERTURESOFGREATERTHANMTHATARECURRENTLYINOPERATION!NUMBEROFMUCHLARGERAPERTUREGROUNDBASEDTELESCOPESAREALSOCURRENTLYBEING CONSIDERED WITH EFFECTIVE MIRROR DIAMETERS RANGING FROM  M TO  MAdaptive Optics7HILE LARGEAPERTURE GROUNDBASED TELESCOPES ARE ABLE TO GATHER MANY MORE PHOTONSTHAN SMALLER TELESCOPES OVER THE SAME TIME INTERVAL THEY ARE GENERALLY UNABLE TO RESOLVETHEOBJECTANYMOREEFFECTIVELYWITHOUTSIGNIlCANTEFFORT)NFACTEVENAGROUNDBASEDM TELESCOPE LOCATED AT A SITE WITH EXCEPTIONAL SEEING EG THE +ECK TELESCOPES AT -AUNA+EA	 CANNOT RESOLVE A SOURCE ANY BETTER THAN AN AMATEURS CM BACKYARD TELESCOPE CANWITHOUTTHEAIDEOFactive opticsTOCORRECTDISTORTIONSINTHETELESCOPESMIRRORSANDadaptive opticsTO COMPENSATE FOR ATMOSPHERIC TURBULENCE )N THE LATER CASE A SMALLDEFORMABLEhRUBBERv	MIRRORISEMPLOYEDTHATHASTENSORPERHAPSHUNDREDSOFPIEZOELECTRICCRYSTALS ATTACHED TO THE BACK THAT ACT LIKE TINY ACTUATORS )N ORDER TO COUNTERACT CHANGES INTHE SHAPE OF THE WAVEFRONTS COMING FROM THE SOURCE DUE TO %ARTHS ATMOSPHERE THESETelescopes


<<<PAGE 189>>>

CRYSTALS MAKE MICROMETERSIZE ADJUSTMENTS TO THE SHAPE OF THE MIRROR SEVERAL HUNDRED OFTIMES PER SECOND )N ORDER TO DETERMINE THE CHANGES THAT NEED TO BE APPLIED THE TELESCOPEAUTOMATICALLY MONITORS A GUIDE STAR THAT IS VERY NEAR THE TARGET OBJECT&LUCTUATIONS INTHE GUIDE STAR DETERMINE THE ADJUSTMENTS THAT MUST BE MADE TO THE DEFORMABLE MIRROR4HIS PROCESS IS SOMEWHAT EASIER IN THE NEARINFRARED SIMPLY BECAUSE OF THE LONGER WAVELENGTHS INVOLVED !S A RESULT ADAPTIVE OPTICS SYSTEMS HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN PROVIDINGNEARDIFFRACTIONLIMITED IMAGES AT NEARINFRARED WAVELENGTHSSpace-Based Observatories)N ANOTHER EFFORT TO OVERCOME THE INHERENT IMAGING PROBLEMS IMPOSED BY %ARTHS ATMOSPHEREOBSERVATIONALASTRONOMYISALSOCARRIEDOUTINSPACE4HEHubble Space Telescope&IG  NAMED FOR %DWIN (UBBLE	 HAS A Mf/ PRIMARY THAT IS THE SMOOTHESTMIRROREVERCONSTRUCTEDWITHNOSURFACEIMPERFECTIONLARGERTHAN/OFTHENMTESTWAVELENGTH ,ONG EXPOSURES OF  HOURS OR MORE ALLOW THE TELESCOPE TO hSEEv OBJECTS ATLEASTASFAINTASTHMAGNITUDE4HEOPTICALSYSTEMUSEDBY(34OPERATESFROMNMTOµM ULTRAVIOLET TO INFRARED RESPECTIVELY	 AND IS OF THE 2ITCHEYn#HR£TIEN TYPE!S (34 APPROACHES THE END OF ITS OPERATIONAL LIFETIME PLANS ARE UNDER WAY TO REPLACEIT WITH THEJames Webb Space Telescope*734	 4HE DESIGN SPECIlCATIONS CALL FOR ATELESCOPE THAT WILL OPERATE IN THE WAVELENGTH RANGE BETWEEN  NM AND µM AND ITWILL HAVE A PRIMARY MIRROR WITH A MDIAMETER APERTURE 5NLIKE (34S LOW%ARTH ORBIT*734WILLORBITABOUTAGRAVITATIONALLYSTABLEPOINTTHATISLOCATEDALONGTHELINECONNECTING%ARTHANDTHE3UNBUTINTHEDIRECTIONAWAYFROMTHE3UN4HISPOINTKNOWNASTHESECOND,AGRANGE POINT ,	 REPRESENTS A BALANCE BETWEEN THE GRAVITATIONAL FORCES OF THE 3UN AND%ARTH AND THE CENTRIFUGAL FORCE DUE TO ITS MOTION AROUND THE 3UN AS SEEN IN A NONINERTIALREFERENCEFRAME 4HISLOCATIONWASCHOSENFORTHESPACECRAFTINORDERTOMINIMIZETHERMALEMISSIONS THAT COULD OTHERWISE AFFECT ITS INFRARED DETECTORSElectronic Detectors!LTHOUGH THE HUMAN EYE AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PLATES HAVE TRADITIONALLY BEEN THE TOOLS OF ASTRONOMERS TO RECORD IMAGES AND SPECTRA OTHER MORE EFlCIENT DEVICES ARE TYPICALLY USED INMODERN ASTRONOMY TODAY )N PARTICULAR THE SEMICONDUCTOR DETECTOR KNOWN AS THE CHARGECOUPLED DEVICE ##$	 HAS REVOLUTIONIZED THE WAY IN WHICH PHOTONS ARE COUNTED7HEREASTHE HUMAN EYE HAS A VERY LOWquantum efﬁciencyOF APPROXIMATELY  ONE PHOTON INONEHUNDREDISDETECTED	ANDPHOTOGRAPHICPLATESDOONLYSLIGHTLYBETTER##$SAREABLETODETECTNEARLYOFTHEINCIDENTPHOTONS-OREOVER##$SAREABLETODETECTAVERYWIDERANGE OF WAVELENGTHS &ROM SOFT LOWENERGY	 8RAYS TO THE INFRARED THEY HAVE A LINEARRESPONSE4EN TIMES AS MANY PHOTONS PRODUCE A SIGNAL TEN TIMES STRONGER ##$S ALSO HAVE)N MOST CASES A SUFlCIENTLY BRIGHT GUIDE STAR DOES NOT EXIST CLOSE ENOUGH TO THE TARGET !T A SMALL NUMBER OFOBSERVATORIES AN ARTIlCIAL LASER GUIDE STAR MAY BE USED IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES 4HIS IS ACCOMPLISHED BY lRING AVERYPOWERFULANDCAREFULLYTUNEDLASERINTOTHESKYINORDERTOEXCITESODIUMATOMSATANALTITUDEOFAPPROXIMATELY KMTelescopes


<<<PAGE 190>>>

A WIDE DYNAMIC RANGE AND SO CAN DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN VERY BRIGHT AND VERY DIM OBJECTSTHAT ARE VIEWED SIMULTANEOUSLY!##$WORKSBYCOLLECTINGELECTRONSTHATAREEXCITEDINTOHIGHERENERGYSTATESCONDUCTION BANDS	 WHEN THE DETECTOR IS STRUCK BY A PHOTON A PROCESS SIMILAR TO THE PHOTOELECTRICEFFECT	 4HE NUMBER OF ELECTRONS COLLECTED IN EACH PIXEL IS THEN PROPORTIONAL TO THE BRIGHTNESSOFTHEIMAGEATTHATLOCATION4HEMILLIONPIXELSOF(34SSECONDGENERATION7IDE&IELDAND0LANETARY#AMERA7&0#	ARETHEINDIVIDUALELEMENTSOFFOUR×PIXEL##$CAMERASWITHEACHPIXELCAPABLEOFHOLDINGUPTOELECTRONS(34S!DVANCED#AMERA FOR 3URVEYS !#3	 CONTAINS AN ARRAY OF × OR 	 PIXELS FORHIGHRESOLUTION SURVEY WORK'IVEN THE RAPID IMPROVEMENT IN BOTH GROUNDBASED AND ORBITAL TELESCOPES ALONG WITHTHE TREMENDOUS ADVANCEMENTS IN DETECTOR TECHNOLOGIES IT IS CLEAR THAT THE FUTURE OF OPTICALASTRONOMY IS INDEED A BRIGHT ONE3RADIO TELESCOPES)N  +ARL *ANSKY n	 WAS CONDUCTING EXPERIMENTS FOR "ELL ,ABORATORIES RELATED TO THE PRODUCTION OF RADIOWAVELENGTH STATIC FROM THUNDERSTORMS $URING THE COURSEOF HIS INVESTIGATIONS *ANSKY DISCOVERED THAT SOME OF THE STATIC IN HIS RECEIVER WAS OF hEXTRATERRESTRIAL ORIGINv "Y  HE HAD CORRECTLY CONCLUDED THAT MUCH OF THE SIGNAL HE WASMEASURING ORIGINATED IN THE PLANE OF THE -ILKY 7AY WITH THE STRONGEST EMISSION COMINGFROM THE CONSTELLATION 3AGITTARIUS WHICH LIES IN THE DIRECTION OF THE CENTER OF OUR 'ALAXY*ANSKYS PIONEERING WORK REPRESENTED THE BIRTH OFradio astronomy A WHOLE NEW lELD OFOBSERVATIONAL STUDY4ODAYRADIOASTRONOMYPLAYSANIMPORTANTROLEINOURINVESTIGATIONOFTHEELECTROMAGNETICSPECTRUM 2ADIO WAVES ARE PRODUCED BY A VARIETY OF MECHANISMS RELATED TO A RANGE OFPHYSICAL PROCESSES SUCH AS THE INTERACTIONS OF CHARGED PARTICLES WITH MAGNETIC lELDS4HISWINDOW ON THE UNIVERSE PROVIDES ASTRONOMERS AND PHYSICISTS WITH VALUABLE CLUES TO THEINNER WORKINGS OF SOME OF NATURES MOST SPECTACULAR PHENOMENASpectral Flux Density3INCERADIOWAVESINTERACTWITHMATTERDIFFERENTLYTHANVISIBLELIGHTDOESTHEDEVICESUSEDTODETECT AND MEASURE IT ARE NECESSARILY VERY DIFFERENT FROM OPTICAL TELESCOPES4HE PARABOLICDISH OF A TYPICAL RADIO TELESCOPE REmECTS THE RADIO ENERGY OF THE SOURCE TO AN ANTENNA 4HESIGNAL IS THEN AMPLIlED AND PROCESSED TO PRODUCE Aradio mapOF THE SKY AT A PARTICULARWAVELENGTH LIKE THE ONE SHOWN IN &IG 4HE STRENGTH OF A RADIO SOURCE IS MEASURED IN TERMS OF THEspectral ﬂux densityS(ν)THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY PER SECOND PER UNIT FREQUENCY INTERVAL STRIKING A UNIT AREA OF THETELESCOPE4ODETERMINETHETOTALAMOUNTOFENERGYPERSECONDTHEPOWER	COLLECTEDBYTHERECEIVER THE SPECTRAL mUX MUST BE INTEGRATED OVER THE TELESCOPES COLLECTING AREA AND OVERTHEFREQUENCYINTERVALFORWHICHTHEDETECTORISSENSITIVEREFERREDTOASTHEbandwidth)FfνIS A FUNCTION DESCRIBING THE EFlCIENCY OF THE DETECTOR AT THE FREQUENCYν THEN THE AMOUNTTelescopes


<<<PAGE 191>>>

HMHMHMHMHMHMnnnn#ENTRAL SOURCE'
FIGURE 19!RADIOMAPOF#ENTAURUS!TOGETHERWITHANOPTICALIMAGEOFTHESAMEREGION4HECONTOURS SHOW LINES OF CONSTANT RADIO POWER &IGURE FROM -ATTHEWS -ORGAN AND 3CHMIDTAp. J.140  	OF ENERGY DETECTED PER SECOND BECOMESP=/integraldisplayA/integraldisplayνS(ν)fνdν dA.	)FTHEDETECTORISEFlCIENTOVERAFREQUENCYINTERVAL/Delta1νIEfν=	ANDIFS(ν)CANBE CONSIDERED TO BE CONSTANT OVER THAT INTERVAL THEN THE INTEGRAL SIMPLIlES TO GIVEP=SA /Delta1ν,WHEREAIS THE EFFECTIVE AREA OF THE APERTURE!TYPICAL RADIO SOURCE HAS A SPECTRAL mUX DENSITYS(ν)ON THE ORDER OF ONE JANSKY *Y	WHERE  *Y=−7M−(Z− 3PECTRAL mUX DENSITY MEASUREMENTS OF SEVERAL M*Y ARENOTUNCOMMON7ITHSUCHWEAKSOURCESALARGEAPERTUREISNEEDEDTOCOLLECTENOUGHPHOTONSTO BE MEASURABLEExample 3.1.4HETHIRDSTRONGESTRADIOSOURCEINTHESKYAFTERTHE3UNAND#ASSIOPEIA!A NEARBY SUPERNOVA REMNANT	 IS THE GALAXY #YGNUS ! SEE &IG 	 !T  -(Z AWAVELENGTH OF  CM	 ITS SPECTRAL mUX DENSITY IS  *Y!SSUMING THAT A MDIAMETER! SIMILAR EXPRESSION APPLIES TO OPTICAL TELESCOPES SINCE lLTERS AND DETECTORS INCLUDING THE HUMAN EYE	 AREFREQUENCY DEPENDENTTelescopes


<<<PAGE 192>>>

FIGURE 20!6ERY,ARGE!RRAY6,!	RADIOWAVELENGTHIMAGEOFTHERELATIVISTICJETSCOMINGFROMTHECOREOFTHEGALAXY#YGNUS!#OURTESYOFTHE.ATIONAL2ADIO!STRONOMY/BSERVATORYÚ.2!/!5)	RADIOTELESCOPEISEFlCIENTANDISUSEDTOCOLLECTTHERADIOENERGYOFTHISSOURCEOVERA FREQUENCY BANDWIDTH OF  -(Z THE TOTAL POWER DETECTED BY THE RECEIVER WOULD BEP=S(ν)π/parenleftbiggD/parenrightbigg/Delta1ν=.×−7.Improving Resolution: Large Apertures and Interferometry/NE PROBLEM THAT RADIO TELESCOPES SHARE WITH OPTICAL TELESCOPES IS THE NEED FOR GREATERRESOLUTION 2AYLEIGHS CRITERION %Q 	 APPLIES TO RADIO TELESCOPES JUST AS IT DOES IN THEVISIBLEREGIMEEXCEPTTHATRADIOWAVELENGTHSAREMUCHLONGERTHANTHOSEINVOLVEDINOPTICALWORK4HEREFORETOOBTAINALEVELOFRESOLUTIONCOMPARABLETOWHATISREACHEDINTHEVISIBLEMUCH LARGER DIAMETERS ARE NEEDEDExample 3.2.4O OBTAIN A RESOLUTION OF ′′AT A WAVELENGTH OF  CM USING A SINGLEAPERTURE THE DISH DIAMETER MUST BED=.λθ=./parenleftbigg CM.×−RAD/parenrightbigg=. KM.&ORCOMPARISONTHELARGESTSINGLEDISHRADIOTELESCOPEINTHEWORLDISTHElXEDDISHM FT	 IN DIAMETER ATArecibo Observatory 0UERTO 2ICO SEE &IG 	/NE ADVANTAGE OF WORKING AT SUCH LONG WAVELENGTHS IS THAT SMALL DEVIATIONS FROM ANIDEAL PARABOLIC SHAPE ARE NOT NEARLY AS CRUCIAL 3INCE THE RELEVANT CRITERION IS TO BE WITHINSOME SMALL FRACTION OF A WAVELENGTH SAYλ/	 OF WHAT IS CONSIDERED A PERFECT SHAPEVARIATIONS OF  CM ARE TOLERABLE WHEN OBSERVING AT  CM!LTHOUGH IT IS IMPRACTICAL TO BUILD INDIVIDUAL DISHES OF SUFlCIENT SIZE TO PRODUCE THERESOLUTION AT RADIO WAVELENGTHS THAT IS ANYTHING LIKE WHAT IS OBTAINABLE FROM THE GROUNDTelescopes


<<<PAGE 193>>>

FIGURE 214HE M RADIO TELESCOPE AT !RECIBO /BSERVATORY 0UERTO 2ICO #OURTESY OF THE.!)#n!RECIBO/BSERVATORYWHICHISOPERATEDBY#ORNELL5NIVERSITYFORTHE.ATIONAL3CIENCE&OUNDATION	
/H9258/H9258/H9261"dL!7AVEFRONTS4O SOURCE
FIGURE 224HE TECHNIQUE OF RADIO INTERFEROMETRYIN THE VISIBLE REGIME ASTRONOMERS HAVE NEVERTHELESS BEEN ABLE TO RESOLVE RADIO IMAGES TOBETTERTHAN.′′4HISREMARKABLERESOLUTIONISACCOMPLISHEDTHROUGHAPROCESSNOTUNLIKETHE INTERFERENCE TECHNIQUE USED IN THE9OUNG DOUBLESLIT EXPERIMENT&IGURE SHOWSTWORADIOTELESCOPESSEPARATEDBYABASELINEOFDISTANCEd3INCETHEDISTANCE FROM TELESCOPE " TO THE SOURCE IS GREATER THAN THE DISTANCE FROM TELESCOPE ! TOTHE SOURCE BY AN AMOUNTL A SPECIlC WAVEFRONT WILL ARRIVE AT " AFTER IT HAS REACHED !4HE TWO SIGNALS WILL BEin phaseAND THEIR SUPERPOSITION WILL RESULT IN A MAXIMUM IFLISEQUALTOANINTEGRALNUMBEROFWAVELENGTHSL=nλWHEREn=,,,...FORCONSTRUCTIVETelescopes


<<<PAGE 194>>>

INTERFERENCE	3IMILARLYIFLISANODDINTEGRALNUMBEROFHALFWAVELENGTHSTHENTHESIGNALSWILL BE EXACTLYout of phaseAND A SUPERPOSITION OF SIGNALS WILL RESULT IN A MINIMUM IN THESIGNAL STRENGTH ;L=(n−)λ WHEREn=,,...FOR DESTRUCTIVE INTERFERENCE= 3INCE THEPOINTING ANGLEθIS RELATED TOdANDLBYSINθ=Ld,	ITISPOSSIBLETOACCURATELYDETERMINETHEPOSITIONOFTHESOURCEBYUSINGTHEINTERFERENCEPATTERNPRODUCEDBYCOMBININGTHESIGNALSOFTHETWOANTENNAS#LEARLY THE ABILITY TO RESOLVE AN IMAGE IMPROVES WITH A LONGER BASELINEdVery longbaseline interferometry6,")	 IS POSSIBLE OVER THE SIZE OF A CONTINENT OR EVEN BETWEENCONTINENTS)NSUCHCASESTHEDATACANBERECORDEDONSITEANDDELIVEREDTOACENTRALLOCATIONFORPROCESSINGATALATERTIME)TISONLYNECESSARYTHATTHEOBSERVATIONSBESIMULTANEOUSANDTHAT THE EXACT TIME OF DATA ACQUISITION BE RECORDED!LTHOUGH A SINGLE ANTENNA HAS ITS GREATEST LEVEL OF SENSITIVITY IN THE DIRECTION IN WHICHIT IS POINTING THE ANTENNA CAN ALSO BE SENSITIVE TO RADIO SOURCES AT ANGLES FAR FROM THEDIRECTIONDESIRED&IGURE SHOWSATYPICALantenna patternFORASINGLERADIOTELESCOPE)T IS A POLAR COORDINATE PLOT DESCRIBING THE DIRECTION OF THE ANTENNA PATTERN ALONG WITH THERELATIVESENSITIVITYINEACHDIRECTIONTHELONGERTHElobeTHEMORESENSITIVETHETELESCOPEISINTHATDIRECTION4WOCHARACTERISTICSAREIMMEDIATELYNOTICEABLE&IRSTTHEMAINLOBEISNOTINlNITESIMALLYTHINTHEDIRECTIONALITYOFTHEBEAMISNOTPERFECT	ANDSECONDSIDELOBESEXISTTHAT CAN RESULT IN THE ACCIDENTAL DETECTION OF UNWANTED SOURCES THAT ARE INDISTINGUISHABLEFROM THE DESIRED SOURCE4HE NARROWNESS OF THE MAIN LOBE IS DESCRIBED BY SPECIFYING ITS ANGULAR WIDTH AT HALF ITSLENGTHREFERREDTOASTHEhalf-powerbeam width(0"7	4HISWIDTHCANBEDECREASEDANDTHEEFFECTOFTHESIDELOBESCANBESIGNIlCANTLYREDUCEDBYTHEADDITIONOFOTHERTELESCOPESTO PRODUCE THE DESIRED DIFFRACTION PATTERN 4HIS PROPERTY IS ANALOGOUS TO THE INCREASE INSHARPNESS OF A GRATING DIFFRACTION PATTERN AS THE NUMBER OF GRATING LINES IS INCREASED
(0"7FIGURE 23!TYPICALANTENNAPATTERNFORASINGLERADIOTELESCOPE4HEWIDTHOFTHEMAINLOBEISDESCRIBABLE BY THE HALFPOWER BEAM WIDTH (0"7	Telescopes


<<<PAGE 195>>>

FIGURE 244HE6ERY,ARGE!RRAY6,!	NEAR3OCORRO.EW-EXICO#OURTESYOFTHE.ATIONAL2ADIO!STRONOMY /BSERVATORY Ú.2!/!5)	4HEVery Large Array6,!	LOCATEDNEAR3OCORRO.EW-EXICOCONSISTSOFRADIOTELESCOPESINAMOVABLEYCONlGURATIONWITHAMAXIMUMCONlGURATIONDIAMETEROFKM%ACH INDIVIDUAL DISH HAS A DIAMETER OF  M AND USES RECEIVERS SENSITIVE AT A VARIETY OFFREQUENCIES SEE &IG 	 4HE SIGNAL FROM EACH OF THE SEPARATE TELESCOPES IS COMBINEDWITH ALL OF THE OTHERS AND ANALYZED BY COMPUTER TO PRODUCE A HIGHRESOLUTION MAP OF THESKY &IG  IS AN EXAMPLE OF AN IMAGE PRODUCED BY THE6,! /F COURSE ALONG WITH THERESOLUTIONGAINTHETELESCOPESCOMBINETOPRODUCEANEFFECTIVECOLLECTINGAREATHATISTIMES GREATER THAN THAT OF AN INDIVIDUAL TELESCOPE4HE .ATIONAL 2ADIO !STRONOMY /BSERVATORY .2!/	 PLANS TO MODERNIZE AND SIGNIFICANTLY EXPAND THE CAPABILITIES OF THE 6,! $URING 0HASE ) THEExpanded Very LargeArray%6,!	 WILL RECEIVE NEW MORE SENSITIVE RECEIVERS EXTENSIVE lBEROPTIC CONNECTIONS BETWEEN THE TELESCOPES AND THE CONTROL FACILITY AND GREATLY ENHANCED SOFTWARE ANDCOMPUTATIONALCAPABILITIES0HASE))OFTHEEXPANSIONPLANCALLSFORTHEADDITIONOFAPPROXIMATELY  NEW TELESCOPES LOCATED THROUGHOUT .EW -EXICO THAT WILL AUGMENT THE CURRENTLYEXISTING  TELESCOPES 7ITH BASELINES OF UP TO  KM THESE NEW TELESCOPES WILL GREATLYINCREASE THE RESOLUTION CAPABILITY OF THE %6,! 4HE PRESENT 6,!HAS A POINT SOURCE SENSITIVITY OF µ*Y A HIGHESTFREQUENCY RESOLUTION OF  (Z AND A SPATIAL RESOLUTION AT'(Z	OF.′′!FTERCOMPLETIONOF0HASE))THE%6,!WILLHAVEAPOINTSOURCESENSITIVITYOF.µ*YAHIGHESTFREQUENCYRESOLUTIONOF(ZANDASPATIALRESOLUTIONAT'(Z	OF.′′WHICHAREIMPROVEMENTSOVERTHEEXISTINGFACILITYBYONETOTWOORDERSOFMAGNITUDE.2!/ALSOOPERATESTHEVery Long BaselineArray6,"!	COMPOSEDOFASERIESOFRADIO TELESCOPES SCATTERED THROUGHOUT THE CONTINENTAL 5NITED 3TATES (AWAII AND 3T #ROIXIN THE 536IRGIN )SLANDS7ITH A MAXIMUM BASELINE OF  KM  MILES	 THE6,"!CAN ACHIEVE RESOLUTIONS OF BETTER THAN .′′Telescopes


<<<PAGE 196>>>

)NADDITIONTOTHESEANDOTHERRADIOOBSERVATORIESAROUNDTHEWORLDAMAJORINTERNATIONALEFFORT IS UNDER WAY TO CONSTRUCT THEAtacama Large Millimeter Array!,-!	!,-!WILL BE COMPOSED OF  M DIAMETER ANTENNAS WITH BASELINES UP TO  KM IN LENGTH3ITUATED AT AN ALTITUDE OF  M  FT	 IN THE !TACAMA DESERT REGION OF ,LANO DE#HAJNANTOR IN NORTHERN #HILE !,-! WILL BE IDEALLY LOCATED TO WORK IN THE WAVELENGTHREGIONFROMMMTOµM'(ZTO'(Z	!TTHOSEWAVELENGTHS!,-!WILLBEABLE TO PROBE DEEPLY INTO DUSTY REGIONS OF SPACE WHERE STARS AND PLANETS ARE BELIEVED TO BEFORMING AS WELL AS TO STUDY THE EARLIEST STAGES OF GALAXY FORMATIONALL CRITICAL PROBLEMSIN MODERN ASTROPHYSICS )T IS ANTICIPATED THAT!,-!WILL BEGIN EARLY SCIENTIlC OPERATIONSWITH A PARTIAL ARRAY IN 4HE FULL ARRAY IS EXPECTED TO BE IN OPERATION BY 4INFRARED, ULTRAVIOLET, X-RAY, AND GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY'IVENTHEENORMOUSAMOUNTOFDATASUPPLIEDBYOPTICALANDRADIOOBSERVATIONSITISNATURALTO CONSIDER STUDIES IN OTHER WAVELENGTH REGIONS AS WELL 5NFORTUNATELY SUCH OBSERVATIONSAREEITHERDIFlCULTORIMPOSSIBLETOPERFORMFROMTHEGROUNDBECAUSE%ARTHSATMOSPHEREISOPAQUE TO MOST WAVELENGTH REGIONS OUTSIDE OF THE VISIBLE AND RADIO BANDSAtmospheric Windows in the Electromagnetic Spectrum&IGURE  SHOWS THE TRANSPARENCY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AS A FUNCTION OF WAVELENGTH ,ONGWAVELENGTH ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION AND SOME REGIONS IN THE INFRARED ARE ABLE TO TRAVERSE THEATMOSPHEREWITHLIMITEDSUCCESSBUTOTHERWAVELENGTHREGIONSARECOMPLETELYBLOCKED&ORTHISREASONSPECIALMEASURESMUSTBETAKENTOGATHERINFORMATIONATMANYPHOTONENERGIES4HEPRIMARYCONTRIBUTORTOINFRAREDABSORPTIONISWATERVAPOR!SARESULTIFANOBSERVATORY CAN BE PLACED ABOVE MOST OF THE ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR SOME OBSERVATIONS CAN BEMADE FROM THE GROUND4O THIS END BOTH .!3!AND THE 5NITED +INGDOM OPERATE INFRAREDTELESCOPES  M AND  M RESPECTIVELY	 ON -AUNA +EA WHERE THE HUMIDITY IS QUITE LOW(OWEVEREVENATANALTITUDEOFMTHEPROBLEMISNOTCOMPLETELYSOLVED4OGETABOVEMORE OF THE ATMOSPHERE BALLOON AND AIRCRAFT OBSERVATIONS HAVE ALSO BEEN USED
n n n n n n n n n-OLECULARABSORPTION)ONOSPHERICREFLECTION-OLECULARABSORPTION2ADIO WAVES2ADIO WINDOW)NFRARED8RAYS5LTRAVIOLET/PTICALWINDOW6ISIBLE
2ELATIVE TRANSPARENCY,OG/H9261 M	-ICROWAVE
FIGURE 254HE TRANSPARENCY OF %ARTHS ATMOSPHERE AS A FUNCTION OF WAVELENGTHTelescopes


<<<PAGE 197>>>

"ESIDESATMOSPHERICABSORPTIONTHESITUATIONINTHEINFRAREDISCOMPLICATEDSTILLFURTHERBECAUSE STEPS MUST BE TAKEN TO COOL THE DETECTOR IF NOT THE ENTIRE TELESCOPE 5SING 7IENSDISPLACEMENTLAWTHEPEAKWAVELENGTHOFABLACKBODYOFTEMPERATURE+ISFOUNDTOBENEARLYµM4HUSTHETELESCOPEANDITSDETECTORSCANPRODUCERADIATIONINJUSTTHEWAVELENGTHREGIONTHEOBSERVERMIGHTBEINTERESTEDIN/FCOURSETHEATMOSPHEREITSELFCANRADIATEINTHEINFRAREDASWELLINCLUDINGTHEPRODUCTIONOFMOLECULAR)2EMISSIONLINESObserving Above the Atmosphere)N  THEInfrared Astronomy Satellite)2!3	 WAS PLACED IN AN ORBIT  KM MILES	 HIGH WELL ABOVE %ARTHS OBSCURING ATMOSPHERE 4HE M IMAGING TELESCOPE WASCOOLEDTOLIQUIDHELIUMTEMPERATURESANDITSDETECTORSWEREDESIGNEDTOOBSERVEATAVARIETYOF WAVELENGTHS FROM µMT O  µM "EFORE ITS COOLANT WAS EXHAUSTED )2!3 PROVEDTOBEVERYSUCCESSFUL!MONGITSMANYACCOMPLISHMENTSWASTHEDETECTIONOFDUSTINORBITAROUNDYOUNGSTARSPOSSIBLYINDICATINGTHEFORMATIONOFPLANETARYSYSTEMS)2!3WASALSORESPONSIBLE FOR MANY IMPORTANT OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE NATURE OF GALAXIES"ASED UPON THE SUCCESS OF )2!3 THE %UROPEAN 3PACE !GENCY IN COLLABORATION WITH*APAN AND THE 5NITED 3TATES	 LAUNCHED THE MInfrared Space Observatory)3/	 IN 4HE OBSERVATORY WAS COOLED JUST AS )2!3 WAS BUT TO OBTAIN NEARLY  TIMES THERESOLUTIONOF)2!3)3/WASABLETOPOINTTOWARDATARGETFORAMUCHLONGERPERIODOFTIMEWHICH ENABLED IT TO COLLECT A GREATER NUMBER OF PHOTONS )3/ CEASED OPERATIONS IN AFTER DEPLETION OF ITS LIQUID HELIUM COOLANT4HE MOST RECENT AND LARGEST INFRARED OBSERVATORY EVER LAUNCHED IS THESpitzer SpaceTelescope;&IG  NAMED FOR ,YMAN 3PITZER *R n	= !FTER MANY YEARS OFDELAY THIS TELESCOPE WAS SUCCESSFULLY PLACED INTO ORBIT ON!UGUST  4RAILING %ARTHINAHELIOCENTRICORBIT3PITZERISABLETOOBSERVETHEHEAVENSINTHEWAVELENGTHRANGEFROMµmTO µM 7ITH A M F MIRROR CONSTRUCTED OF LIGHTWEIGHT BERYLLIUM ANDCOOLED TO LESS THAN  + THE TELESCOPE IS ABLE TO PROVIDE DIFFRACTIONLIMITED PERFORMANCEATWAVELENGTHSOF.µM ANDLONGER)TISANTICIPATEDTHAT3PITZERWILLHAVEANOPERATIONALLIFETIME OF AT LEAST  YEARS$ESIGNED TO INVESTIGATE THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM AT THE LONGER WAVELENGTHS OF THEMICROWAVEREGIMETHECosmic Background Explorer#/"%	WASLAUNCHEDINANDlNALLY SWITCHED OFF IN  #/"% MADE A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT OBSERVATIONS INCLUDINGVERY PRECISE MEASUREMENTS OF THE  + BLACKBODY SPECTRUM BELIEVED TO BE THE REMNANTlREBALL OF THE "IG "ANG!S IN OTHER WAVELENGTH REGIONS A NUMBER OF CHALLENGES EXIST WHEN OBSERVING IN THEULTRAVIOLETPORTIONOFTHEELECTROMAGNETICSPECTRUM)NTHISCASEBECAUSEOFTHESHORTWAVELENGTHSINVOLVEDASCOMPAREDTOOPTICALOBSERVATIONS	GREATCAREMUSTBETAKENTOPROVIDEA VERY PRECISE REmECTING SURFACE !S HAS ALREADY BEEN MENTIONED EVEN THE (34 PRIMARYMIRROR HAS IMPERFECTIONS THAT PROHIBIT SHORTER 56WAVELENGTHS FROM BEING OBSERVED AT THETHEORETICAL RESOLUTION LIMIT!SECOND56OBSERVINGPROBLEMSTEMSFROMTHEFACTTHATGLASSISOPAQUETOTHESESHORTWAVELENGTH PHOTONS AS IT IS FOR MUCH OF THE INFRARED	 #ONSEQUENTLY GLASS LENSES CANNOT4HE3PITZER3PACE4ELESCOPEWASTHELASTOF.!3!SFOURGREATORBITINGOBSERVATORIESTOBEPLACEDINORBIT4HEOTHERS WERE THE (UBBLE 3PACE 4ELESCOPE &IG 	 THE #OMPTON 'AMMA 2AY /BSERVATORY ;&IG A	= ANDTHE #HANDRA 8RAY /BSERVATORY ;&IG B	=Telescopes


<<<PAGE 198>>>

A	B	
FIGURE 26A	 4HE 3PITZER )NFRARED 4ELESCOPE DURING CONSTRUCTION 4HE M BERYLLIUM PRIMARY MIRROR IS VISIBLE #OURTESY OF .!3!*0,	 B	 4HE ALMOST FULLY ASSEMBLED 3PITZER 3PACE4ELESCOPE IN THE LABORATORY #OURTESY OF .!3!*0,	
A	B	
FIGURE 27A	 !N ARTISTS CONCEPTION OF THE #HANDRA 8RAY /BSERVATORY )LLUSTRATION.!3!-3&#	 B	 4HE #OMPTON 'AMMA 2AY /BSERVATORY BEING DEPLOYED BY THE 3PACE 3HUTTLEAtlantisIN BE USED IN THE OPTICAL SYSTEM OF A TELESCOPE DESIGNED TO OBSERVE IN THE ULTRAVIOLET ,ENSESMADE OF CRYSTAL PROVIDE AN APPROPRIATE SUBSTITUTE HOWEVER!REALWORKHORSEOFULTRAVIOLETASTRONOMYWASTHEInternational Ultraviolet Explorer,AUNCHED IN  AND OPERATIONAL UNTIL  THE )5% PROVED TO BE A REMARKABLY PRODUCTIVE AND DURABLE INSTRUMENT 4ODAY (34 WITH ITS SENSITIVITY DOWN TO  NM PROVIDESANOTHER IMPORTANT WINDOW ON THE ULTRAVIOLET UNIVERSE !T EVEN SHORTER WAVELENGTHS THETelescopes


<<<PAGE 199>>>

Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer LAUNCHED IN  AND SWITCHED OFF MORE THAN EIGHT YEARSLATER MADE OBSERVATIONS BETWEEN  NM AND  NM 4HE DATA FROM THESE TELESCOPES HAVEGIVENASTRONOMERSIMPORTANTINFORMATIONCONCERNINGAVASTARRAYOFASTROPHYSICALPROCESSESINCLUDINGMASSLOSSFROMHOTSTARSCATACLYSMICVARIABLESTARSANDCOMPACTOBJECTSSUCHASWHITE DWARFS AND PULSARS!TEVENSHORTERWAVELENGTHS8RAYANDGAMMARAYASTRONOMYYIELDSINFORMATIONABOUTVERYENERGETICPHENOMENASUCHASNUCLEARREACTIONPROCESSESANDTHEENVIRONMENTSAROUNDBLACK HOLES!S A RESULT OF THE VERY HIGH PHOTON ENERGIES INVOLVED 8RAY AND GAMMARAYOBSERVATIONSREQUIRETECHNIQUESTHATDIFFERMARKEDLYFROMTHOSEATLONGERWAVELENGTHS&ORINSTANCETRADITIONALGLASSMIRRORSAREUSELESSFORFORMINGIMAGESINTHISREGIMEBECAUSEOFTHEGREATPENETRATINGPOWEROFTHESEPHOTONS(OWEVERITISSTILLPOSSIBLETOIMAGESOURCESBYUSINGGRAZINGINCIDENCEREmECTIONSINCIDENTANGLECLOSETO◦	8RAYSPECTRACANALSOBEOBTAINEDUSINGTECHNIQUESSUCHAS"RAGGSCATTERINGANINTERFERENCEPHENOMENONPRODUCEDBYPHOTONREmECTIONSFROMATOMSINAREGULARCRYSTALLATTICE4HEDISTANCEBETWEENTHEATOMSCORRESPONDS TO THE SEPARATION BETWEEN SLITS IN AN OPTICAL DIFFRACTION GRATING)N UHURUALSO KNOWN AS THE 3MALL !STRONOMY 3ATELLITEn 3!3 	 MADE THElRST COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY OF THE 8RAY SKY )N THE LATE S THE THREEHigh EnergyAstrophysical ObservatoriesINCLUDINGTHEEinstein ObservatoryDISCOVEREDTHOUSANDSOF8RAYANDGAMMARAYSOURCES"ETWEENANDTHE8RAYOBSERVATORY2/3!4THERoentgen Satellite	A'ERMANn!MERICANn"RITISHSATELLITECONSISTINGOFTWODETECTORSAND AN IMAGING TELESCOPE OPERATING IN THE RANGE OF  NM TO  NM INVESTIGATED THEHOT CORONAS OF STARS SUPERNOVA REMNANTS AND QUASARS *APANSAdvanced Satellite forCosmology and AstrophysicsWHICHBEGANITSMISSIONINALSOMADEVALUABLE8RAYOBSERVATIONS OF THE HEAVENS BEFORE ATTITUDE CONTROL WAS LOST AS A RESULT OF A GEOMAGNETICSTORM *ULY  ,AUNCHEDINANDNAMEDFORTHE.OBEL0RIZEnWINNINGASTROPHYSICIST3UBRAHMANYAN#HANDRASEKHAR n	 THEChandra X-ray Observatory;&IG A	= OPERATES INTHE ENERGY RANGE FROM  KE6TO  KE6 NM TO  NM RESPECTIVELY	 WITH AN ANGULARRESOLUTION OF APPROXIMATELY .′′ "ECAUSE 8RAYS CANNOT BE FOCUSED IN THE SAME WAY THATLONGER WAVELENGTHS CAN GRAZING INCIDENCE MIRRORS ARE USED TO ACHIEVE THE OUTSTANDINGRESOLVING POWER OF #HANDRA4HE%UROPEAN3PACE!GENCYOPERATESANOTHER8RAYTELESCOPEALSOLAUNCHEDINTHEX-ray Multi-Mirror Newton Observatory8--.EWTON	 #OMPLEMENTING #HANDRASSENSITIVITY RANGE 8--.EWTON OPERATES BETWEEN  NM AND  NM4HECompton Gamma Ray Observatory;#'2/&IG B	=OBSERVEDTHEHEAVENSAT WAVELENGTHS SHORTER THAN THOSE MEASURED BY THE 8RAY TELESCOPES 0LACED INTO ORBIT BYTHE3PACE3HUTTLEAtlantisINTHEOBSERVATORYWASDEORBITEDINTOTHE0ACIlC/CEANIN*UNE 5ALL-SKY SURVEYS AND VIRTUAL OBSERVATORIES/URABILITYTOPROBETHEHEAVENSATWAVELENGTHSSPANNINGTHEELECTROMAGNETICSPECTRUMHASPROVIDED AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF INFORMATION NOT PREVIOUSLY AVAILABLE FROM GROUNDBASEDOBSERVATIONS MADE EXCLUSIVELY IN THE VISIBLE WAVELENGTH REGIME &OR EXAMPLE &IG ILLUSTRATES THE CHANGE IN THE APPEARANCE OF THE SKY WHEN DIFFERENT WAVELENGTH REGIONS ARETelescopes


<<<PAGE 200>>>

A	B	
D	E	C	
FIGURE 28/BSERVATIONS OF THE ENTIRE SKY AS SEEN IN VARIOUS WAVELENGTHS 4HE PLANE OF THE-ILKY7AY'ALAXYISCLEARLYEVIDENTRUNNINGHORIZONTALLYACROSSEACHIMAGE!LSOEVIDENTINSEVERALOF THE IMAGES IS THE PLANE OF OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM RUNNING DIAGONALLY FROM LOWER LEFT TO UPPER RIGHTA	 2ADIO COURTESY OF THE -AXn0LANCK )NSTITUT FÓR 2ADIOASTRONOMIE	 B	 INFRARED COURTESY OF THE#/"% 3CIENCE 7ORKING 'ROUP AND .!3!S 'ODDARD 3PACE &LIGHT #ENTER	 C	 VISIBLE COURTESY OF,UND/BSERVATORY	D	ULTRAVIOLETCOURTESYOF.!3!S'ODDARD3PACE&LIGHT#ENTER	ANDE	GAMMARAY WAVELENGTHS COURTESY OF .!3!	EXPLOREDRADIOINFRAREDVISIBLEULTRAVIOLETANDGAMMARAYS	.OTICETHATTHEPLANEOFOUR-ILKY7AYGALAXYISCLEARLYEVIDENTINEACHOFTHEWAVELENGTHBANDSBUTTHATOTHERFEATURESARE NOT NECESSARILY PRESENT IN EACH IMAGE4HEGROUNDBASEDANDSPACEBASEDOBSERVATORIESDESCRIBEDINTHISCHAPTERBYNOMEANSCONSTITUTE A COMPLETE LIST &OR INSTANCE ALONG WITH THE ORBITAL TELESCOPES DISCUSSED IN 3ECTION AREMANYOTHERSDESIGNEDFORGENERALOBSERVINGORTOCARRYOUTSPECIALIZEDSTUDIESTelescopes


<<<PAGE 201>>>

SUCH AS SOLAR OBSERVATIONS ;EG THESolar and Heliospheric Observatory3/(/	 ANDTHETransition Region and Coronal Explorer42!#%	= OR THE DETERMINATION OF HIGHLYACCURATE POSITIONS OF AND DISTANCES TO CELESTIAL OBJECTS;THEHipparcos Space Astrom-etry MissionCOMPLETED %3!	 THESIM PlanetQuest Mission3)- ANTICIPATED LAUNCH .!3!	 ANDGaiaANTICIPATED LAUNCH  %3!	=-OREOVER FROM THE GROUND LARGESCALE AUTOMATED SURVEYS HAVE BEEN OR ARE BEINGCONDUCTED IN VARIOUS WAVELENGTH REGIMES &OR INSTANCE THE VISIBLESloan Digital SkySurvey3$33	ANDTHENEARINFRAREDTwo-Micron All Sky Survey-!33	WILLPRODUCETREMENDOUSVOLUMESOFDATATHATNEEDTOBEANALYZED3$33ALONEWILLRESULTINTERABYTESOFDATACOMPARABLETOALLOFTHEINFORMATIONCONTAINEDINTHE,IBRARYOF#ONGRESS	0ETABYTESIZED DATA SETS ARE ALSO BEING ENVISIONED IN THE NOTTOODISTANT FUTURE'IVEN THE ENORMOUS VOLUMES OF DATA THAT HAVE ALREADY BEEN AND WILL BE PRODUCED BYGROUNDBASED AND SPACEBASED ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORIES TOGETHER WITH THE TREMENDOUSAMOUNTOFINFORMATIONTHATALREADYEXISTSINONLINEJOURNALSANDDATABASESGREATATTENTIONIS BEING GIVEN TO DEVELOPING WEBBASED VIRTUAL OBSERVATORIES 4HE GOAL OF THESE PROJECTSIS TO CREATE USER INTERFACES THAT GIVE ASTRONOMERS ACCESS TO ALREADYEXISTING OBSERVATIONALDATA &OR INSTANCE AN ASTRONOMER COULD QUERY A VIRTUAL OBSERVATORY DATABASE FOR ALL OF THEOBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE EVER BEEN MADE IN A SPECIlED REGION OF THE SKY OVER ANY WAVELENGTHBAND4HATDATAWOULDTHENBEDOWNLOADEDTOTHEASTRONOMERSDESKTOPCOMPUTERORMAINFRAME FOR STUDY )N ORDER TO ACCOMPLISH THIS TASK COMMON DATA FORMATS MUST BE CREATEDANDDATAANALYSISANDVISUALIZATIONTOOLSMUSTBEDEVELOPEDTOAIDEINTHISCHALLENGINGPROJECTININFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY!TTHETIMETHISTEXTWASWRITTENSEVERALPROTOTYPEVIRTUALOBSERVATORIES HAD BEEN DEVELOPED SUCH ASSkyviewHOSTED BY .!3!S 'ODDARD 3PACE&LIGHT#ENTERORTHEGuide Star CatalogsANDTHEDigitized Sky SurveyMAINTAINEDBYTHE3PACE 4ELESCOPE 3CIENCE )NSTITUTE /NLINE ACCESS TO A LARGE NUMBER OF CURRENTLY EXISTINGDATABASESAREALSOAVAILABLEATTHE.ATIONAL3PACE3CIENCE$ATA#ENTER.33$#	)NADDITIONSEVERALINITIATIVESAREUNDERWAYTOINTEGRATEANDSTANDARDIZETHEEFFORTS)NTHE5NITED3TATESTHE.ATIONAL3CIENCE&OUNDATION.3&	HASFUNDEDTHENational Virtual Observa-toryPROJECTIN %UROPE THEAstrophysical Virtual ObservatoryPROJECT IS UNDER WAYTHE 5NITED +INGDOM IS PURSUINGAstrogrid AND !USTRALIA IS WORKING ON THEAustralianVirtual Observatory )T IS HOPED THAT ALL OF THESE EFFORTS WILL ULTIMATELY BE COMBINED TOCREATE ANInternational Virtual Observatory7ITH THE PAST SUCCESSES OF GROUNDBASED AND ORBITAL OBSERVATORIES ASTRONOMERS HAVEBEEN ABLE TO MAKE GREAT STRIDES IN OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE UNIVERSE 'IVEN THE CURRENTADVANCES IN DETECTORS OBSERVATIONAL TECHNIQUES NEW OBSERVATIONAL FACILITIES AND VIRTUALOBSERVATORIES THE FUTURE HOLDS TREMENDOUS PROMISE FOR PROVIDING SIGNIlCANTLY IMPROVEDSTUDIES OF KNOWN OBJECTS IN THE HEAVENS (OWEVER PERHAPS THE MOST EXCITING IMPLICATIONSOF THESE OBSERVATIONAL ADVANCES ARE TO BE FOUND IN AS YET UNDISCOVERED AND UNANTICIPATEDPHENOMENAAstrometryIS THE SUBDISCIPLINE IN ASTRONOMY THAT DETERMINES POSITIONAL INFORMATION OF CELESTIAL OBJECTS3KYVIEW IS AVAILABLE AThttp://skyview.gsfc.nasa.gov4HE 'UIDE 3TAR #ATALOGS AND THE $IGITIZED 3KY 3URVEY CAN BOTH BE CONSULTED AThttp://www-gsss.stsci.edu4HE .33$# WEBSITE IS LOCATED AThttp://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/4HE .ATIONAL6IRTUAL /BSERVATORY WEBSITE IS LOCATED AThttp://www.us-vo.org
Telescopes


<<<PAGE 202>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneral#OLLESS -ATTHEW h4HE 'REAT #OSMIC -AP 4HE D& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT 3URVEYvMercury-ARCH!PRIL &RIEMAN *OSHUA! AND 3UBBA2AO -ARK h#HARTING THE (EAVENS 4HE 3LOAN $IGITAL 3KY3URVEYvMercury -ARCH!PRIL &UGATE2OBERT1AND7ILD7ALTER*h5NTWINKLINGTHE3TARS0ART)vSky and Telescope-AY -ARTINEZ0ATRICKED	The Observer’ s Guide to Astronomy: Volume 1#AMBRIDGE5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE /$ELL#2OBERTh"UILDINGTHE(UBBLE3PACE4ELESCOPEvSky and Telescope*ULY3CHILLING 'OVERT h!DAPTIVE /PTICSvSky and Telescope /CTOBER 3CHILLING 'OVERT h4HE 5LTIMATE4ELESCOPEvMercury -AY*UNE 3HERROD 0 #LAYA Complete Manual of Amateur Astronomy: Tools and Techniques forAstronomical Observations 0RENTICE(ALL %NGLEWOOD #LIFFS .* 3TEPHENS 3ALLYh@7E .AILED )T! &IRST ,OOK AT THE .EW AND )MPROVED (UBBLE 3PACE4ELESCOPEvMercury *ANUARY&EBRUARY 6AN $YK 3CHUYLER h4HE 5LTIMATE )NFRARED 3KY 3URVEY 4HE -!33 3URVEYvMercury-ARCH!PRIL 7HITE *AMES # )) h3EEING THE 3KY IN A7HOLE .EW7AYvMercury -ARCH!PRIL 7ILD7ALTER*AND&UGATE2OBERT1h5NTWINKLINGTHE3TARS0ART))vSky and Telescope*UNE Technical"ECKERS *ACQUES - h!DAPTIVE /PTICS FOR!STRONOMY 0RINCIPLES 0ERFORMANCE AND!PPLICATIONSvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics31 #ULHANE * ,EONARD AND 3ANFORD 0ETER 7X-ray Astronomy &ABER AND &ABER ,ONDON*ENKINS &RANCIS ! AND 7HITE (ARVEY %Fundamentals of Optics &OURTH %DITION-C'RAW(ILL .EW9ORK +ELLERMANN + ) AND -ORAN * - h4HE $EVELOPMENT OF (IGH2ESOUTION )MAGING IN2ADIO!STRONOMYvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics39 +RAUS *OHN $Radio Astronomy 3ECOND %DITION #YGNUS1UASAR "OOKS 0OWELL /HIO1UIRRENBACH!NDREAS h/PTICAL )NTERFEROMETRYvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astro-physics39 4HOMPSON!2-ORAN*-AND3WENSON'7Interferometry and Synthesis in RadioAstronomy 3ECOND %DITION7ILEY .EW9ORK Telescopes


<<<PAGE 203>>>



<<<PAGE 204>>>

PROBLEM
1For some point Pin space, show that for any arbitrary closed surface surrounding P, the integral
over a solid angle about Pgives
/Omega1tot=/contintegraldisplay
d/Omega1=4π.
2The light rays coming from an object do not, in general, travel parallel to the optical axis of
a lens or mirror system. Consider an arrow to be the object, located a distance pfrom the
center of a simple converging lens of focal length f, such that p>f . Assume that the arrow is
perpendicular to the optical axis of the system with the tail of the arrow located on the axis. To
locate the image, draw two light rays coming from the tip of the arrow:
(i)One ray should follow a path parallel to the optical axis until it strikes the lens. It then bends
toward the focal point of the side of the lens opposite the object.
(ii)A second ray should pass directly through the center of the lens unde ﬂected. (This assumes
that the lens is suf ﬁciently thin.)
The intersection of the two rays is the location of the tip of the image arrow. All other rays
coming from the tip of the object that pass through the lens will also pass through the image tip.
The tail of the image is located on the optical axis, a distance qfrom the center of the lens. The
image should also be oriented perpendicular to the optical axis.
(a)Using similar triangles, prove the relation
1
p+1
q=1
f.
(b)Show that if the distance of the object is much larger than the focal length of the lens
(p≫f), then the image is effectively located on the focal plane. This is essentially always
the situation for astronomical observations.
The analysis of a diverging lens or a mirror (either converging or diverging) is similar and leads
to the same relation between object distance, image distance, and focal length.
3Show that if two lenses of focal lengths f1andf2can be considered to have zero physical
separation, then the effective focal length of the combination of lenses is
1
feff=1
f1+1
f2.
Note: Assuming that the actual physical separation of the lenses is x, this approximation is strictly
valid only when f1≫xandf2≫x.
4 (a) Using the result of Problem 3, show that a compound lens system can be constructed from
two lenses of different indices of refraction, n1λandn2λ, having the property that the resultant
focal lengths of the compound lens at two speci ﬁc wavelengths λ1andλ2, respectively, can
be made equal, or
feff,λ1=feff,λ2.
(b)Argue qualitatively that this condition does not guarantee that the focal length will be constant
for all wavelengths.Telescopes
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.6SET
,


<<<PAGE 205>>>

5Prove that the angular magniﬁcation of a telescope having an objective focal length offobjandan eyepiece focal length offeyeis given by Eq. ( 9) when the objective and the eyepiece areseparated by the sum of their focal lengths,fobj+feye.m=fobjfeye.(9)6The diffraction pattern for a single slit (Figs. 7 and 8) is given byI (θ)=I0/bracketleftbiggsin(β/2)β/2/bracketrightbigg2,whereβ≡2πDsinθ/λ.
(a)Using l’Hôpital’s rule, prove that the intensity atθ=0 is given byI(0)=I0.(b)If the slit has an aperture of 1.0µm, what angleθcorresponds to theﬁrst minimum if thewavelength of the light is 500 nm? Express your answer in degrees./H9258/H9258Path difference = (D/2) sin /H9258LDyFIGURE 7For a minimum to occur, the path difference between paired rays must be a half-wavelength.
0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
m–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3I / I0
FIGURE 8The diffraction pattern produced by a single slit. (Photograph from Cagnet, Francon,and Thrierr,Atlas of Optical Phenomena, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1962.)7 (a)Using the Rayleigh criterion, estimate the angular resolution limit of the human eye at550 nm. Assume that the diameter of the pupil is 5 mm.(b)Compare your answer in part (a) to the angular diameters of the Moon and Jupiter. You mayﬁnd the data in Appendix helpful.(c)What can you conclude about the ability to resolve the Moon’s disk and Jupiter’s disk withthe unaided eye?Telescopes: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 206>>>

Using the Rayleigh criterion, estimate the theoretical diffraction limit for the angular res-olution of a typical 20-cm (8-in) amateur telescope at 550 nm. Express your answer inarcseconds.(b)Using the information in Appendix: Solar  System  Data,  estimate the minimum size of acrater on the Moonthat can be resolved by a 20-cm (8-in) telescope.(c)Is this resolution limit likely to be achieved? Why or why not?9The New Technology Telescope (NTT) is operated by the European Southern Observatory atCerro La Silla. This telescope was used as a testbed for evaluating the adaptive optics technologyused in the VLT. The NTT has a 3.58-m primary mirror with a focal ratio off/2.2.(a)Calculate the focal length of the primary mirror of the New Technology Telescope.(b)What is the value of the plate scale of the NTT?(c)ϵBootes is a double star system whose components are separated by 2.9′′. Calculate thelinear separation of the images on the primary mirror focal plane of the NTT.10When operated in“planetary”mode, HST’s WF/PC 2 has a focal ratio off/28.3 with a plate scaleof 0.0455′′pixel−1. Estimate the angular size of theﬁeld of view of one CCD in the planetarymode.11Suppose that a radio telescope receiver has a bandwidth of 50 MHz centered at 1.430 GHz(1 GHz=1000 MHz). Assume that, rather than being a perfect detector over the entire band-width, the receiver’s frequency dependence is triangular, meaning that the sensitivity of thedetector is 0% at the edges of the band and 100% at its center. Thisﬁlter function can beexpressed asfν=⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ννm−νℓ−νℓνm−νℓifνℓ≤ν≤νm−ννu−νm+νuνu−νmifνm≤ν≤νu0elsewhere.(a)Find the values ofνℓ,νm, andνu.(b)Assume that the radio dish is a 100% efﬁcient reﬂector over the receiver’s bandwidth andhas a diameter of 100 m. Assume also that the source NGC 2558 (a spiral galaxy with anapparent visual magnitude of 13.8) has a constant spectralﬂux density ofS=2.5 mJy overthe detector bandwidth. Calculate the total powermeasuredat the receiver.(c)Estimate the power emitted at the source in this frequency range ifd=100 Mpc. Assumethat the source emits the signal isotropically.12What would the diameter of a single radio dish need to be to have a collecting area equivalentto that of the 27 telescopes of the VLA?13How much must the pointing angle of a two-element radio interferometer be changed in order tomove from one interference maximum to the next? Assume that the two telescopes are separatedby the diameter of Earth and that the observation is being made at a wavelength of 21 cm. Expressyour answer in arcseconds.14Assuming that ALMA is completed with the currently envisioned 50 antennas, how many uniquebaselines will exist within the array?15The technical speciﬁcations for the planned SIM PlanetQuest mission call for the ability toresolve two point sources with an accuracy of better than 0.000004′′for objects as faint as 20thmagnitude in visible light. This will be accomplished through the use of optical interferometry.(a)Assuming that grass grows at the rate of 2 cm per week, and assuming that SIM couldobserve a blade of grass from a distance of 10 km, how long would it take for SIM to detecta measurable change in the length of the blade of grass?Telescopes: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 207>>>

(b)Using a baseline of the diameter of Earth’s orbit, how far away will SIM be able to determinedistances using trigonometric parallax, assuming the source is bright enough? (For reference,the distance from the Sun to the center of the Milky Way Galaxy is approximately 8 kpc.)(c)From your answer to part (b), what would the apparent magnitude of the Sun be from thatdistance?(d)The star Betelgeuse (in Orion) has an absolute magnitude of−5.14. How far could Betelgeusebe from SIM and still be detected? (Neglect any effects of dust and gas between the star andthe spacecraft.)16 (a)Using data available in the text or on observatory websites, list the wavelength ranges (incm) and photon energy ranges (in eV) covered by the following telescopes: VLA, ALMA,SIRTF, JWST, VLT/VLTI, Keck/Keck Interferometer, HST, IUE, EUVE, Chandra, CGRO.(b)Graphically illustrate the wavelength coverage of each of the telescopes listed in part (a) bydrawing a horizontal bar over a horizontal axis like the one shown in Fig. 25.
–9–8–7–6–5–4–3–2–10123MolecularabsorptionIonosphericreflectionMolecularabsorptionRadio wavesRadio windowInfraredX-raysUltravioletOpticalwindowVisible
0.01.0Relative transparencyLog10/H9261 (m)Microwave
FIGURE 25The transparency of Earth’s atmosphere as a function of wavelength.(c)Using photon energies rather than wavelengths, create a graphic similar to the one in part (b).COMPUTER PROBLEM17Suppose that two identical slits are situated next to each other in such a way that the axes of theslits are parallel and oriented vertically. Assume also that the two slits are the same distance fromaﬂat screen. Different light sources of identical intensity are placed behind each slit so that thetwo sources are incoherent, which means that double-slit interference effects can be neglected.(a)If the two slits are separated by a distance such that the central maximum of the diffractionpattern corresponding to theﬁrst slit is located at the second minimum of the second slit’sdiffraction pattern, plot the resulting superposition of intensities (i.e., the total intensity ateach location). Include at least two minima to the left of the central maximum of the leftmostslit and at least two minima to the right of the central maximum of the rightmost slit.Hint:Refer to the equation given in Problem 6 and plot your results as a function ofβ.(b)Repeat your calculations for the case when the two slits are separated by a distance suchthat the central maximum of one slit falls at the location of theﬁrst minimum of the second(the Rayleigh criterion for single slits).(c)What can you conclude about the ability to resolve two individual sources (the slits) as thesources are brought progressively closer together?Telescopes: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 208>>>

&ROM #HAPTER   OF An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBinary Systems and StellarParameters
BY 

<<<PAGE 209>>>

Binary Systems and StellarParameters1The Classiﬁcation of Binary Stars2Mass Determination Using Visual Binaries3Eclipsing, Spectroscopic Binaries4The Search for Extrasolar Planets1THE CLASSIFICATION OF BINARY STARS
&ORTUNATELY NATURE HAS PROVIDED AMPLE OPPORTUNITY FOR ASTRONOMERS TO OBSERVE BINARYSTARSYSTEMS!TLEASTHALFOFALLhSTARSvINTHESKYAREACTUALLYMULTIPLESYSTEMSTWOORMORESTARS IN ORBIT ABOUT A COMMON CENTER OF MASS!NALYSIS OF THE ORBITAL PARAMETERS OF THESESYSTEMSPROVIDESVITALINFORMATIONABOUTAVARIETYOFSTELLARCHARACTERISTICSINCLUDINGMASS4HEMETHODSUSEDTOANALYZETHEORBITALDATAVARYSOMEWHATDEPENDINGONTHEGEOMETRYOF THE SYSTEM ITS DISTANCE FROM THE OBSERVER AND THE RELATIVE MASSES AND LUMINOSITIES OFTHECOMPONENTS#ONSEQUENTLYBINARYSTARSYSTEMSARECLASSIlEDACCORDINGTOTHEIRSPECIlCOBSERVATIONAL CHARACTERISTICSsOptical double 4HESE SYSTEMS ARE NOT ACTUALLY BINARIES AT ALL BUT SIMPLY TWO STARSTHAT LIE ALONG THE SAME LINE OF SIGHT IE THEY HAVE SIMILAR RIGHT ASCENSIONS ANDDECLINATIONS	 !S A CONSEQUENCE OF THEIR LARGE PHYSICAL SEPARATIONS THE STARS ARENOT GRAVITATIONALLY BOUND AND HENCE THE SYSTEM IS NOT USEFUL IN DETERMINING STELLARMASSESsVisual binary "OTH STARS IN THE BINARY CAN BE RESOLVED INDEPENDENTLY AND IF THEORBITAL PERIOD IS NOT PROHIBITIVELY LONG IT IS POSSIBLE TO MONITOR THE MOTION OF EACHMEMBER OF THE SYSTEM 4HESE SYSTEMS PROVIDE IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT THE ANGULAR SEPARATION OF THE STARS FROM THEIR MUTUAL CENTER OF MASS )F THE DISTANCE TO THEBINARY IS ALSO KNOWN THE LINEAR SEPARATIONS OF THE STARS CAN THEN BE CALCULATED!DETAILED UNDERSTANDING OF THE STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS REQUIRES KNOWLEDGE OF THEIR PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 7E HAVE SEEN THAT KNOWLEDGE OF BLACKBODY RADIATION CURVES SPECTRA AND PARALLAX ENABLES US TO DETERMINE A STARS EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE LUMINOSITY RADIUS COMPOSITION AND OTHER PARAMETERS (OWEVER THE ONLY DIRECT WAY TO DETERMINE THE MASS OF A STAR IS BY STUDYING ITS GRAVITATIONAL INTERACTION WITH OTHER OBJECTS +EPLERS LAWS CAN BE USED TO CALCULATE THE MASSES OF MEMBERS OF OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM (OWEVER THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE GRAVITATIONAL FORCE ALLOWS +EPLERS LAWS TO BE GENERALIZED TO INCLUDE THE ORBITS OF STARS ABOUT ONE ANOTHER AND EVEN THE ORBITAL INTERACTIONS OF GALAXIES AS LONG AS PROPER CARE IS TAKEN TO REFER ALL ORBITS TO THE CENTER OF MASS OF THE SYSTEM


<<<PAGE 210>>>

5NSEEN COMPANION#ENTER OF MASS2IGHT ASCENSION$ECLINATION6ISUAL MEMBERFIGURE 1!N ASTROMETRIC BINARY WHICH CONTAINS ONE VISIBLE MEMBER 4HE UNSEEN COMPONENTIS IMPLIED BY THE OSCILLATORY MOTION OF THE OBSERVABLE STAR IN THE SYSTEM 4HE PROPER MOTION OF THEENTIRE SYSTEM IS REmECTED IN THE STRAIGHTLINE MOTION OF THE CENTER OF MASSsAstrometric binary )F ONE MEMBER OF A BINARY IS SIGNIlCANTLY BRIGHTER THAN THEOTHER IT MAY NOT BE POSSIBLE TO OBSERVE BOTH MEMBERS DIRECTLY )N SUCH A CASE THEEXISTENCEOFTHEUNSEENMEMBERMAYBEDEDUCEDBYOBSERVINGTHEOSCILLATORYMOTIONOF THE VISIBLE COMPONENT 3INCE .EWTONS lRST LAW REQUIRES THAT A CONSTANT VELOCITYBEMAINTAINEDBYAMASSUNLESSAFORCEISACTINGUPONITSUCHANOSCILLATORYBEHAVIORREQUIRES THAT ANOTHER MASS BE PRESENT SEE &IG 	sEclipsing binary &ORBINARIESTHATHAVEORBITALPLANESORIENTEDAPPROXIMATELYALONGTHE LINE OF SIGHT OF THE OBSERVER ONE STAR MAY PERIODICALLY PASS IN FRONT OF THE OTHERBLOCKING THE LIGHT OF THE ECLIPSED COMPONENT SEE &IG 	 3UCH A SYSTEM IS RECOGNIZABLEBYREGULARVARIATIONSINTHEAMOUNTOFLIGHTRECEIVEDATTHETELESCOPE.OTONLYDOOBSERVATIONSOFTHESElight curvesREVEALTHEPRESENCEOFTWOSTARSBUTTHEDATACANALSO PROVIDE INFORMATION ABOUT RELATIVE EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURES AND RADII OF EACH STARBASEDONTHEDEPTHSOFTHELIGHTCURVEMINIMAANDTHELENGTHSOFTHEECLIPSES$ETAILSOF SUCH AN ANALYSIS WILL BE DISCUSSED IN 3ECTION sSpectrum binary !SPECTRUMBINARYISASYSTEMWITHTWOSUPERIMPOSEDINDEPENDENTDISCERNIBLESPECTRA4HE$OPPLEREFFECTCAUSESTHESPECTRALLINESOFA STAR TO BE SHIFTED FROM THEIR REST FRAME WAVELENGTHS IF THAT STAR HAS A NONZERO RADIAL VELOCITY 3INCE THE STARS IN A BINARY SYSTEM ARE CONSTANTLY IN MOTION ABOUT THEIRMUTUAL CENTER OF MASS THERE MUST NECESSARILY BE PERIODIC SHIFTS IN THE WAVELENGTHOF EVERY SPECTRAL LINE OF EACH STAR UNLESS THE ORBITAL PLANE IS EXACTLY PERPENDICULARTO THE LINE OF SIGHT OF COURSE	 )T IS ALSO APPARENT THAT WHEN THE LINES OF ONE STAR AREBLUESHIFTEDTHELINESOFTHEOTHERMUSTBEREDSHIFTEDRELATIVETOTHEWAVELENGTHSTHATWOULDBEPRODUCEDIFTHESTARSWEREMOVINGWITHTHECONSTANTVELOCITYOFTHECENTEROFMASS(OWEVERITMAYBETHATTHEORBITALPERIODISSOLONGTHATTHETIMEDEPENDENCEOF THE SPECTRAL WAVELENGTHS IS NOT READILY APPARENT )N ANY CASE IF ONE STAR IS NOTOVERWHELMINGLYMORELUMINOUSTHANITSCOMPANIONANDIFITISNOTPOSSIBLETORESOLVEEACHSTARSEPARATELYITMAYSTILLBEPOSSIBLETORECOGNIZETHEOBJECTASABINARYSYSTEMBY OBSERVING THE SUPERIMPOSED AND OPPOSITELY $OPPLERSHIFTED SPECTRA              Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 211>>>

V MAGNITUDE
n n n        /RBITAL PHASEFIGURE 24HEVMAGNITUDELIGHTCURVEOF993AGITTARIIANECLIPSINGBINARYSTAR4HEDATAFROMMANY ORBITAL PERIODS HAVE BEEN PLOTTED ON THIS LIGHT CURVE AS A FUNCTION OF PHASE WHERE THE PHASE ISDElNED TO BE  AT THE PRIMARY MINIMUM 4HIS SYSTEM HAS AN ORBITAL PERIODP=. D ANECCENTRICITYe=. AND ORBITAL INCLINATIONi=.◦SEE 3ECTION 	 &IGURE ADOPTED FROM,ACY # ( 3Astron. J.105  	%VENIFTHE$OPPLERSHIFTSARENOTSIGNIlCANTIFTHEORBITALPLANEISPERPENDICULARTO THE LINE OF SIGHT FOR INSTANCE	 IT MAY STILL BE POSSIBLE TO DETECT TWO SETS OF SUPERIMPOSED SPECTRA IF THEY ORIGINATE FROM STARS THAT HAVE SIGNIlCANTLY DIFFERENT SPECTRALFEATURE sSpectroscopic binary )FTHEPERIODOFABINARYSYSTEMISNOTPROHIBITIVELYLONGANDIFTHEORBITALMOTIONHASACOMPONENTALONGTHELINEOFSIGHTAPERIODICSHIFTINSPECTRALLINESWILLBEOBSERVABLE!SSUMINGTHATTHELUMINOSITIESOFTHESTARSARECOMPARABLEBOTHSPECTRAWILLBEOBSERVABLE(OWEVERIFONESTARISMUCHMORELUMINOUSTHANTHEOTHER THEN THE SPECTRUM OF THE LESS LUMINOUS COMPANION WILL BE OVERWHELMED ANDONLYASINGLESETOFPERIODICALLYVARYINGSPECTRALLINESWILLBESEEN)NEITHERSITUATIONTHE EXISTENCE OF A BINARY STAR SYSTEM IS REVEALED &IGURE  SHOWS THE RELATIONSHIPBETWEEN SPECTRA AND ORBITAL PHASE FOR A SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STAR SYSTEM4HESE SPECIlC CLASSIlCATIONS ARE NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE &OR INSTANCE AN UNRESOLVEDSYSTEM COULD BE BOTH AN ECLIPSING AND A SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY )T IS ALSO TRUE THAT SOMESYSTEMSCANBESIGNIlCANTLYMOREUSEFULTHANOTHERSINPROVIDINGINFORMATIONABOUTSTELLARCHARACTERISTICS 4HREE TYPES OF SYSTEMS CAN PROVIDE US WITH MASS DETERMINATIONS VISUALBINARIESCOMBINEDWITHPARALLAXINFORMATIONVISUALBINARIESFORWHICHRADIALVELOCITIESAREAVAILABLE OVER A COMPLETE ORBIT AND ECLIPSING DOUBLELINE SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIESSBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 212>>>



/H9261/H92614O %ARTHA	B	C	D	FIGURE 34HE PERIODIC SHIFT IN SPECTRAL FEATURES OF A DOUBLELINE SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY 4HERELATIVEWAVELENGTHSOFTHESPECTRAOF3TARSANDARESHOWNATFOURDIFFERENTPHASESDURINGTHEORBITA	 3TAR  IS MOVING TOWARD THE OBSERVER WHILE 3TAR  IS MOVING AWAY B	 "OTH STARS HAVE VELOCITIESPERPENDICULARTOTHELINEOFSIGHTC	3TARISRECEDINGFROMTHEOBSERVERWHILE3TARISAPPROACHINGD	!GAIN BOTH STARS HAVE VELOCITIES PERPENDICULAR TO THE LINE OF SIGHTλREPRESENTS THE WAVELENGTHOF THE OBSERVED LINE $OPPLERSHIFTED BY THE VELOCITY OF THE CENTER OF MASS OF THE SYSTEM2MASS DETERMINATION USING VISUAL BINARIES7HEN THE ANGULAR SEPARATION BETWEEN COMPONENTS OF A BINARY SYSTEM IS GREATER THAN THERESOLUTION LIMIT IMPOSED BY LOCAL SEEING CONDITIONS AND THE FUNDAMENTAL DIFFRACTION LIMITATION OF THE 2AYLEIGH CRITERION IT BECOMES POSSIBLE TO ANALYZE THE ORBITAL CHARACTERISTICSOF THE INDIVIDUAL STARS &ROM THE ORBITAL DATA THE ORIENTATION OF THE ORBITS AND THE SYSTEMSCENTEROFMASSCANBEDETERMINEDPROVIDINGKNOWLEDGEOFTHERATIOOFTHESTARSMASSES)FTHEDISTANCETOTHESYSTEMISALSOKNOWNFROMTRIGONOMETRICPARALLAXFORINSTANCETHELINEARSEPARATION OF THE STARS CAN BE DETERMINED LEADING TO THE INDIVIDUAL MASSES OF THE STARS INTHE SYSTEM4O SEE HOW A VISUAL BINARY CAN YIELD MASS INFORMATION CONSIDER TWO STARS IN ORBITABOUT THEIR MUTUAL CENTER OF MASS!SSUMING THAT THE ORBITAL PLANE IS PERPENDICULAR TO THEOBSERVERS LINE OF SIGHT WE SEEHATTHERATIOOFMASSESMAYBEFOUNDFROMTHERATIOOFTHEANGULARSEPARATIONSOFTHESTARSFROMTHECENTEROFMASSrANDr WE lND THATmm=rr=aa,	WHEREaANDaARETHESEMIMAJORAXESOFTHEELLIPSES)FTHEDISTANCEFROMTHEOBSERVERTO                                      T#ONSIDERINGONLYTHELENGTHSOFTHEVECTORSBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 213>>>

THE BINARY STAR SYSTEM ISd THEN THE ANGLES SUBTENDED BY THE SEMIMAJOR AXES AREα=adANDα=ad,WHEREαANDαARE MEASURED IN RADIANS 3UBSTITUTING WE lND THAT THE MASS RATIO SIMPLYBECOMESmm=αα.	%VENIFTHEDISTANCETOTHESTARSYSTEMISNOTKNOWNTHEMASSRATIOMAYSTILLBEDETERMINED.OTETHATSINCEONLYTHERATIOOFTHESUBTENDEDANGLESISNEEDEDαANDαMAYBEEXPRESSEDIN ARCSECONDS THE UNIT TYPICALLY USED FOR ANGULAR MEASURE IN ASTRONOMY4HE GENERAL FORM OF +EPLERS THIRD LAWP=πG(m+m)a,GIVES THE SUM OF THE MASSES OF THE STARS PROVIDED THAT THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS a	 OF THE ORBITOF THE REDUCED MASS IS KNOWN 3INCEa=a+aTHE PROOF OF THIS IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE	THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS CAN BE DETERMINED DIRECTLY ONLY IF THE DISTANCE TO THE SYSTEM HAS BEENDETERMINED !SSUMING THATdIS KNOWNm+mMAY BE COMBINED WITHm/mTO GIVEEACH MASS SEPARATELY4HISPROCESSISCOMPLICATEDSOMEWHATBYTHEPROPERMOTIONOFTHECENTEROFMASSSEE&IG 	 AND BY THE FACT THAT MOST ORBITS ARE NOT CONVENIENTLY ORIENTED WITH THEIR PLANESPERPENDICULARTOTHELINEOFSIGHTOFTHEOBSERVER2EMOVINGTHEPROPERMOTIONOFTHECENTEROF MASS FROM THE OBSERVATIONS IS A RELATIVELY SIMPLE PROCESS SINCE THE CENTER OF MASS MUSTMOVE AT A CONSTANT VELOCITY &ORTUNATELY ESTIMATING THE ORIENTATION OF THE ORBITS IS ALSOPOSSIBLE AND CAN BE TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION,ETiBE THEangle of inclinationBETWEEN THE PLANE OF AN ORBIT AND THE PLANE OF THESKY AS SHOWN IN &IG  NOTE THAT THE ORBITS OF BOTH STARS ARE NECESSARILY IN THE SAMEPLANE!S A SPECIAL CASE ASSUME THAT THE ORBITAL PLANE AND THE PLANE OF THE SKY DElNED ASBEING PERPENDICULAR TO THE LINE OF SIGHT	 INTERSECT ALONG A LINE PARALLEL TO THE MINOR AXISFORMINGAline of nodes4HEOBSERVERWILLNOTMEASURETHEACTUALANGLESSUBTENDEDBYTHESEMIMAJORAXESαANDαBUTTHEIRPROJECTIONSONTOTHEPLANEOFTHESKY˜α=αCOSiAND˜α=αCOSi4HISGEOMETRICALEFFECTPLAYSNOROLEINCALCULATINGTHEMASSRATIOSSINCETHECOSiTERM WILL SIMPLY CANCEL IN %Q  	mm=αα=αCOSiαCOSi=˜α˜α.(OWEVERTHISPROJECTIONEFFECTCANMAKEASIGNIlCANTDIFFERENCEWHENWEAREUSING+EPLERSTHIRD LAW 3INCEα=a/dαIN RADIANS	 +EPLERS THIRD LAW MAY BE SOLVED FOR THE SUM OF4HE ANNUAL WOBBLE OF STELLAR POSITIONS DUE TO TRIGONOMETRIC PARALLAX MUST ALSO BE CONSIDERED WHEN SIGNIlCANTBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 214>>>

,INE OF NODESi&OCUS OF OBSERVED ELLIPSE0LANE OF THE SKY0LANE OF THE TRUE ORBIT0ROJECTED FOCUS4RUE FOCUSFIGURE 4!NELLIPTICALORBITPROJECTEDONTOTHEPLANEOFTHESKYPRODUCESANOBSERVABLEELLIPTICALORBIT4HE FOCI OF THE ORIGINAL ELLIPSE DO NOT PROJECT ONTO THE FOCI OF THE OBSERVED ELLIPSE HOWEVERTHE MASSES TO GIVEm+m=πG(αd)P=πG/parenleftbiggdCOSi/parenrightbigg˜αP,	WHERE˜α=˜α+˜α4O EVALUATE THE SUM OF THE MASSES PROPERLY WE MUST DEDUCE THE ANGLE OF INCLINATION4HIS CAN BE ACCOMPLISHED BY CAREFULLY NOTING THE APPARENT POSITION OF THE CENTER OF MASSOFTHESYSTEM!SILLUSTRATEDIN&IG THEPROJECTIONOFANELLIPSETILTEDATANANGLEiWITHRESPECTTOTHEPLANEOFTHESKYWILLRESULTINANOBSERVEDELLIPSEWITHADIFFERENTECCENTRICITY(OWEVERTHECENTEROFMASSWILLNOTBELOCATEDATONEOFTHEFOCIOFTHEPROJECTIONARESULTTHAT IS INCONSISTENT WITH +EPLERS lRST LAW 4HUS THE GEOMETRY OF THE TRUE ELLIPSE MAY BEDETERMINED BY COMPARING THE OBSERVED STELLAR POSITIONS WITH MATHEMATICAL PROJECTIONS OFVARIOUS ELLIPSES ONTO THE PLANE OF THE SKY/F COURSE THE PROBLEM OF PROJECTION HAS BEEN SIMPLIlED HERE .OT ONLY CAN THE ANGLEOF INCLINATIONiBE NONZERO BUT THE ELLIPSE MAY BE TILTED ABOUT ITS MAJOR AXIS AND ROTATEDABOUTTHELINEOFSIGHTTOPRODUCEANYPOSSIBLEORIENTATION(OWEVERTHEGENERALPRINCIPLESALREADY MENTIONED STILL APPLY MAKING IT POSSIBLE TO DEDUCE THE TRUE SHAPES OF THE STARSELLIPTICAL ORBITS AS WELL AS THEIR MASSES)T IS ALSO POSSIBLE TO DETERMINE THE INDIVIDUAL MASSES OF MEMBERS OF VISUAL BINARIESEVENIFTHEDISTANCEISNOTKNOWN)NTHISSITUATIONDETAILEDRADIALVELOCITYDATAARENEEDED4HE PROJECTION OF VELOCITY VECTORS ONTO THE LINE OF SIGHT COMBINED WITH INFORMATION ABOUTTHESTARSPOSITIONSANDTHEORIENTATIONOFTHEIRORBITSPROVIDESAMEANSFORDETERMININGTHESEMIMAJOR AXES OF THE ELLIPSES AS REQUIRED BY +EPLERS THIRD LAWBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 215>>>

ECLIPSING, SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES! WEALTH OF INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE FROM A BINARY SYSTEM EVEN IF IT IS NOT POSSIBLE TORESOLVE EACH OF ITS STARS INDIVIDUALLY 4HIS IS PARTICULARLY TRUE FOR A DOUBLELINE ECLIPSINGSPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STAR SYSTEM )N SUCH A SYSTEM NOT ONLY IS IT POSSIBLE TO DETERMINE THEINDIVIDUAL MASSES OF THE STARS BUT ASTRONOMERS MAY BE ABLE TO DEDUCE OTHER PARAMETERS ASWELLSUCHASTHESTARSRADIIANDTHERATIOOFTHEIRmUXESANDHENCETHERATIOOFTHEIREFFECTIVETEMPERATURES/FCOURSEECLIPSINGSYSTEMSARENOTRESTRICTEDTOSPECTROSCOPICBINARIESBUTMAY OCCUR IN OTHER TYPES OF BINARIES AS WELL SUCH AS VISUAL BINARIES	The Effect of Eccentricity on Radial Velocity Measurements#ONSIDERASPECTROSCOPICBINARYSTARSYSTEMFORWHICHTHESPECTRAOFBOTHSTARSMAYBESEENA DOUBLELINE SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY	 3INCE THE INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS OF THE SYSTEM CANNOTBE RESOLVED THE TECHNIQUES USED TO DETERMINE THE ORIENTATION AND ECCENTRICITY OF THE ORBITSOFVISUALBINARIESARENOTAPPLICABLE!LSOTHEINCLINATIONANGLEiCLEARLYPLAYSAROLEINTHESOLUTION OBTAINED FOR THE STARSMASSES BECAUSE IT DIRECTLY INmUENCES THE MEASURED RADIALVELOCITIES )FvIS THE VELOCITY OF THE STAR OF MASSmANDvIS THE VELOCITY OF THE STAR OFMASSmAT SOME INSTANT THEN REFERRING TO &IG  THE OBSERVED RADIAL VELOCITIES CANNOTEXCEEDvMAXr=vSINiANDvMAXr=vSINi RESPECTIVELY 4HEREFORE THE ACTUAL MEASUREDRADIAL VELOCITIES DEPEND UPON THE POSITIONS OF THE STARS AT THAT INSTANT!S A SPECIAL CASE IFTHEDIRECTIONSOFMOTIONOFTHESTARSHAPPENTOBEPERPENDICULARTOTHELINEOFSIGHTTHENTHEOBSERVED RADIAL VELOCITIES WILL BE ZERO&OR A STAR SYSTEM HAVING CIRCULAR ORBITS THE SPEED OF EACH STAR WILL BE CONSTANT )F THEPLANE OF THEIR ORBITS LIES IN THE LINE OF SIGHT OF THE OBSERVER i=◦	 THEN THE MEASUREDRADIALVELOCITIESWILLPRODUCESINUSOIDALvelocity curvesASIN&IG #HANGINGTHEORBITALINCLINATIONDOESNOTALTERTHESHAPEOFTHEVELOCITYCURVESITMERELYCHANGESTHEIRAMPLITUDES
     nn
tP2ADIAL VELOCITY KM Sn	vvvvvCMvCM4O %ARTH
A	B	FIGURE4HE ORBITAL PATHS AND RADIAL VELOCITIES OF TWO STARS IN CIRCULAR ORBITS e=	 )N THISEXAMPLEM=-⊙M=-⊙ THE ORBITAL PERIOD ISP= D AND THE RADIAL VELOCITY OF THECENTER OF MASS ISvCM= KM S−vv ANDvCMARE THE VELOCITIES OF 3TAR  3TAR  AND THE CENTEROF MASS RESPECTIVELY A	 4HE PLANE OF THE CIRCULAR ORBITS LIES ALONG THE LINE OF SIGHT OF THE OBSERVERB	4HE OBSERVED RADIAL VELOCITY CURVESBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters3
5


<<<PAGE 216>>>

     nnn
tP2ADIAL VELOCITY KM Sn	vCMvv4O %ARTH
A	B	vvvCM
FIGURE4HE ORBITAL PATHS AND RADIAL VELOCITIES OF TWO STARS IN ELLIPTICAL ORBITS e=.	 !SIN &IG M=-⊙M=-⊙ THE ORBITAL PERIOD ISP= D AND THE RADIAL VELOCITY OF THECENTER OF MASS ISvCM= KM S− )N ADDITION THE ORIENTATION OF PERIASTRON IS ◦vv ANDvCMARETHEVELOCITIESOF3TAR3TARANDTHECENTEROFMASSRESPECTIVELYA	4HEPLANEOFTHEORBITSLIESALONG THE LINE OF SIGHT OF THE OBSERVER B	4HE OBSERVED RADIAL VELOCITY CURVESBYTHEFACTORSINi4OESTIMATEiANDTHEACTUALORBITALVELOCITIESTHEREFOREOTHERINFORMATIONABOUT THE SYSTEM IS NECESSARY7HEN THE ECCENTRICITYe OF THE ORBITS IS NOT ZERO THE OBSERVED VELOCITY CURVES BECOMESKEWED AS SHOWN IN &IG  4HE EXACT SHAPES OF THE CURVES ALSO DEPEND STRONGLY ON THEORIENTATION OF THE ORBITS WITH RESPECT TO THE OBSERVER EVEN FOR A GIVEN INCLINATION ANGLE)N REALITY MANY SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES POSSESS NEARLY CIRCULAR ORBITS SIMPLIFYING THEANALYSIS OF THE SYSTEM SOMEWHAT 4HIS OCCURS BECAUSE CLOSE BINARIES TEND TO CIRCULARIZETHEIRORBITSDUETOTIDALINTERACTIONSOVERTIMESCALESTHATARESHORTCOMPAREDTOTHELIFETIMESOF THE STARS INVOLVEDThe Mass Function and the Mass–Luminosity Relation)FWEASSUMETHATTHEORBITALECCENTRICITYISVERYSMALLe≪	THENTHESPEEDSOFTHESTARSAREESSENTIALLYCONSTANTANDGIVENBYv=πa/PANDv=πa/PFORSTARSOFMASSmANDmRESPECTIVELYWHEREaANDaARETHERADIISEMIMAJORAXES	ANDPISTHEPERIODOFTHEORBITS3OLVINGFORaANDaANDSUBSTITUTINGINTO%Q 	WElNDTHATTHERATIOOFTHEMASSES OF THE TWO STARS BECOMESmm=vv.	"ECAUSEvr=vSINiANDvr=vSINi%Q 	CANBEWRITTENINTERMSOFTHEOBSERVEDRADIAL VELOCITIES RATHER THAN ACTUAL ORBITAL VELOCITIESmm=vr/SINivr/SINi=vrvr.	!S IS THE SITUATION WITH VISUAL BINARIES WE CAN DETERMINE THE RATIO OF THE STELLAR MASSESWITHOUT KNOWING THE ANGLE OF INCLINATIONBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters
6


<<<PAGE 217>>>

(OWEVER AS IS ALSO THE CASE WITH VISUAL BINARIES lNDING THE SUM OF THE MASSES DOESREQUIRE KNOWLEDGE OF THE ANGLE OF INCLINATION 2EPLACINGaWITHa=a+a=Pπ(v+v)IN +EPLERS THIRD LAW AND SOLVING FOR THE SUM OF THE MASSES WE HAVEm+m=PπG(v+v).7RITINGTHEACTUALRADIALVELOCITIESINTERMSOFTHEOBSERVEDVALUESWECANEXPRESSTHESUMOF THE MASSES ASm+m=PπG(vr+vr)SINi.	)TISCLEARFROM%Q 	THATTHESUMOFTHEMASSESCANBEOBTAINEDONLYIFBOTHvrANDvrAREMEASURABLE5NFORTUNATELYTHISISNOTALWAYSTHECASE)FONESTARISMUCHBRIGHTERTHANITSCOMPANIONTHESPECTRUMOFTHEDIMMERMEMBERWILLBEOVERWHELMED3UCHASYSTEMISREFERREDTOASAsingle-line spectroscopic binary)FTHESPECTRUMOF3TARISOBSERVABLEBUTTHE SPECTRUM OF 3TAR  IS NOT %Q  	 ALLOWSvrTO BE REPLACED BY THE RATIO OF THE STELLARMASSES GIVING A QUANTITY THAT IS DEPENDENT ON BOTH OF THE SYSTEM MASSES AND THE ANGLE OFINCLINATION )F WE SUBSTITUTE %Q  	 BECOMESm+m=PπGvrSINi/parenleftbigg+mm/parenrightbigg.2EARRANGING TERMS GIVESm(m+m)SINi=PπGvr.	4HE RIGHTHAND SIDE OF THIS EXPRESSION KNOWN AS THEmass function DEPENDS ONLY ON THEREADILY OBSERVABLE QUANTITIES PERIOD AND RADIAL VELOCITY 3INCE THE SPECTRUM OF ONLY ONESTAR IS AVAILABLE %Q  	 CANNOT PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION ABOUT MASS RATIOS!S A RESULTTHEMASSFUNCTIONISUSEFULONLYFORSTATISTICALSTUDIESORIFANESTIMATEOFTHEMASSOFATLEASTONE COMPONENT OF THE SYSTEM ALREADY EXISTS BY SOME INDIRECT MEANS )F EITHERmOR SINiIS UNKNOWN THE MASS FUNCTION SETS A LOWER LIMIT FORm SINCE THE LEFTHAND SIDE IS ALWAYSLESS THANm%VENIFBOTHRADIALVELOCITIESAREMEASURABLEITISNOTPOSSIBLETOGETEXACTVALUESFORmANDmWITHOUTKNOWINGi(OWEVERSINCESTARSCANBEGROUPEDACCORDINGTOTHEIREFFECTIVETEMPERATURES AND LUMINOSITIESANDASSUMINGTHATTHEREISARELATIONSHIPBETWEENTHESEQUANTITIESANDMASSTHENASTATISTICALMASSESTIMATEFOREACHCLASSMAYBEFOUNDBYCHOOSINGANAPPROPRIATELYAVERAGEDVALUEFORSINi!NINTEGRALAVERAGEOFSINi⟨SINi⟩	EVALUATEDBETWEEN◦AND◦HASAVALUEπ/≃.(OWEVERSINCENO4HE PROOF IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISEBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 218>>>

$ETACHED MAINSEQUENCE SYSTEMS " TO -6ISUAL BINARIES$ETACHED /" SYSTEMS2ESOLVED SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES
n n    ,OGMM 	,OGLL  	
nnn
FIGURE 74HEMASSnLUMINOSITYRELATION$ATAFROM0OPPERAnnu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.18 	$OPPLER SHIFT WILL BE NOTICEABLE IF THE INCLINATION ANGLE IS VERY SMALL IT IS MORE LIKELY THATASPECTROSCOPICBINARYSTARSYSTEMWILLBEDISCOVEREDIFiDIFFERSSIGNIlCANTLYFROM◦4HISselection effectASSOCIATED WITH DETECTING BINARY SYSTEMS SUGGESTS THAT A LARGER VALUE OF⟨SINi⟩≃/ IS MORE REPRESENTATIVE%VALUATING MASSES OF BINARIES HAS SHOWN THE EXISTENCE OF A WELLDElNEDmass–luminosity relationFOR THE LARGE MAJORITY OF STARS IN THE SKY SEE &IG 	 /NE OFTHEGOALSOFTHENEXTSEVERALCHAPTERSISTOINVESTIGATETHEORIGINOFTHISRELATIONINTERMSOFFUNDAMENTAL PHYSICAL PRINCIPLESUsing Eclipses to Determine Radii and Ratios of Temperatures! GOOD ESTIMATE OFiIS POSSIBLE IN THE SPECIAL SITUATION THAT A SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STARSYSTEM IS OBSERVED TO BE AN ECLIPSING SYSTEM AS WELL 5NLESS THE DISTANCE OF SEPARATIONBETWEEN THE COMPONENTS OF THE BINARY IS NOT MUCH LARGER THAN THE SUM OF THE RADII OF THESTARS INVOLVED AN ECLIPSING SYSTEM IMPLIES THATiMUST BE CLOSE TO ◦ AS SUGGESTED IN&IG  %VEN IF IT WERE ASSUMED THATi=◦WHILE THE ACTUAL VALUE WAS CLOSER TO ◦AN ERROR OF ONLY  WOULD RESULT IN THE CALCULATION OF SINiAND IN THE DETERMINATION OFm+m&ROMTHELIGHTCURVESPRODUCEDBYECLIPSINGBINARIESITISPOSSIBLETOIMPROVETHEESTIMATEOFiSTILL FURTHER &IGURE  INDICATES THAT IF THE SMALLER STAR IS COMPLETELY ECLIPSED BY THELARGERONEANEARLYCONSTANTMINIMUMWILLOCCURINTHEMEASUREDBRIGHTNESSOFTHESYSTEMDURING THE PERIOD OF OCCULTATION 3IMILARLY EVEN THOUGH THE LARGER STAR WILL NOT BE FULLYHIDDEN FROM VIEW WHEN THE SMALLER COMPANION PASSES IN FRONT OF IT A CONSTANT AMOUNTOF AREA WILL STILL BE OBSCURED FOR A TIME AND AGAIN A NEARLY CONSTANT THOUGH DIMINISHEDAMOUNTOFLIGHTWILLBEOBSERVED7HENONESTARISNOTCOMPLETELYECLIPSEDBYITSCOMPANION&IG 	 THE MINIMA ARE NO LONGER CONSTANT IMPLYING THATiMUST BE LESS THAN ◦Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 219>>>

/RBITAL PLANE4O %ARTH0LANE OF THE SKYi
FIGURE 84HEGEOMETRYOFANECLIPSINGSPECTROSCOPICBINARYREQUIRESTHATTHEANGLEOFINCLINATIONiBE CLOSE TO ◦
tatbtctetgtdtfth4IMEmvedhacfbg
FIGURE 94HE LIGHT CURVE OF AN ECLIPSING BINARY FOR WHICHi=◦4HE TIMES INDICATED ON THELIGHTCURVECORRESPONDTOTHEPOSITIONSOFTHESMALLERSTARRELATIVETOITSLARGERCOMPANION)TISASSUMEDIN THIS EXAMPLE THAT THE SMALLER STAR IS HOTTER THAN THE LARGER ONE
tatbtctdtetf4IMEmvacfdb
eFIGURE 104HELIGHTCURVEOFAPARTIALLYECLIPSINGBINARY)TISASSUMEDINTHISEXAMPLETHATTHESMALLER STAR IS HOTTER THAN ITS COMPANIONBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 220>>>

5SINGMEASUREMENTSOFTHEDURATIONOFECLIPSESITISALSOPOSSIBLETOlNDTHERADIIOFEACHMEMBEROFANECLIPSINGSPECTROSCOPICBINARY2EFERRINGAGAINTO&IG IFWEASSUMETHATi≃◦ THE AMOUNT OF TIME BETWEENﬁrst contactta	 AND MINIMUM LIGHT tb	 COMBINEDWITH THE VELOCITIES OF THE STARS LEADS DIRECTLY TO THE CALCULATION OF THE RADIUS OF THE SMALLERCOMPONENT &OR EXAMPLE IF THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF THE SMALLER STARS ORBIT IS SUFlCIENTLYLARGECOMPAREDTOEITHERSTARSRADIUSANDIFTHEORBITISNEARLYCIRCULARWECANASSUMETHATTHESMALLEROBJECTISMOVINGAPPROXIMATELYPERPENDICULARTOTHELINEOFSIGHTOFTHEOBSERVERDURING THE DURATION OF THE ECLIPSE )N THIS CASE THE RADIUS OF THE SMALLER STAR IS SIMPLYrs=v(tb−ta),	WHEREv=vs+vℓISTHErelativeVELOCITYOFTHETWOSTARSvsANDvℓARETHEVELOCITIESOFTHESMALLANDLARGESTARSRESPECTIVELY	3IMILARLYIFWECONSIDERTHEAMOUNTOFTIMEBETWEENtbANDtc THE SIZE OF THE LARGER MEMBER CAN ALSO BE DETERMINED )T CAN BE QUICKLY SHOWN THATTHE RADIUS OF THE LARGER STAR IS JUSTrℓ=v(tc−ta)=rs+v(tc−tb).	Example 3.1.!N ANALYSIS OF THE SPECTRUM OF AN ECLIPSING DOUBLELINE SPECTROSCOPICBINARYHAVINGAPERIODOFP=.YRSHOWSTHATTHEMAXIMUM$OPPLERSHIFTOFTHEHYDROGEN"ALMER(αNM	LINEIS/Delta1λs=.NMFORTHESMALLERMEMBERANDONLY/Delta1λℓ=. NM FOR ITS COMPANION &ROM THE SINUSOIDAL SHAPES OF THE VELOCITY CURVES IT IS ALSOAPPARENT THAT THE ORBITS ARE NEARLY CIRCULAR 5SING %Q	WElNDTHATTHEMASSRATIOOFTHETWOSTARSMUSTBEmℓms=vrsvrℓ=/Delta1λs/Delta1λℓ=..!SSUMING THAT THE ORBITAL INCLINATION ISi=◦ THE $OPPLER SHIFT OF THE SMALLER STARIMPLIES THAT THE MAXIMUM MEASURED RADIAL VELOCITY ISvrs=/Delta1λsλc= KM S−AND THE RADIUS OF ITS ORBIT MUST BEas=vrsPπ=.×M=. !5.)NTHESAMEMANNERTHEORBITALVELOCITYANDRADIUSOFTHEOTHERSTARAREvrℓ=.KMS−ANDaℓ=. !5 RESPECTIVELY 4HEREFORE THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF THE REDUCED MASS BECOMESa=as+aℓ=. !5continued Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 221>>>

4HE SUM OF THE MASSES CAN NOW BE DETERMINED FROM +EPLERS THIRD LAW )FWRITTEN IN UNITS OF SOLAR MASSES ASTRONOMICAL UNITS AND YEARS WE HAVEms+mℓ=a/P=.-⊙.3OLVING FOR THE MASSES INDEPENDENTLY YIELDSms=.-⊙ANDmℓ=.-⊙&URTHERMORE FROM THE LIGHT CURVE FOR THIS SYSTEM IT IS FOUND THATtb−ta=. HOURSANDtc−tb= DAYS 5SING %Q  	 REVEALS THAT THE RADIUS OF THE SMALLER STAR ISrs=(vrs+vrℓ)(tb−ta)=.×M=.2⊙,WHEREONESOLARRADIUSIS2⊙=.×M%QUATION 	NOWGIVESTHERADIUSOFTHELARGER STAR WHICH IS FOUND TO BErℓ= 2⊙)NTHISPARTICULARSYSTEMTHEMASSESANDRADIIOFTHESTARSAREFOUNDTODIFFERSIGNIlCANTLY4HERATIOOFTHEEFFECTIVETEMPERATURESOFTHETWOSTARSCANALSOBEOBTAINEDFROMTHELIGHTCURVEOFANECLIPSINGBINARY4HISISACCOMPLISHEDBYCONSIDERINGTHEOBJECTSASBLACKBODYRADIATORS AND COMPARING THE AMOUNT OF LIGHT RECEIVED DURING AN ECLIPSE WITH THE AMOUNTRECEIVED WHEN BOTH MEMBERS ARE FULLY VISIBLE2EFERRING ONCE MORE TO THE SAMPLE BINARY SYSTEM DEPICTED IN &IG  IT CAN BE SEENTHAT THE DIP IN THE LIGHT CURVE IS DEEPER WHEN THE SMALLER HOTTER STAR IS PASSING BEHINDITS COMPANION 4O UNDERSTAND THIS EFFECT RECALL THAT THE RADIATIVE SURFACE mUX IS GIVEN BYFr=FSURF=σTe.2EGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE SMALLER STAR PASSES BEHIND OR IN FRONT OF THE LARGER ONE THESAME TOTAL CROSSSECTIONAL AREA IS ECLIPSED!SSUMING FOR SIMPLICITY THAT THE OBSERVED mUXIS CONSTANT ACROSS THE DISKSTHE AMOUNT OF LIGHT DETECTED FROM THE BINARY WHEN BOTH STARSARE FULLY VISIBLE IS GIVEN BYB=k/parenleftbigπrℓFrℓ+πrsFrs/parenrightbig,WHEREkISACONSTANTTHATDEPENDSONTHEDISTANCETOTHESYSTEMTHEAMOUNTOFINTERVENINGMATERIAL BETWEEN THE SYSTEM AND THE DETECTOR AND THE NATURE OF THE DETECTOR 4HE DEEPERORprimary MINIMUM OCCURS WHEN THE HOTTER STAR PASSES BEHIND THE COOLER ONE )F AS INTHELASTEXAMPLETHESMALLERSTARISHOTTERANDTHEREFOREHASTHELARGERSURFACEmUXANDTHESMALLER STAR IS ENTIRELY ECLIPSED THE AMOUNT OF LIGHT DETECTED DURING THE PRIMARY MINIMUMMAY BE EXPRESSED ASBp=kπrℓFrℓWHILE THE BRIGHTNESS OF THEsecondaryMINIMUM ISBs=k/parenleftbigπrℓ−πrs/parenrightbigFrℓ+kπrsFrs.3TARS OFTEN APPEAR DARKER NEAR THE EDGES OF THEIR DISKS A PHENOMENON REFERRED TO ASlimb darkeningTHIS EQUATION IS Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 222>>>

3INCE IT IS GENERALLY NOT POSSIBLE TO DETERMINEkEXACTLY RATIOS ARE EMPLOYED #ONSIDERTHE RATIO OF THE DEPTH OF THE PRIMARY TO THE DEPTH OF THE SECONDARY 5SING THE EXPRESSIONSFORBBp ANDBs WE lND IMMEDIATELY THATB−BpB−Bs=FrsFrℓ	OR FROM %Q 	B−BpB−Bs=/parenleftbiggTsTℓ/parenrightbigg.	Example 3.2.&URTHEREXAMINATIONOFTHELIGHTCURVEOFTHEBINARYSYSTEMDISCUSSEDIN%XAMPLE  PROVIDES INFORMATION ON THE RELATIVE TEMPERATURES OF THE TWO STARS 0HOTOMETRICOBSERVATIONSSHOWTHATATMAXIMUMLIGHTTHEBOLOMETRICMAGNITUDEISmBOL,=.AT THE PRIMARY MINIMUMmBOL,p=. AND AT THE SECONDARY MINIMUMmBOL,s=.HE RATIO OF BRIGHTNESSES BETWEEN THE PRIMARY MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIGHT ISBpB=(mBOL,−mBOL,p)/=..3IMILARLYTHERATIOOFBRIGHTNESSESBETWEENTHESECONDARYMINIMUMANDMAXIMUMLIGHTISBsB=(mBOL,−mBOL,s)/=...OW BY REWRITING %Q  	 WE lND THAT THE RATIO OF THE RADIATIVE mUXES ISFrsFrℓ=−Bp/B−Bs/B=..&INALLYTsTℓ=/parenleftbiggFrsFrℓ/parenrightbigg/=..A Computer Modeling Approach4HE MODERN APPROACH TO ANALYZING THE DATA FROM BINARY STAR SYSTEMS INVOLVES COMPUTINGDETAILED MODELS THAT CAN YIELD IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT A VARIETY OF PHYSICAL PARAMETERS .OT ONLY CAN MASSES RADII AND EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURES BE DETERMINED BUT FOR MANYSYSTEMSOTHERDETAILSCANBEDESCRIBEDASWELL&ORINSTANCEGRAVITATIONALFORCESCOMBINEDWITH THE EFFECTS OF ROTATION AND ORBITAL MOTION ALTER THE STARSSHAPES THEY ARE NO LONGERSIMPLYSPHERICALOBJECTSBUTMAYBECOMEELONGATED4HEMODELSMAYALSOINCORPORATEINFORMATIONABOUTTHENONUNIFORM4Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 223>>>

n     V LIGHT0HASEFIGURE 11! SYNTHETIC LIGHT CURVE OF 22 #ENTAURI AN ECLIPSING BINARY STAR SYSTEM FOR WHICHTHE TWO COMPONENTS ARE IN CLOSE CONTACT 4HE OPEN CIRCLE REPRESENTS THE SIZE OF THE 3UN 4HE ORBITALAND PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 22 #EN SYSTEM AREP=. De=.M=.-⊙M=.-⊙4HESPECTRALCLASSIlCATIONOFTHEPRIMARYIS&6&IGUREADAPTEDFROM2%7ILSONPubl.Astron.Soc.Pac.106Ú!STRONOMICAL 3OCIETY OF THE 0ACIlC	DISTRIBUTIONOFmUXACROSSTHEOBSERVEDDISKSOFTHESTARSVARIATIONSINSURFACETEMPERATURESANDSOON/NCETHESHAPESOFTHEGRAVITATIONALEQUIPOTENTIALSURFACESANDOTHERPARAMETERSAREDETERMINEDsyntheticTHEORETICAL	LIGHTCURVESCANBECOMPUTEDFORVARIOUSWAVELENGTHBANDS UBV ETC	 WHICH ARE THEN COMPARED TO THE OBSERVATIONAL DATA!DJUSTMENTS INTHEMODELPARAMETERSAREMADEUNTILTHELIGHTCURVESAGREEWITHTHEOBSERVATIONS/NESUCHMODELFORTHEBINARYSYSTEM22#ENTAURIISSHOWNIN&IG )NTHISSYSTEMTHETWOSTARSAREACTUALLYINCONTACTWITHEACHOTHERPRODUCINGINTERESTINGANDSUBTLEEFFECTSINTHELIGHTCURVETwoStarsBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters
In order to introduce you to the process of modeling binary systems, the simple code is described on the companion website. TwoStars

<<<PAGE 224>>>

4HE STUDY OF BINARY STAR SYSTEMS PROVIDES VALUABLE INFORMATION ABOUT THE OBSERVABLECHARACTERISTICS OF STARS 4HESE RESULTS ARE THEN EMPLOYED IN DEVELOPING A THEORY OF STELLARSTRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION4THE SEARCH FOR EXTRASOLAR PLANETS&OR HUNDREDS OF YEARS PEOPLE HAVE LOOKED UP AT THE NIGHT SKY AND WONDERED IF PLANETSMIGHT EXIST AROUND OTHER STARS(OWEVER IT WASNT UNTIL /CTOBER  THAT -ICHEL -AYORAND$IDIER1UELOZOFTHE'ENEVA/BSERVATORYANNOUNCEDTHEDISCOVERYOFAPLANETAROUNDTHESOLARTYPESTAR0EGASI4HISDISCOVERYREPRESENTEDTHElRSTDETECTIONOFANEXTRASOLARPLANET AROUND A TYPICAL STAR7ITHIN ONE MONTH OF THE ANNOUNCED DISCOVERY OF  0EG'EOFFERY 7 -ARCY AND 2 0AUL "UTLER OF THE 5NIVERSITY OF #ALIFORNIA "ERKELEY AND THE#ARNEGIE)NSTITUTIONOF7ASHINGTONRESPECTIVELYANNOUNCEDTHATTHEYHADDETECTEDPLANETSAROUNDTWOOTHER3UNLIKESTARS6IRAND5-A"Y-AYJUSTOVERTENYEARSAFTERTHE ORIGINAL ANNOUNCEMENTS  EXTRASOLAR PLANETS HAD BEEN DISCOVERED ORBITING  STARSTHAT ARE SIMILAR TO OUR OWN 3UN4HISMODERNDISCOVERYOFEXTRASOLARPLANETSATSUCHAPRODIGIOUSRATEWASMADEPOSSIBLEBY DRAMATIC ADVANCES IN DETECTOR TECHNOLOGY THE AVAILABILITY OF LARGEAPERTURE TELESCOPESAND DILIGENT LONGTERM OBSERVING CAMPAIGNS 'IVEN THE HUGE DISPARITY BETWEEN THE LUMINOSITYOFTHEPARENTSTARANDANYORBITINGPLANETSDIRECTOBSERVATIONOFAPLANETHASPROVEDVERY DIFlCULT THE PLANETS REmECTED LIGHT IS SIMPLY OVERWHELMED BY THE LUMINOSITY OF THESTAR!S A RESULT MORE INDIRECT METHODS ARE USUALLY REQUIRED TO DETECT EXTRASOLAR PLANETS4HREE TECHNIQUES THAT HAVE ALL BEEN USED SUCCESSFULLY ARE BASED ON IDEAS DISCUSSED IN THISCHAPTERRADIALVELOCITYMEASUREMENTSASTROMETRICWOBBLESANDECLIPSES4HElRSTMETHODTHE DETECTION OF RADIAL VELOCITY VARIATIONS IN PARENT STARS INDUCED BY THE GRAVITATIONAL TUGOF THE ORBITING PLANETS HAS BEEN BY FAR THE MOST PROLIlC METHOD AT THE TIME THIS TEXT WASWRITTEN-ORE SOPHISTICATED BINARY STAR MODELING CODES ARE AVAILABLE FOR DOWNLOAD ON THE )NTERNET OR MAY BE PURCHASED%XAMPLES INCLUDEWD95 ORIGINALLY WRITTEN BY 7ILSON AND $EVINNEY AND LATER MODIlED BY +ALLRATH ET AL ANDBinary MakerBY "RADSTREET AND 3TEELMAN)NFACTITISTHOUGHTTHAT'IORDANO"RUNOn	AONETIME$OMINICANMONKWASEXECUTEDFORHISBELIEFINA#OPERNICANUNIVERSElLLEDWITHANINlNITENUMBEROFINHABITEDWORLDSAROUNDOTHERSTARS)N!LEXANDER7OLSZCZANOFTHE!RECIBO2ADIO/BSERVATORYIN0UERTO2ICOAND$ALE&RAILOFTHE.ATIONAL2ADIO !STRONOMY /BSERVATORY DETECTED THREE %ARTH AND -OONSIZED PLANETS AROUND A PULSAR 032 	ANEXTREMELYCOMPACTCOLLAPSEDSTARTHATWASPRODUCEDFOLLOWINGASUPERNOVAEXPLOSION4HISDISCOVERYWASMADEBYNOTINGVARIATIONSINTHEEXTREMELYREGULARRADIOEMISSIONCOMINGFROMTHECOLLAPSEDSTAR)N!PRIL'#HAUVINANDCOLLEAGUESUSEDTHE6,4.!#/OFTHE%UROPEAN3OUTHERN/BSERVATORYTOOBTAINAN INFRARED IMAGE OF A GIANT EXTRASOLAR PLANET OF SPECTRAL TYPE BETWEEN , AND , ORBITING THE BROWN DWARF-!337*n (34.)#-/3 WAS ALSO ABLE TO OBSERVE THE BROWN DWARFS PLANETARY COMPANION!NOTHER TECHNIQUE HAS ALSO BEEN EMPLOYED IN THE SEARCH FOR EXTRASOLAR PLANETS IT IS BASED ON THE GRAVITATIONALLENSING OF LIGHT           Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters
makes the simplifying assumption that the stars are perfectly spherically symmetric. ThusTwoStarsis capable of generating light curves, radial velocity curves, and astrometric datafor systems in which the two stars are well separated. The simplifying assumptions implythatTwoStarsis incapable of modeling the details of more complicated systems such asRR Cen, however.4


<<<PAGE 225>>>

Example 4.1.4HE SOCALLEDreﬂex motionOF THE PARENT STAR IS EXTREMELY SMALL &OREXAMPLECONSIDERTHEMOTIONOF*UPITERAROUNDTHE3UN*UPITERSORBITALPERIODISYRTHE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF ITS ORBIT IS  !5 AND ITS MASS IS ONLY . -⊙ !SSUMINGTHATTHEORBITOF*UPITERISESSENTIALLYCIRCULARITSACTUALECCENTRICITYISJUSTe=.	THEPLANETS ORBITAL VELOCITY IS APPROXIMATELYv*=πa/P=. KM S−.!CCORDINGTO%Q 	THE3UNSORBITALVELOCITYABOUTTHEIRMUTUALCENTEROFMASSISONLYv⊙=m*M⊙v*=.MS−.4HIS IS SIMILAR TO THE TOP SPEED OF A WORLDCLASS SPRINTER FROM %ARTH)NCREDIBLYTODAYITISPOSSIBLETOMEASURERADIALVELOCITYVARIATIONSASSMALLASM S−ASLOWJOGINTHEPARK-ARCY"UTLERANDTHEIRRESEARCHTEAMCOLLEAGUESACCOMPLISHTHISLEVELOF DETECTION BY PASSING STARLIGHT THROUGH AN IODINE VAPOR 4HE IMPRINTED ABSORPTION LINESFROM THE IODINE ARE USED AS ZEROVELOCITY REFERENCE LINES IN THE HIGHRESOLUTION SPECTRUMOF THE STAR "Y COMPARING THE ABSORPTION AND EMISSIONLINE WAVELENGTHS OF THE STAR TO THEIODINEREFERENCEWAVELENGTHSITISPOSSIBLETODETERMINEVERYPRECISERADIALVELOCITIES4HEHIGHRESOLUTION SPECTROGRAPHS USED BY THE TEAM WERE DESIGNED AND BUILT BY ANOTHER TEAMMEMBER 3TEVE6OGT OF THE 5NIVERSITY OF #ALIFORNIA 3ANTA #RUZ4HE ANALYSIS OF THE RADIAL VELOCITIES REQUIRES MUCH MORE WORK BEFORE THE TRUE REmEXMOTIONRADIALVELOCITYVARIATIONSOFTHESTARCANBEDEDUCEDHOWEVER)NORDERTODETERMINETHE SOURCE OF THE VARIATIONS IT IS lRST NECESSARY TO ELIMINATE ALL OTHER SOURCES OF RADIALVELOCITIESSUPERIMPOSEDONTHEOBSERVEDSPECTRA4HESEINCLUDETHEROTATIONANDWOBBLEOF%ARTHTHEORBITALVELOCITYOF%ARTHAROUNDTHE3UNANDTHEGRAVITATIONALEFFECTSOFTHEOTHERPLANETS IN OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM ON %ARTH AND OUR 3UN!FTER ALL OF THESE CORRECTIONS HAVE BEENMADE THE RADIAL VELOCITY OF THE TARGET STAR CAN BE REFERENCED TO THE TRUE CENTER OF MASS OFOUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM)N ADDITION TO THE MOTIONS IN OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM MOTIONS OF THE TARGET STAR ITSELF MUSTBE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT &OR INSTANCE IF THE TARGET STAR IS ROTATING RADIAL VELOCITIES DUE TOTHEAPPROACHINGANDRECEDINGEDGESOFITSAPPARENTDISKWILLBLURTHEABSORPTIONLINESUSED
#AREFUL ANALYSIS OF THE RADIAL VELOCITY CURVES OF ONE STAR ($  LED RESEARCHERSTO PREDICT AND THEN DETECT TRANSITS OF AN EXTRASOLAR PLANET ACROSS THE STARS DISK IN 4HE DIMMING OF THE LIGHT DUE TO THE TRANSITS IS COMPLETELY ANALOGOUS TO THE ECLIPSINGBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters
planets discovered by the radial velocity technique are quite close to their parent star and very massive. For instance, the lower limit for the mass of the planet orbiting 51 Peg is 0.45 MJ (where MJ is the mass of Jupiter), it has an orbital period of just 4.23077 d, and the semimajor axis of its orbit is only 0.051 AU. The lower limit on the mass of the planet orbiting HD 168443c is 16.96 MJ, its orbital period is 1770 d, and the semimajor axis of its orbit is 2.87 AU. As the length of time that stars are observed increases, longer orbital-period planets will continue to be discovered, as will lower-mass planets.to measure radial velocity. Pulsations of the surface of the star, surface con-vection and the movement of surface features such as star spots, can also con-fuse the measurements and degrade the velocity resolution limit. All of the,


<<<PAGE 226>>>

n n*$ n Tc DAYS	54  3EP 54  3EP 
2ELATIVE FLUX
FIGURE 124HE PHOTOMETRIC DETECTION OF TWO TRANSITS OF AN EXTRASOLAR PLANET ACROSS THE DISK OF($  IN 3EPTEMBER  4HE 3EPTEMBER  TRANSIT WAS ARTIlCIALLY OFFSET BY−. RELATIVETO THE TRANSIT OF 3EPTEMBER  IN ORDER TO AVOID OVERLAP OF THE DATATcDESIGNATES THE MIDPOINT OF THETRANSITAND*$REPRESENTSTHE*ULIAN$ATETIME	OFTHEPARTICULARMEASUREMENT&IGUREADAPTEDFROM#HARBONNEAU "ROWN ,ATHAM AND -AYORAp. J., 529 , 	SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STAR SYSTEMS DISCUSSED IN 3ECTION  'IVEN THE VERY SMALL SIZE OFTHE PLANET RELATIVE TO ($  THE DIMMING OF THE LIGHT WAS ONLY ABOUT  MMAG MILLIMAGNITUDES	SEE&IG "ASEDONTHEADDITIONALINFORMATIONPROVIDEDBYTHELIGHTCURVESDURING THE TRANSITS #HARBONNEAU "ROWN ,ATHAM AND -AYOR WERE ABLE TO DETERMINE THATTHETRANSITINGPLANETHASARADIUSOFAPPROXIMATELY.2**UPITERRADII	ANDTHATTHEORBITALINCLINATIONi=.◦±.◦ (AVING RESTRICTED THE VALUE OF THE INCLINATION ANGLE IT THENBECAME POSSIBLE TO LARGELY REMOVE THE UNCERTAINTY OF THE SINiTERM RESULTING IN A MASSDETERMINATIONFORTHEPLANETOF.-*&ROMTHERADIALVELOCITYDATATHEMASSANDRADIUSOF ($  ARE .-⊙AND .2⊙ RESPECTIVELY 4HE ORBITAL PERIOD OF THE PLANET ISP=.±. D AND THE SEMIMAJOR AXIS OF ITS ORBIT ISa=. !54O DATE A NUMBER OF PLANETS HAVE BEEN DETECTED BY THE DIMMING OF STARLIGHT RESULTINGFROM THEIR TRANSITS OF THE DISKS OF THEIR PARENT STARS (OWEVER /',%42B WAS THE lRSTSYSTEMFORWHICHAPLANETWASDETECTEDBEFOREITWASFOUNDBYTHERADIALVELOCITYTECHNIQUE4HE ORBITAL PERIOD OF THE PLANET IS ONLY  H AND IT ORBITS JUST  STELLAR RADII !5	FROM ITS PARENT STAR4HE MEASUREMENT WAS MADE BY DETECTING A DROP OF SLIGHTLY MORE THAN MAGNITUDES IN THE BRIGHTNESS OF THE STAR!N ADVANTAGE OF THIS TECHNIQUE IS THE ABILITYTO DETECT RELATIVELY DISTANT SYSTEMS /',%42B IS APPROXIMATELY  PC FROM %ARTH)NADDITIONFROMTHETRANSITTIMETHERADIUSOFTHEPLANETCANALSOBEDETERMINEDENABLINGAN ESTIMATE OF THE DENSITY OF THE PLANET 4HE MASS OF THE PLANET ORBITING /',%42B ISESTIMATED TO BE .-* AS CONlRMED BY FOLLOWUP RADIAL VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS AND ITSRADIUS IS JUST SLIGHTLY LARGER THAN *UPITERS4HE REmEX MOTION OF A STAR DUE TO THE PULL OF A PLANET WAS DETECTED FOR THE lRST TIMEIN 4HE (UBBLE 3PACE4ELESCOPES &INE 'UIDANCE 3ENSORS WERE USED TO MEASURE MILLIARCSECONDWOBBLESIN'LIESEATENTHMAGNITUDESTARLOCATEDPCFROM%ARTH"YADDING THE THIRD DIMENSION OF PROJECTION ONTO THE PLANE OF THE SKY THE MASS OF THE PLANETPREVIOUSLY OBTAINED BY THE RADIAL VELOCITY TECHNIQUE WAS RElNED TO GIVE A VALUE BETWEENBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters


<<<PAGE 227>>>

.-*AND .-*7HENFUTUREASTROMETRICMISSIONSARELAUNCHEITISLIKELYTHATTHISTECHNIQUEWILLRESULTINDETECTIONOFMANYMOREPLANETS!LTHOUGH %ARTHSIZED PLANETS HAVE YET TO BE DISCOVERED AROUND SOLARTYPE STARS WITHMISSIONSSUCHAS.!3!S4ERRESTRIAL0LANET&INDERBEINGPLANNEDANDEXQUISITELYSENSITIVEASTROMETRICMISSIONSSUCHAS3)-0LANET1UESTAND'AIAITSEEMSLIKELYTHATSUCHDISCOVERIESWILL OCCUR SOONSUGGESTED READINGGeneral"URNHAM2OBERT*RBurnham’ s Celestial Handbook: An Observer’ s Guide to the UniverseBeyond the Solar System2EVISEDAND%NLARGED%DITION$OVER0UBLICATIONS.EW9ORK*ONES+ENNETH'LYNED	Webb Society Deep-Sky Observer’ s Handbook3ECOND%DITION%NSLOW 0UBLISHERS (ILLSIDE .* -ARCY'EOFFREYAND"UTLER20AULh.EW7ORLDS4HE$IVERSITYOF0LANETARY3YSTEMSvSky and Telescope -ARCH -ARCY 'EOFFREY ET ALCalifornia and Carnegie Planet Search Web Sitehttp://exoplanets.org.!3!Planet Quest: The Search for Another Earth Web Sitehttp://planetquest.jpl.nasa.gov0ASACHOFF*AY-Field Guide to the Stars and Planets&OURTH%DITION(OUGHTON-IFmIN"OSTON Technical"ATTEN!LAN(&LETCHER*-URRAYAND-AC#ARTHY$'h%IGHTH#ATALOGUEOFTHE/RBITAL%LEMENTSOF3PECTROSCOPIC"INARY3YSTEMSvPublications of the Dominion AstrophysicalObservatory17 "HM6ITENSE%RIKAIntroduction to Stellar Astrophysics: Basic Stellar Observations andData6OLUME  #AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE "RADSTREET$(AND3TEELMAN$0h"INARY-AKER!N)NTERACTIVE'RAPHICS"ASED,IGHT#URVE3YNTHESIS0ROGRAM7RITTENIN*AVAvBulletin of the American AstronomicalSociety *ANUARY #HARBONNEAU $AVID "ROWN 4IMOTHY - ,ATHAM $AVID 7 AND -AYOR -ICHEL h$ETECTION OF 0LANETARY 4RANSITS!CROSS A 3UN,IKE 3TARvThe Astrophysical Journal529, %GGEN / * h-ASSES OF 6ISUAL "INARY 3TARSvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astro-physics5  +ALLRATH *OSEF AND -ILONE %UGENE &Eclipsing Binary Stars: Modeling and Analysis3PRINGERn6ERLAG .EW9ORK +ALLRATH*-ILONE%&4ERRELL$AND9OUNG!4h2ECENT)MPROVEMENTSTOA6ERSIONOFTHE7ILSONn$EVINNEY0ROGRAMvThe Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series508 Binary Systems and Stellar ParametersD


<<<PAGE 228>>>

Binary Systems and Stellar ParametersKitchin, C. R.,Astrophysical Techniques, Third Edition, Institute of Physics Publications,Philadelphia, 1998.Marcy, Geoffrey W., and Butler, R. Paul, “ Detection of Extrasolar Giant Planets,”AnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,36, 57, 1998.Mayor, M., and Queloz, D., “A Jupiter-Mass Companion to a Solar-Type Star,”Nature,378, 355, 1995.Popper, Daniel M., “Determination of Masses of Eclipsing Binary Stars,”Annual Reviewof Astronomy and Astrophysics,5, 85, 1967.Popper, Daniel M., “Stellar Masses,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,18,115, 1980.Wilson, R. E., “Binary-Star Light-Curve Models,”Publications of the Astronomical Societyof the Paciﬁc,106, 921, 1994.


<<<PAGE 229>>>



<<<PAGE 230>>>

PROBLEM SET1Consider two stars in orbit about a mutual center of mass. Ifa1is the semimajor axis of theorbit of star of massm1anda2is the semimajor axis of the orbit of star of massm2, prove thatthe semimajor axis of the orbit of thereduced massis given bya=a1+a2.Hint:ecall thatr=r2−r1.2weighting functionw(τ)is considered, such that/integraldisplayτ0w(τ) dτ=1,then the integral average off (τ)becomes⟨f (τ)⟩=/integraldisplayτ0f (τ) w(τ) dτ.Comparison reveals that the weighting function implicitly used in that casewasw(τ)=1/τover the interval 0 toτ.In evaluating⟨sin3i⟩between 0 rad andπ/2 rad (0◦and 90◦, respectively)it is more(a)Select an appropriate weighting function and show that your weighting function is normal-ized over the intervali=0 toπ/2.(b)Prove that⟨sin3i⟩=3π/16.3Assume that two stars are in circular orbits about a mutual center of mass and are separated bya distancea. Assume also that the angle of inclination isiand their stellar radii arer1andr2.(a)Find an expression for the smallest angle of inclination that will just barely produce aneclipse.Hint:Refer to Fig.   8.R
,
Orbital planeTo EarthPlane of the skyi
FIGURE 8The geometry of an eclipsing, spectroscopic binary requires that the angle of inclina-tionibe close to 90◦.From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 byPearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.7(b)Ifa=2A U ,r1=10 R⊙, andr2=1R⊙, what minimum value ofiwill result in an eclipse?,Binary Systems and StellareP a r a m e t r s
Integral averages implicitly assume a probability distribution (or weighting function) that was constant throughout the interval over which the integral was applied. When a normalized 
likely that the radial velocity variations will be detected if the plane of the orbit is oriented along the line of sight. The weighting function should therefore take into consideration the projection of the plane of the orbital velocity onto the line of sight.


<<<PAGE 231>>>

4Sirius is a visual binary with a period of 49.94 yr. Its measured trigonometric parallax is0.37921′′±0.00158′′and, assuming that the plane of the orbit is in the plane of the sky, thetrue angular extent of the semimajor axis of the reduced mass is 7.61′′. The ratio of the distancesof Sirius A and Sirius B from the center of mass isaA/aB=0.466.(a)Find the mass of each member of the system.(b)The absolute bolometric magnitude of Sirius A is 1.36, and Sirius B has an absolute bolo-metric magnitude of 8.79. Determine their luminosities. Express your answers in terms ofthe luminosity of the Sun.(c)The effective temperature of Sirius B is approximately 24,790 K±100 K. Estimate its radius,and compare your answer to the radii of the Sun and Earth.5ζPhe is a 1.67-day spectroscopic binary with nearly circular orbits. The maximum measuredDoppler shifts of the brighter and fainter components of the system are 121.4k m s−1and247 km s−1, respectively.(a)Determine the quantitymsin3ifor each star.(b)Using a statistically chosen value for sin3ithat takes into consideration the Doppler-shiftselection effect, estimate the individual masses of the components ofζPhe.6From the light and velocity curves of an eclipsing, spectroscopic binary star system, it is deter-mined that the orbital period is 6.31 yr, and the maximum radial velocities of Stars A and B are5.4k ms−1and 22.4k ms−1, respectively. Furthermore, the time period between ﬁrst contact andminimum light (tb−ta) is 0.58 d, the length of the primary minimum (tc−tb) is 0.64 d, and theapparent bolometric magnitudes of maximum, primary minimum, and secondary minimum are5.40 magnitudes, 9.20 magnitudes, and 5.44 magnitudes, respectively. From this information,and assuming circular orbits, ﬁnd the(a)Ratio of stellar masses.(b)Sum of the masses (assumei≃90◦).(c)Individual masses.(d)Individual radii (assume that the orbits are circular).(e)Ratio of the effective temperatures of the two stars.Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 232>>>

7TheV-band light curve of YY Sgr is shown in Fig. 2. Neglecting bolometric corrections,estimate the ratio of the temperatures of the two stars in the system.
10.910.810.710.610.510.410.310.210.110.09.9V magnitude
–0.25 –0.15 –0.05 0.05 0.15 0.25 0.35 0.45 0.55 0.65 0.75Orbital phaseFIGURE 2TheVmagnitude light curve of YY Sagittarii, an eclipsing binary star. The data frommany orbital periods have been plotted on this light curve as a function of phase, where the phase isdeﬁned to be 0.0 at the primary minimum. This system has an orbital periodP=2.6284734 d, aneccentricitye=0.1573, and orbital inclinationi=88.89◦(see Section 2). (Figure adopted fromLacy, C. H. S.,Astron. J.,105, 637, 1993.)Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 233>>>

8Refer to the synthetic light curve and model of RR Centauri shown in Fig. 11.
–0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.80.60.81.0V lightPhaseFIGURE 11A synthetic light curve of RR Centauri, an eclipsing binary star system for whichthe two components are in close contact. The open circle represents the size of the Sun. The orbitaland physical characteristics of the RR Cen system areP=0.6057 d,e=0.0,M1=1.8M⊙,M2=0.37 M⊙. The spectral classiﬁcation of the primary is F0V. (Figure adapted from R. E. Wilson,Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac.,106, 921, 1994;©AstronomicalSociety of the Paciﬁc.)(a)Indicate the approximate points on the light curve (as a function of phase) that correspondto the orientations depicted.(b)Explain qualitatively the shape of the light curve.9Data from binary star systems were used to illustrate the mass–luminosity relation in Fig. 7. Astrong correlation also exists between mass and the effective temperatures of stars. Use the dataprovided in Popper,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,18, 115, 1980 to create a graph of log10Teasa function of log10(M/M⊙). Use the data from Popper’s Table 2, Table 4, Table 7 (excluding theαAur system), and Table 8 (include only those stars with spectral types in the Sp column thatend with the Roman numeral V). The stars that are excluded in Tables 7 and 8 are evolved starswith structures signiﬁcantly different from the main sequence stars.The article by Popper maybe available in your library or it can be downloaded from the NASA Astrophysics Data System(NASA ADS) athttp://adswww.harvard.edu.Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 234>>>

10Give two reasons why the radial velocity technique for detecting planets around other stars favorsmassive planets (Jupiters) with relatively short orbital periods.11Explain why radial velocity detections of extrasolar planets yield only lower limits on the massesof the orbiting planets. What value is actually measured, and what unknown orbital parameteris involved?12From the data given in the text, determine the masses of the following stars (in solar masses):(a)51 Peg(b)HD 168443c13Suppose that you are an astronomer on a planet orbiting another star. While you are observingour Sun, Jupiter passes in front of it. Estimate the fractional decrease in the brightness of the star,assuming that you are observing a ﬂat disk of constant ﬂux, with a temperature ofTe=5777 K.Hint:Neglect Jupiter’s contribution to the total brightness of the system.14From the data given in the text, combined with the information in Fig. 12, make a roughestimate of the radius of the orbiting planet, and compare your result with the quoted value. Besure to explain each step used in computing your estimate.
–0.2–0.10.00.1JD – Tc (days)UT 16 Sep 1999UT 09 Sep 1999
0.920.940.960.981.00Relative flux
FIGURE 12The photometric detection of two transits of an extrasolar planet across the disk ofHD 2094589 in September 1999. The September 16 transit was artiﬁcially offset by−0.05 relativeto the transit of September 9 in order to avoid overlap of the data.Tcdesignates the midpoint of thetransit, and JD represents the Julian Date (time) of the particular measurement. (Figure adapted fromCharbonneau, Brown, Latham, and Mayor,Ap. J., 529, L45, 2000.)COMPUTER PROBLEMS15 (a)Use the computer programTwoStars, described in Appendix: A  Binary  Star  Code  and available on the companion website,to generate orbital radial velocity datasimilarto Fig.6 for any choice ofeccentricity. Assume thatM1=0.5M⊙,M2=2.0M⊙,P=1.8 yr, andi=30◦. Plot yourresults fore=0, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.5. (You may assumethat the center-of-mass velocity is zeroand that the orientation of the major axis isperpendicular to the line of sight.)TwoStars,   Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 235>>>

(b)Verify your results fore=0 by using the equations developed in Section 3.(c)Explain how you might determine the eccentricity of an orbital system.16The codeTwoStarscan be used to analyze the apparent motions of binarystars acrossthe plane of the sky. If fact,TwoStarswas used to generate the data for Fig.1.Assume that the binary system used in Problem15 is located 3.2 pc from Earth andthat its center of mass is moving through space with the vector components(v′x,v′y,v′z)=(30 km s−1,42 km s−1,−15.3k ms−1). From the position data generated byTwoStars, plotthe apparent positions of the stars in milliarcseconds for the case wheree=0.4.of Binary  “”0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0–60–40–20020406080100120
t/PRadial velocity (km s–1)vcmv2v1To Earth
(a)(b)v1v2vcm
FIGURE 6The orbital paths and radial velocities of two stars in elliptical orbits (e=0.4). Asin Fig. 5,M1=1M⊙,M2=2M⊙, the orbital period isP=30 d, and the radial velocity of thecenter of mass isvcm=42 km s−1. In addition, the orientation of periastron is 45◦.v1,v2, andvcmare the velocities of Star 1, Star 2, and the center of mass, respectively. (a) The plane of the orbits liesalong the line of sight of the observer. (b) The observed radial velocity curves.
Unseen companionCenter of massRight ascensionDeclinationVisual memberFIGURE 1An astrometric binary, which contains one visible member. The unseen componentis implied by the oscillatory motion of the observable star in the system. The proper motion of theentire system is reﬂected in the straight-line motion of the center of mass.Systems and Stellar par  ameter  s Binary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 236>>>

17Figure 2 shows the light curve of the eclipsing binary YY Sgr. The codeTwoStars, describedin Appendix:and available on the companion website, can beused to roughly model thissystem. Use the data provided in the caption, and assume thatthe masses, radii, and effectivetemperatures of the two stars areM1=5.9M⊙,R1=3.2R⊙,Te1=15,200 K, andM2=5.6M⊙,R2=2.9R⊙,Te2=13,700 K.Also assume that theperiastron angle is 214.6◦and thatthe center of mass is at rest relative to the observer.(a)UsingTwoStars, create a synthetic light curve for the system.(b)UsingTwoStars, plot the radial velocities of the two stars.
18Using the data given in the text, and assuming that the orbital inclination is 90◦, useTwoStarsto generate data that model the light curve of OGLE-TR-56b. You may assumethat the radius of the planet is approximately the radius of Jupiter (7×107m) and its temperatureis roughly 1000 K. Take the temperature of the star to be 3000 K. You may also assume that theplanet’s orbit is perfectly circular.10.910.810.710.610.510.410.310.210.110.09.9V magnitude
–0.25 –0.15 –0.05 0.05 0.15 0.25 0.35 0.45 0.55 0.65 0.75Orbital phaseFIGURE 2TheVmagnitude light curve of YY Sagittarii, an eclipsing binary star. The data frommany orbital periods have been plotted on this light curve as a function of phase, where the phase isdeﬁned to be 0.0 at the primary minimum. This system has an orbital periodP=2.6284734 d, aneccentricitye=0.1573, and orbital inclinationi=88.89◦(see Section 2). (Figure adopted fromLacy, C. H. S.,Astron. J.,105, 637, 1993.)TwoStars,A Binary Star CodeBinary Systems and Stellar Parameters: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 237>>>



<<<PAGE 238>>>

From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.The Classiﬁcation of Stellar Spectra
8by 

<<<PAGE 239>>>

The Classiﬁcation of Stellar Spectra1The Formation of Spectral Lines2The Hertzsprung–Russell Diagram1THE FORMATION OF SPECTRAL LINESWith the invention of photometry and spectroscopy, the new science ofastrophysicspro-gressed rapidly. As early as 1817, Joseph Fraunhofer had determined that different starshave different spectra. Stellar spectra were classiﬁed according to several schemes, the ear-liest of which recognized just three types of spectra. As instruments improved, increasinglysubtle distinctions became possible.The Spectral Types of StarsA spectral taxonomy developed at Harvard by Edward C. Pickering (1846–1919) and hisassistant Williamina P. Fleming (1857–1911) in the 1890s labeled spectra with capital let-ters according to the strength of their hydrogen absorption lines, beginning with the letterA for the broadest lines. At about the same time, Antonia Maury (1866–1952), another ofPickering’s assistants and a colleague of Fleming’s, was developing a somewhat differ-ent classiﬁcation scheme that she was using to study the widths of spectral lines. In herwork Maury rearranged her classes in a way that would have been equivalent to placingPickering’s and Fleming’s B class before the A stars. Then, in 1901, Annie Jump Cannon1(1863–1941; see Fig. 1), also employed by Pickering, and using the scheme of Pickeringand Fleming while following the suggestion of Maury, rearranged the sequence of spectraby placing O and B before A, added decimal subdivisions (e.g., A0–A9), and consolidatedmany of the classes. With these changes, the Harvard classiﬁcation scheme of “O B A F G KM” became atemperaturesequence, running from the hottest blue O stars to the coolest redM stars. Generations of astronomy students have remembered this string ofspectral typesby memorizing the phrase “Oh Be A Fine Girl/Guy, Kiss Me.” Stars nearer the beginningof this sequence are referred to asearly-typestars, and those closer to the end are calledlate-typestars. These labels also distinguish the stars within the spectral subdivisions, soastronomers may speak of a K0 star as an “early K star” or refer to a B9 star as a “late Bstar.” Cannon classiﬁed some 200,000 spectra between 1911 and 1914, and the results were1The Annie J. Cannon Award is bestowed annually by the American Association of University Women and theAmerican Astronomical Society for distinguished contributions to astronomy by a woman.


<<<PAGE 240>>>

FIGURE 1Annie Jump Cannon (1863–1941). (Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.)collected into theHenry Draper Catalogue.2Today, many stars are referred to by theirHD numbers; Betelgeuse is HD 39801.The physical basis of the Harvard spectral classiﬁcation scheme remained obscure, how-ever. Vega (spectral type A0) displays very strong hydrogen absorption lines, much strongerthan the faint lines observed for the Sun (spectral type G2). On the other hand, the Sun’scalcium absorption lines are much more intense than those of Vega. Is this a result of avariation in thecompositionof the two stars? Or are the different surface temperatures ofVega (Te=9500 K) and the Sun (Te=5777 K) responsible for the relative strengths of theabsorption lines?The theoretical understanding of the quantum atom achieved early in the twentieth cen-tury gave astronomers the key to the secrets of stellar spectra.for an electron to make an upward transition from a lower to a higher orbital. Emission linesare formed in the inverse process, when an electron makes a downward transition from ahigher to a lower orbital and a single photon carries away the energy lost by the elec-tron. The wavelength of the photon thus depends on the energies of the atomic orbitalsinvolved in these transitions. For example, the Balmer absorption lines of hydrogen arecaused by electrons making upward transitions from then=2 orbital to higher-energy or-bitals, and Balmer emission lines are produced when electrons make downward transitionsfrom higher-energy orbitals to then=2 orbital.The distinctions between the spectra of stars with different temperatures are due toelectrons occupying different atomic orbitals in the atmospheres of these stars. The detailsof spectral line formation can be quite complicated because electrons can be found in any ofan atom’s orbitals. Furthermore, the atom can be in any one of various stages of ionizationand has a unique set of orbitals at each stage. An atom’s stage of ionization is denoted by a2In 1872 Henry Draper took the ﬁrst photograph of a stellar spectrum. The catalog bearing his name was ﬁnancedfrom his estate.Absorption lines are created when anatom absorbsa photon with exactly the energyrequiredThe Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 241>>>

Roman numeral following the symbol for the atom. For example, H I and He I are neutral(not ionized) hydrogen and helium, respectively; He II is singly ionized helium, and Si IIIand Si IV refer to a silicon atom that has lost two and three electrons, respectively.In the Harvard system devised by Cannon, the Balmer lines reach their maximum inten-sity in the spectra of stars of type A0, which have an effective temperature ofTe=9520 K.Thevisiblespectrallinesofneutralhelium(HeI)arestrongestforB2stars (Te=22,000 K), and the visible spectral lines of singly ionized calcium (Ca II) aremost intense for K0 stars (Te=5250 K).3Table 1 lists some of the deﬁning criteria for various spectral types. In the table thetermmetalis used to indicate any element heavier than helium, a convention commonlyadopted by astronomers because by far the most abundant elements in the universe arehydrogen and helium.(1300 K to 2500 K for L spectral types and less than 1300 K for T spectral types).4Inorder to remember the new, cooler spectral types, one might consider extending the popularmnemonic by: “Oh Be A Fine Girl/Guy, Kiss Me—Less Talk!”Figures 2 and 3 display some sample photographic spectra for various spectral types.You will note that hydrogen lines [e.g., Hγ(434.4 nm) and Hδ(410.1 nm)] increase in width(strength) from O9 to A0, then decrease in width from A0 through F5, and nearly vanishby late K. Helium (He) lines are discernible in the spectra of early-type stars (O and earlyB) but begin to disappear in cooler stars.Figures 4 and 5 also depict stellar spectra in a graphical format typical of moderndigital detectors. Readily apparent is the shifting to longer wavelengths of the peak of thesuperimposed blackbody spectrum as the temperature of the star decreases (later spectraltypes). Also apparent are the Hα,Hβ,Hγ, and HδBalmer lines at 656.2 nm, 486.1 nm,434.0 nm, and 410.2 nm, respectively. Note how these hydrogen absorption lines growin strength from O to A and then decrease in strength for spectral types later than A. Forlater spectral types, the messy spectra are indicative of metal lines, with molecular linesappearing in the spectra of the coolest stars.The Maxwell–Boltzmann Velocity DistributionTo uncover the physical foundation of this classiﬁcation system, two basic questions mustbe answered: In what orbitals are electrons most likely to be found? What are the relativenumbers of atoms in various stages of ionization?3The two prominent spectral lines of Ca II are usually referred to as the H (λ=396.8 nm) and K (λ=393.3 nm)lines of calcium. The nomenclature for the H line was devised by Fraunhofer; the K line was named by E. Mascart(1837–1908) in the 1860s.4The surveys that discovered large numbers of these objects are the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and the2-Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS).The Classification of Stellar Spectra
In addition to the traditional spectral types of the Harvard classiﬁcation scheme (OBAFGKM), Table   1 also includes recently deﬁned spectral types of very cool stars and brown dwarfs. Brown dwarfs are objects with too little mass to allow nuclear reac-tions to occur in their interiors in any substantial way, so they are not considered stars in the usual sense. The necessity of introducing these new spectral types came from all-sky surveys that detected a large number of objects with very low effective temperatures


<<<PAGE 242>>>

TABLE 1Harvard Spectral Classiﬁcation.Spectral Type CharacteristicsO Hottest blue-white stars with few linesStrong He II absorption (sometimes emission) lines.He I absorption lines becoming stronger.B Hot blue-whiteHe I absorption lines strongest at B2.H I (Balmer) absorption lines becoming stronger.A WhiteBalmer absorption lines strongest at A0, becoming weaker later.Ca II absorption lines becoming stronger.F Yellow-whiteCa II lines continue to strengthen as Balmer lines continue to weaken.Neutral metal absorption lines (Fe I, Cr I).G YellowSolar-type spectra.Ca II lines continue becoming stronger.Fe I, other neutral metal lines becoming stronger.K Cool orangeCa II H and K lines strongest at K0, becoming weaker later.Spectra dominated by metal absorption lines.M Cool redSpectra dominated by molecular absorption bands,especially titanium oxide (TiO) and vanadium oxide (VO).Neutral metal absorption lines remain strong.L Very cool, dark redStronger in infrared than visible.Strong molecular absorption bands of metal hydrides (CrH, FeH), water(H2O), carbon monoxide (CO), and alkali metals (Na, K, Rb, Cs).TiO and VO are weakening.T Coolest, InfraredStrong methane (CH4) bands but weakening CO bands.The answers to both questions are found in an area of physics known asstatisticalmechanics. This branch of physics studies the statistical properties of a system composedof many members. For example, a gas can contain a huge number of particles with a largerange of speeds and energies. Although in practice it would be impossible to calculatethe detailed behavior of any single particle, the gas as a whole does have certain well-deﬁned properties, such as its temperature, pressure, and density. For such a gas in thermalThe Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 243>>>

FIGURE 2Stellar spectra for main-sequence classes O9–F5. Note that these spectra are displayedas negatives; absorption lines appear bright. Wavelengths are given in angstroms. (Figure from Abt,et al.,An Atlas of Low-Dispersion Grating Stellar Spectra, Kitt Peak National Observatory, Tucson,AZ, 1968.)equilibrium (the gas is not rapidly increasing or decreasing in temperature, for instance), theMaxwell–Boltzmann velocity distribution function5describes the fraction of particleshaving a given range of speeds. The number of gas particles per unit volume having speedsbetweenvandv+dvis given bynvdv=n/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,(1)5This name honors James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906), the latter of whom is consideredthe founder of statistical mechanics.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 244>>>

FIGURE 3Stellar spectra for main-sequence classes F5–M5. Note that these spectra are displayedas negatives; absorption lines appear bright. Wavelengths are given in angstroms. (Figure from Abt,et al.,An Atlas of Low-Dispersion Grating Stellar Spectra, Kitt Peak National Observatory, Tucson,AZ, 1968.)wherenis the total number density (number of particles per unit volume),nv≡∂n/∂v,mis a particle’s mass,kis Boltzmann’s constant, andTis the temperature of the gasinkelvins. Figure 6 shows the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution of molecular speeds in termsof thefractionof molecules having a speed betweenvandv+dv. The exponent of thedistribution function is the ratio of a gas particle’s kinetic energy,12mv2, to the characteristicthermal energy,kT. It is difﬁcult for a signiﬁcant number of particles to have an energymuch greater or less than the thermal energy; the distribution peaks when these energiesare equal, at amost probable speedofvmp=/radicalbigg2kTm.(2)The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 245>>>

Relative flux (arbitrary units)
400 500 600 700 800 900Wavelength (nm)A9-F0VA8VA5-A7VA1-A3VB6VB3-B4VO7-B0VO5V
FIGURE 4Digitized spectra of main sequence classes O5–F0 displayed in terms of relative ﬂuxas a function of wavelength. Modern spectra obtained by digital detectors (as opposed to photographicplates) are generally displayed graphically. (Data from Silva and Cornell,Ap. J. Suppl.,81, 865, 1992.)The high-speed exponential “tail” of the distribution function results in a somewhat higher(average)root-mean-square speed6ofvrms=/radicalbigg3kTm.(3)Example 1.1.The area under the curve between two speeds is equal to the fraction of gasparticles in that range of speeds. In order to determine the fraction of hydrogen atoms in a gasofT=10,000 K having speeds betweenv1=2×104ms−1andv2=2.5×104ms−1,it is necessary to integrate the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution between these two limits,6The root-mean-square speed is the square root of the average (mean) value ofv2:vrms=/radicalbigv2.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 246>>>

orN/Ntotal=1n/integraldisplayv2v1nvdv=/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2/integraldisplayv2v1e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv.(4)Although Eq. ( 4) has a closed-form solution whenv1=0 andv2→∞, it must be eval-uated numerically in other cases. This can be accomplished crudely by evaluating theintegrand using an average value of the velocity over the interval, multiplied by the widthof the interval, orN/Ntotal=1n/integraldisplayv2v1nv(v) dv≃1nnv(v) (v2−v1),wherev≡(v1+v2)/2. Substituting, we ﬁndN/Ntotal≃/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2(v2−v1)≃0.125.Approximately 12.5% of the hydrogen atoms in a gas at 10,000 K have speeds between2×104ms−1and 2.5×104ms−1. A more careful numerical integration over the rangegives 12.76%.The Boltzmann EquationThe atoms of a gas gain and lose energy as they collide. As a result, the distribution inthe speeds of the impacting atoms, given by Eq. ( 1), produces a deﬁnite distribution ofthe electrons among the atomic orbitals. This distribution of electrons is governed by afundamental result of statistical mechanics: Orbitals of higher energy are less likely to beoccupied by electrons.Letsastand for the speciﬁc set of quantum numbers that identiﬁes a state of energyEafor a system of particles. Similarly, letsbstand for the set of quantum numbers that identiﬁesa state of energyEb. For example,Ea=−13.6 eV for the lowest orbit of the hydrogenatom, withsa={n=1,ℓ=0,mℓ=0,ms=+1/2}identifying a speciﬁc state withthat energy (recall Section 5.4 for a discussion of quantum numbers). Then the ratio of theprobabilityP (sb)that the system is in statesbto the probabilityP (sa)that the system is instatesais given byP (sb)P (sa)=e−Eb/kTe−Ea/kT=e−(Eb−Ea)/kT,(5)whereTis the common temperature of the two systems. The terme−E/kTis called theBoltzmann factor.77The energies encountered in this context are usually given in units of electron volts (eV), so it is useful toremember that at a room temperature of 300 K, the productkTis approximately 1/40 eV .The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 247>>>

Relative flux (arbitrary units)
400 500 600 700 800 900Wavelength (nm)F6-F7VF8-F9VG1-G2VG6-G8VG9-K0VK4VK5VFIGURE 5Digitized spectra of main sequence classes F6–K5 displayed in terms of relative ﬂuxas a function of wavelength. (Data from Silva and Cornell,Ap. J. Suppl.,81, 865, 1992.)The Boltzmann factor plays such a fundamental role in the study of statistical mechanicsthat Eq. ( 5) merits further consideration. Suppose, for example, thatEb>Ea; the energyof statesbis greater than the energy of statesa. Notice that as the thermal energykTdecreasestoward zero (i.e.,T→0), the quantity−(Eb−Ea)/kT→− ∞, and soP (sb)/P (sa)→0.This is just what is to be expected if there isn’t any thermal energy available to raise theenergy of an atom to a higher level. On the other hand, if there is a great deal of thermalenergy available (i.e.,T→∞), then−(Eb−Ea)/kT→0 andP (sb)/P (sa)→1. Againthis is what would be expected since with an unlimited reservoir of thermal energy, allavailable energy levels of the atom should be accessible with equal probability. You canquickly verify that if we had assumed instead thatEb<Ea, the expected results wouldagain be obtained in the limits ofT→0 andT→∞.It is often the case that the energy levels of the system may bedegenerate, with morethan one quantum state having the same energy. That is, if statessaandsbare degenerate,thenEa=Ebbutsa̸=sb. When taking averages, we must count each of the degeneratestates separately. To account properly for the number of states that have a given energy,deﬁnegato be the number of states with energyEa. Similarly, deﬁnegbto be the numberof states with energyEb. These are called thestatistical weightsof the energy levels.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 248>>>

01234vmpvrmsSpeed (104 m s–1)01234567nv/n (10–5 s m–1)Hydrogen atoms with T = 10,000 Kvmp = 1.29 ¥ 104 m s–1vrms = 1.57 ¥ 104 m s–1
FIGURE 6Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function,nv/n, for hydrogen atoms at a temperatureof 10,000 K. The fraction of hydrogen atoms in the gas having velocities between 2×104ms−1and2.5×104ms−1is the shaded area under the curve between those two velocities; see Example 1.1.Example 1.2.The ground state of the hydrogen atom is twofold degenerate. In fact,although “ground state” is the standard terminology, the plural “ground states” would bemore precise because these aretwoquantum states that have the same energy of−13.6e V(forms=±1/2).8In the same manner, the “ﬁrst excited state” actually consists ofeightdegenerate quantum states with the same energy of−3.40 eV .Table 2 shows the set of quantum numbers {n,ℓ,mℓ,ms} that identiﬁes each state; italso shows each state’s energy. Notice that there areg1=2 ground states with the energyE1=−13.6 eV , andg2=8 ﬁrst excited states with the energyE2=−3.40 eV .The ratio of the probabilityP (Eb)that the system will be found inanyof thegbdegeneratestates with energyEbto the probabilityP (Ea)that the system is inanyof thegadegeneratestates with energyEais given byP (Eb)P (Ea)=gbe−Eb/kTgae−Ea/kT=gbgae−(Eb−Ea)/kT.Stellar atmospheres contain a vast number of atoms, so the ratio of probabilities is indis-tinguishable from the ratio of the number of atoms. Thus, for the atoms of a given elementin a speciﬁed state of ionization, the ratio of the number of atomsNbwith energyEbto8In reality, the two “ground states” of the hydrogen atom are not precisely degenerate.importantsignatureofhydrogengasininterstellarspace.wostatesactuallyhaveslightlydifferentenergies,enablingthehydrogenatomtoemit21-cmradiowaves,The Classification of Stellar Spectra
The tan 

<<<PAGE 249>>>

TABLE 2Quantum Numbers and Energies for the Hydrogen Atom.Ground Statess1EnergyE1nℓmℓms(eV)10 0+1/2−13.610 0−1/2−13.6First Excited Statess2EnergyE2nℓmℓms(eV)20 0+1/2−3.4020 0−1/2−3.4021 1+1/2−3.4021 1−1/2−3.4021 0+1/2−3.4021 0−1/2−3.4021−1+1/2−3.4021−1−1/2−3.40the number of atomsNawith energyEain different states of excitationis given by theBoltzmann equation,NbNa=gbe−Eb/kTgae−Ea/kT=gbgae−(Eb−Ea)/kT.(6)Example 1.3.For a gas of neutral hydrogen atoms, at what temperature will equalnumbers of atoms have electrons in the ground state (n=1) and in the ﬁrst excited state(n=2)?9Recall from Example 1.2 that the degeneracy of thenth energy level of thehydrogen atom isgn=2n2. Associating stateawith the ground state and statebwith theﬁrst excited state, settingN2=N1on the left-hand sideof Eq. (6), and using the equationfor the energy levels lead to1=2(2)22(1)2e−[(−13.6e V/22)−(−13.6e V/12)]/kT,or10.2 eVkT=ln(4).9We have reverted to the standard practice of referring to the two degenerate states of lowest energy as the “groundstate” and to the eight degenerate states of next-lowest energy as the “ﬁrst excited state.”The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 250>>>

Solving for the temperature yields10T=10.2 eVkln(4)=8.54×104K.High temperatures are required for a signiﬁcant number of hydrogen atoms to have elec-trons in the ﬁrst excited state. Figure 7 shows the relative occupancy of the ground andﬁrst excited states,N2/(N1+N2), as a function of temperature.11This result is somewhatpuzzling, however. Recall that the Balmer absorption lines are produced by electrons inhydrogen atoms making an upward transition from then=2 orbital. If, as shown in Exam-ple 1.3, temperatures on the order of 85,000 K are needed to provide electrons in the ﬁrstexcited state, then why do the Balmer lines reach their maximum intensity at a much lowertemperature of 9520 K? Clearly, according to Eq. ( 6), at temperatures higher than 9520 Kan even greater proportion of the electrons will be in the ﬁrst excited state rather than in theground state. If this is the case, then what is responsible for the diminishing strength of theBalmer lines at higher temperatures?The Saha EquationThe answer lies in also considering the relative number of atomsin different stages ofionization. Letχibe the ionization energy needed to remove an electron from an atom (or
5000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000Temperature (K)0.000.010.020.030.04N2/(N1 + N2)
FIGURE 7N2/(N1+N2)for the hydrogen atom obtained via the Boltzmann equation.10When we are working with electron volts, the Boltzmann constant can be expressed in the convenient formk=8.6173423×10−5eV K−1.11For the remainder of this section, we will usea=1 for the ground state energy andb=2 for the energy of theﬁrst excited state.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 251>>>

ion) in the ground state, thus taking it from ionization stageito stage (i+1). For example,the ionization energy of hydrogen, the energy needed to convert it from H I to H II, isχI=13.6 eV . However, it may be that the initial and ﬁnal ions are not in the ground state.An average must be taken over the orbital energies to allow for the possible partitioning ofthe atom’s electrons among its orbitals. This procedure involves calculating thepartitionfunctions,Z, for the initial and ﬁnal atoms. The partition function is simply the weightedsum of the number of ways the atom can arrange its electrons with the same energy, withmore energetic (and therefore less likely) conﬁgurations receiving less weight from theBoltzmann factor when the sum is taken. IfEjis the energy of thejth energy level andgjis the degeneracy of that level, then the partition functionZis deﬁned asZ=∞/summationdisplayj=1gje−(Ej−E1)/kT.(7)If we use the partition functionsZiandZi+1for the atom in its initial and ﬁnal stages ofionization, the ratio of the number of atoms in stage (i+1) to the number of atoms in stageiisNi+1Ni=2Zi+1neZi/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χi/kT.(8)This equation is known as theSaha equation, after the Indian astrophysicist MeghnadSaha (1894–1956), who ﬁrst derived it in 1920. Because a free electron is produced in theionization process, it is not surprising to ﬁnd the number density of free electrons (numberof free electrons per unit volume),ne, on the right-hand side of the Saha equation. Note thatas the number density of free electrons increases, the number of atoms in the higher stageof ionization decreases, since there are more electrons with which the ion may recombine.The factor of 2 in front of the partition functionZi+1reﬂects the two possible spins of thefree electron, withms=±1/2. The term in parentheses is also related to the free electron,withmebeing the electron mass.12Sometimes the pressure of the free electrons,Pe, is usedin place of the electron number density; the two are related by the ideal gas law written inthe formPe=nekT.Then the Saha equation takes the alternative formNi+1Ni=2kT Zi+1PeZi/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χi/kT.(9)12The term in parentheses is the number density of electrons for which the quantum energyisroughlyequaltothecharacteristicthermalenergykT.F o rt h ec l a s s i c a lc o n d i t i o n se n c o u n t e r e din stellar atmospheres, this term is muchgreaterthanne.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 252>>>

The electron pressure ranges from 0.1Nm−2in the atmospheres of cooler stars to 100 N m−2for hotter stars.Combining the Boltzmann and Saha EquationsWe are now ﬁnally ready to consider the combined effects of the Boltzmann and Sahaequations and how they inﬂuence the stellar spectra that we observe.Example 1.4.Consider the degree of ionization in a stellar atmosphere that is assumedto be composed of pure hydrogen. Assume for simplicity that the electron pressure is aconstantPe=20 N m−2.The Saha equation ( 9) will be used to calculate the fraction of atoms that are ionized,NII/Ntotal=NII/(NI+NII), as the temperatureTvaries between 5000 K and 25,000 K.However, the partition functionsZIandZIImust be determined ﬁrst. A hydrogen ion isjust a proton and so has no degeneracy; thusZII=1. The energy of the ﬁrst excited stateof hydrogen isE2−E1=10.2 eV above the ground state energy. Because 10.2 eV≫kTfor the temperature regime under consideration, the Boltzmann factore−(E2−E1)/kT≪1.Nearly all of the H I atoms are therefore in the ground state (recall the previous example),so Eq. ( 7) for the partition function simpliﬁes toZI≃g1=2(1)2=2.Inserting these values into the Saha equation withχI=13.6 eV gives the ratio of ionizedto neutral hydrogen,NII/NI. This ratio is then used to ﬁnd the fraction of ionized hydrogen,NII/Ntotal, by writingNIINtotal=NIINI+NII=NII/NI1+NII/NI;the results are displayed in Fig. 8. This ﬁgure shows that whenT=5000 K, essentiallynone of the hydrogen atoms are ionized. At about 8300 K, 5% of the atoms have becomeionized. Half of the hydrogen is ionized at a temperature of 9600 K, and whenThas risen to11,300 K, all but 5% of the hydrogen is in the form of H II. Thus the ionization of hydrogentakes place within a temperature interval of approximately 3000 K. This range of tempera-tures is quite limited compared to the temperatures of tens of millions of degrees routinelyencountered inside stars. The narrow region inside a star where hydrogen is partially ion-ized is called a hydrogenpartial ionization zoneand has a characteristic temperature ofapproximately 10,000 K for a wide range of stellar parameters.Now we can see why the Balmer lines are observed to attain their maximum intensity ata temperature of 9520 K, instead of at the much higher characteristic temperatures (on theorder of 85,000 K) required to excite electrons to then=2 energy level of hydrogen. Thestrength of the Balmer lines depends onN2/Ntotal, the fraction ofallhydrogen atoms thatare in the ﬁrst excited state. This is found by combining the results of the Boltzmann andSaha equations. Because virtually all of the neutral hydrogen atoms are in either the groundstate or the ﬁrst excited state, we can employ the approximationN1+N2≃NIand writeN2Ntotal=/parenleftbiggN2N1+N2/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggNINtotal/parenrightbigg=/parenleftbiggN2/N11+N2/N1/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg11+NII/NI/parenrightbigg.continuedThe Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 253>>>

5000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000Temperature (K)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0NII/Ntotal
FIGURE 8NII/Ntotalfor hydrogen from the Saha equation whenPe=20 N m−2. Fifty percentionization occurs atT≃9600 K.
5000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000Temperature (K)0123456789N2/Ntotal (10–6)
FIGURE 9N2/Ntotalfor hydrogen from the Boltzmann and Saha equations, assumingPe=20 N m−2. The peak occurs at approximately 9900 K.Figure 9 shows that in this example, the hydrogen gas would produce the most intenseBalmer lines at a temperature of 9900 K, in good agreement with the observations.Thediminishing strength of the Balmer lines at higher temperatures is due to the rapid ionizationof hydrogen above 10,000 K.Figure 10 summarizes this situation.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 254>>>

2134H/H9251H/H9252(a) T < 9900 K(b) T = 9900 K(c) T > 9900 KExcitationBoltzmann equationIonizationSaha equation
FIGURE 10The electron’s position in the hydrogen atom at different temperatures. In (a), theelectron is in the ground state. Balmer absorption lines are produced only when the electron is initiallyin the ﬁrst excited state, as shown in (b). In (c), the atom has been ionized.Of course, stellar atmospheres are not composed of pure hydrogen, and the results ob-tained in Example 1.4 depended on an appropriate value for the electron pressure. Instellar atmospheres, there is typically one helium atom for every ten hydrogen atoms. Thepresence of ionized helium provides more electrons with which the hydrogen ions can re-combine. Thus, when helium is added, it takes ahighertemperature to achieve the samedegree of hydrogen ionization.It should also be emphasized that the Saha equation can be applied only to a gas inther-modynamic equilibrium,s ot h a tt h eM a x w e l l – B o l t z m a n nv e l o c i t yd i s t r i b u t i o ni so b e y e d .Furthermore, the density of the gas must not be too great (less than roughly 1 kg m−3forstellar material), or the presence of neighboring ions will distort an atom’s orbitals andlower its ionization energy.Example 1.5.The Sun’s “surface” is a thin layer of the solar atmosphere called thepho-We must compare the number of neutral hydrogen atoms with electrons in the ﬁrstexcited state (which produce the Balmer lines) to the number of singly ionized calciumatoms with electrons in the ground state (which produce the Ca II H and K lines). As inExample 1.4, we will use the Saha equation to determine the degree of ionization and willuse the Boltzmann equation to reveal the distribution of electrons between the ground andﬁrst excited states.continued1See Cox (2000), page 348 for a model solar photosphere.3The Classification of Stellar Spectra
tosphere The characteristic temperature of the photosphere is T = Te = 5777 K, and it has about 500,000 hydrogen atoms for each calcium atom with an electron pressure of about 1.5 Nm−2.13 From this information and knowledge of the  appropriate statistical weights and partition functions, the Saha and Boltzmann equations can be used to estimate the rela-tive strengths of the absorption lines due to hydrogen (the Balmer lines) and those due to calcium (the Ca II H and K lines)..


<<<PAGE 255>>>

Let’s consider hydrogen ﬁrst. If we substitute the partition functions found in Exam-ple 1.4 into the Saha equation ( 9), the ratio of ionized to neutral hydrogen is/bracketleftbiggNIINI/bracketrightbiggH=2kT Zi+1PeZi/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χi/kT=7.70×10−5≃113,000.Thus there is only one hydrogen ion (H II) for every 13,000 neutral hydrogen atoms (H I)at the Sun’s surface. Almost none of the hydrogen is ionized.The Boltzmann equation ( 6) reveals how many of these neutral hydrogen atoms are inthe ﬁrst excited state. Usinggn=2n2for hydrogen (implyingg1=2 andg2=8), we have/bracketleftbiggN2N1/bracketrightbiggHI=g2g1e−(E2−E1)/kT=5.06×10−9≃1198,000,000.The result is that only one of every 200 million hydrogen atoms is in the ﬁrst excited stateand capable of producing Balmer absorption lines:N2Ntotal=/parenleftbiggN2N1+N2/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggNINtotal/parenrightbigg=5.06×10−9.We now turn to the calcium atoms. The ionization energyχIof Ca I is 6.11 eV , abouthalf of the 13.6 eV ionization energy of hydrogen. We will soon see, however, that thissmall difference has a great effect on the ionization state of the atoms. Note that the Sahaequation is very sensitive to the ionization energy becauseχ/kTappears as anexponentandkT≈0.5 eV≪χ. Thus a difference of several electron volts in the ionization energyproduces a change of many powers ofein the Saha equation.Evaluating the partition functionsZIandZIIfor calcium is a bit more complicated thanfor hydrogen, and the results have been tabulated elsewhere:14ZI=1.32 andZII=2.30.Thus the ratio of ionized to un-ionized calcium is/bracketleftbiggNIINI/bracketrightbiggCa=2kT ZIIPeZI/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χI/kT=918.Practically all of the calcium atoms are in the form of Ca II; only one atom out of 900remains neutral. Now we can use the Boltzmann equation to estimate how many of thesecalcium ions are in the ground state, capable of forming the Ca II H and K absorptionlines. The next calculation will consider the K (λ=393.3 nm) line; the results for the H(λ=396.8 nm) line are similar. The ﬁrst excited state of Ca II isE2−E1=3.12 eV abovethe ground state. The degeneracies for these states areg1=2 andg2=4. Thus the ratio ofthe number of Ca II ions in the ﬁrst excited state to those in the ground state is/bracketleftbiggN2N1/bracketrightbiggCa II=g2g1e−(E2−E1)/kT=3.79×10−3=1264.Out of every 265 Ca II ions, all but one are in the ground state and are capable of produc-ing the Ca II K line. This implies that nearlyallof the calcium atoms in the Sun’s photosphere1The values of the partition functions used here are from Aller (1963); see also Cox (2000), page 32.4The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 256>>>

are singly ionized and in the ground state,1so that almost all of the calcium atoms areavailable for forming the H and K lines of calcium:/bracketleftbiggN1Ntotal/bracketrightbiggCa II≃/bracketleftbiggN1N1+N2/bracketrightbiggCa II/bracketleftbiggNIINtotal/bracketrightbiggCa=/parenleftbigg11+[N2/N1]Ca II/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg[NII/NI]Ca1+[NII/NI]Ca/parenrightbigg=/parenleftbigg11+3.79×10−3/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg9181+918/parenrightbigg=0.995.Now it becomes clear why the Ca II H and K lines are so much stronger in the Sun’sspectrum than are the Balmer lines. There are 500,000 hydrogen atoms for every calciumatom in the solar photosphere, but only an extremely small fraction, 5.06×10−9, of thesehydrogen atoms are un-ionized and in the ﬁrst excited state, capable of producing a Balmerline. Multiplying these two factors,(500,000)×(5.06×10−9)≈0.00253=1395,reveals that there are approximately 400 times more Ca II ions with electrons in the groundstate (to produce the Ca II H and K lines) than there are neutral hydrogen atoms withelectrons in the ﬁrst excited state (to produce the Balmer lines). The strength of the H andK lines isnotdue to a greater abundance of calcium in the Sun. Rather, the strength of theseCa II lines reﬂects the sensitive temperature dependence of the atomic states of excitationand ionization.Figure 11 shows how the strength of various spectral lines varies with spectral typeand temperature. As the temperature changes, a smooth variation from one spectral type tothe next occurs, indicating that there are only minor differences in the composition of stars,as inferred from their spectra. The ﬁrst person to determine the composition of the stars anddiscover the dominant role of hydrogen in the universe was Cecilia Payne (1900–1979).Her 1925 Ph.D. thesis, in which she calculated the relative abundances of 18 elements instellar atmospheres, is among the most brilliant ever done in astronomy.2THE HERTZSPRUNG–RUSSELL DIAGRAMEarly in the twentieth century, as astronomers accumulated data for an increasingly largesample of stars, they became aware of the wide range of stellar luminosities and absolutemagnitudes. The O stars at one end of the Harvard sequence tended to be both brighter and1It is left as an exercise to show that only a very small fraction of calcium atoms are doubly ionized (Ca III).5
5The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 257>>>

O5 B0 A0 F0 G0 K0 M0 M7Si IVSi IIIHe IHe IIHFe IICa IICa IFe ITiOMg IISi II25,00050,00010,000 8000 6000 5000 4000 3000Temperature (K)
Spectral typeLine strengthFIGURE 11The dependence of spectral line strengths on temperature.
An Enormous Range in Stellar RadiiIf this idea of stellar cooling were correct, then there should be a relation between a star’sabsolute magnitude and its spectral type. A Danish engineer and amateur astronomer, EjnarHertzsprung (1873–1967), analyzed stars whose absolute magnitudes and spectral typeshad been accurately determined. In 1905 he published a paper conﬁrming the expectedcorrelation between these quantities. However, he was puzzled by his discovery that starsof type G or later had a range of magnitudes, despite having the same spectral classiﬁcation.Hertzsprung termed the brighter starsgiants. This nomenclature was natural, since theStefan–Boltzmann law shows thatR=1T2e/radicalbiggL4πσ.(10)If two stars have the same temperature (as inferred for stars having the same spectral type),then the more luminous star must be larger.1Stellar evolution describes the change in the structure and composition of an individual star as it ages. Thisusage of the termevolutiondiffers from that in biology, where it describes the changes that occur over generations,rather than during the lifetime of a single individual.6The Classification of Stellar Spectra
hotter than the M stars at the other end. In addition, the empirical mass–luminosity rela-tion, deduced from the study of binary stars, showed that O stars are more massive than M stars. These regularities led to a theory of stellar evolution16 that described how stars might cool off as they age. This theory (no longer accepted) held that stars begin their lives as young, hot, bright blue O stars. It was suggested that as they age, stars become less massive as they exhaust more and more of their “fuel” and that they then gradually become cooler and fainter until they fade away as old, dim red M stars. Although incorrect, a vestige of this idea remains in the terms early and late spectral types.


<<<PAGE 258>>>

Hertzsprung presented his results in tabular form only. Meanwhile, at Princeton Uni-versity, Henry Norris Russell (1877–1957) independently came to the same conclusions asHertzsprung. Russell used the same term,giant, to describe the luminous stars of late spec-tral type and the termdwarfstars for their dim counterparts. In 1913 Russell published thediagram shown in Fig. 12. It records a star’s observed properties: absolute magnitude onthe vertical axis (with brightness increasing upward) and spectral type running horizontally(so temperature increases to theleft). This ﬁrst “Russell diagram” shows most of the featuresof its modern successor, theHertzsprung–Russell (H–R) diagram.17More than 200 starswere plotted, most within a band reaching from the upper left-hand corner, home of the hot,bright O stars, to the lower right-hand corner, where the cool, dim M stars reside. This band,called themain sequence, contains between 80% and 90% of all stars in the H–R diagram.In the upper right-hand corner are the giant stars. A singlewhite dwarf, 40 Eridani B, sits atthe lower left.1The vertical bands of stars in Russell’s diagram are a result of the discreteclassiﬁcation of spectral types. A more recent version of an observational H–R diagram isshown in Fig. 13 with the absolute visual magnitude of each star plotted versus its colorindex and spectral type.Figure 14 shows another version of the H–R diagram. Based on the average propertiesTheSun(G2)isfoundonthemainsequence,asisVega(A0).Bothaxesarescaledlogarithmicallytoaccommodatethehugespanofstellar luminosities, ranging from about 5×10−4L⊙to nearly 106L⊙.2Actually, the mainsequence is not a line but, rather, has a ﬁnite width, as shown in Figs. 12 and 13, owingto the changes in a star’s temperature and luminosity that occur while it is on the mainsequence and to slight differences in the compositions of stars. The giant stars occupy theregion above the lower main sequence, with thesupergiants, such as Betelgeuse, in theextreme upper right-hand corner. The white dwarfs (which, despite their name, are oftennot white at all) lie well below the main sequence.The radius of a star can be easily determined from its position on the H–R diagram.The Stefan–Boltzmann law in the form of Eq. ( 10) shows that if two stars have thesame surface temperature, but one star is 100 times more luminous than the other, then the17The names of Hertzsprung and Russell were forever joined by another Danish astronomer, Bengt Strömgren(1908–1987), who suggested that the diagram be named after its two inventors. Strömgren’s suggestion that starclusters be studied led to a clariﬁcation of the ideas of stellar evolution.18Russell merely considered this star to be an extremely underluminous binary companion of the star 40 EridaniA; the extraordinary nature of white dwarfs was yet to be discovered. Note that the termdwarfrefers to the starson the main sequence and should not be confused with thewhite dwarfdesignation for stars lying well below themain sequence.Note that Fig. 13 suggests that a correlation exists between color index and spectral type, both of which arereﬂections of the effective temperature of the star. Recall that color index is closely related to the blackbodyspectrum of a star.2Extremely late and early spectral types are not included in Fig. 14. The dimmest main-sequence stars aredifﬁcult to ﬁnd, and the brightest have very short lifetimes, making their detection unlikely. As a result, only ahandful of stars belonging to these classiﬁcations are known—too few to establish their average properties.819
0
190The Classification of Stellar Spectra
of main-sequence stars, this diagram has a theorist’s orientation: The luminosity and  effective temperature are plotted for each star, rather than the observationally determined quantities of absolute magnitude and color index or spectral type.


<<<PAGE 259>>>

FIGURE 12Henry Norris Russell’s ﬁrst diagram, with spectral types listed along the top andabsolute magnitudes on the left-hand side. (Figure from Russell,Nature,93, 252, 1914.)radius of the more luminous star is√100=10 times larger. On a logarithmically plottedH–R diagram, the locations of stars having the same radii fall along diagonal lines that runroughly parallel to the main sequence (lines of constant radius are also shown in Fig. 14).The main-sequence stars show some variation in their sizes, ranging from roughly 20 R⊙at the extreme upper left end of the main sequence down to 0.1 R⊙at the lower right end.The giant stars fall between roughly 10 R⊙and 100 R⊙. For example, Aldebaran (αTauri),The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 260>>>

1612840–4–8MV
–0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0B – VWhite dwarfsMain sequenceGiantsSupergiantsO5 B0 A0 F0 G0 K0M0 M7
FIGURE 13An observer’s H–R diagram. The data are from the Hipparcos catalog. More than3700 stars are included here with parallax measurements determined to better than 20%. (Data courtesyof the European Space Agency.)
40,000 20,000 10,000 6000 3000Te (K)–4–3–2–101234567Log10 (L/L )0.01 R1 R100 R
White dwarfsMain sequenceO5B0A0F0G0K0M0M7GiantsSupergiants
FIGURE 14The theorist’s Hertzsprung–Russell diagram. The dashed lines indicate lines of con-stant radius.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 261>>>

the gleaming “eye” of the constellation Taurus (the Bull), is an orange giant star that is 45times larger than the Sun.The supergiant stars are even larger. Betelgeuse, a pulsating variable star, contractsand expands roughly between 700 and 1000 times the radius of the Sun with a period ofapproximately 2070 days. If Betelgeuse were located at the Sun’s position, its surface wouldat times extend past the orbit of Jupiter. The starµCephei in the constellation of Cepheus(a king of Ethiopia) is even larger and would swallow Saturn.21The existence of such a simple relation between luminosity and temperature for main-sequence stars is a valuable clue that the position of a star on the main sequence is governedby a single factor. This factor is the star’smass.ThemostmassiveOstarslistedinthattableareobservedto have masses of 60 M⊙,22and the lower end of the main sequence is bounded by M starshaving at least 0.08 M⊙.2Combining the radii and masses known for main-sequence stars,we can calculate the average density of the stars. The result, perhaps surprising, is that main-sequence stars have roughly the same density as water. Moving up the main sequence, weﬁnd that the larger, more massive, early-type stars have aloweraverage density.Example 2.1.The Sun, a G2 main-sequence star, has a mass ofM⊙=1.9891×1030kgand a radius ofR⊙=6.95508×108m. Its average density is thusρ⊙=M⊙43πR3⊙=1410 kg m−3.Sirius, the brightest-appearing star in the sky, is classiﬁed as an A1 main sequence star witha mass of 2.2 M⊙and a radius of 1.6 R⊙. The average density of Sirius isρ=2.2M⊙43π(1.6R⊙)3=760 kg m−3=0.54ρ⊙,which is about 76 percent of the density of water. However, this is enormously densecompared to a giant or supergiant star. The mass of Betelgeuse is estimated to lie between10 and 15 M⊙; we will adopt 10 M⊙here. For illustration, if we take the maximum radius ofthis pulsating star to be about 1000 R⊙, then the average density of Betelgeuse (at maximumsize) is roughlyρ=10 M⊙43π(1000 R⊙)3=10−8ρ⊙!Thus Betelgeuse is a tenuous, ghostly object—a hundred thousand times less dense thanthe air we breathe. It is difﬁcult even to deﬁne what is meant by the “surface” of such awraith-like star.21µCephei is a pulsating variable like Betelgeuse and has a period of 730 days. One of the reddest stars visiblein the night sky,µCephei, is known as theGarnet Star.22Theoretical calculations indicate that main-sequence stars as massive as 90 M⊙may exist, and recent observationshave been made of a few stars with masses estimated near 100 M⊙2Stars less massive than 0.08 M⊙have insufﬁcient temperatures in their cores to support signiﬁcant nuclearburning3
.3.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 262>>>

Morgan–Keenan Luminosity ClassesHertzsprung wondered whether there might be some difference in the spectra of giantand main-sequence stars of the same spectral type (or same effective temperature). Hefound just such a variation in spectra among the stars cataloged by Antonia Maury. Inher classiﬁcation scheme she had noted line width variations that she referred to as ac-characteristic. The subtle differences in the relative strengths of spectral lines for stars ofsimilar effective temperatures and different luminosities are depicted in Fig. 15. The workbegun by Hertzsprung and Maury, and further developed by other astronomers, culminatedin the 1943 publication of theAtlas of Stellar Spectraby William W. Morgan (1906–1994)and Phillip C. Keenan (1908–2000) of Yerkes Observatory. Their atlas consists of 55 printsof spectra that clearly display the effect of temperature and luminosity on stellar spectra andincludes the criteria for the classiﬁcation of each spectrum. TheMKK Atlasestablished thetwo-dimensionalMorgan–Keenan (M–K) system of spectral classiﬁcation.2Aluminosityclass, designated by a Roman numeral, is appended to a star’s Harvard spectral type. Thenumeral “I” (subdivided into classes Ia and Ib) is reserved for the supergiant stars, and “V”denotes a main-sequence star. The ratio of the strengths of two closely spaced lines is oftenemployed to place a star in the appropriate luminosity class. In general, for stars of the samespectral type, narrower lines are usually produced by more luminous stars.2The Sun is aG2 V star, and Betelgeuse is classiﬁed as M2 Ia.2The series of Roman numerals extendsbelow the main sequence; the subdwarfs (class VI or “sd”) reside slightly to the left of themain sequence because they are deﬁcient in metals. The M–K system does not extend tothe white dwarfs, which are classiﬁed by the letter D. Figure 16 shows the correspondingdivisions on the H–R diagram and the locations of a selection of speciﬁc stars, and Table 3lists the luminosity classes.The two-dimensional M–K classiﬁcation scheme enables astronomers to locate a star’sposition on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram basedentirelyon the appearance of its spec-trum. Once the star’s absolute magnitude,M, has been read from the vertical axis of theH–Rdiagram,thedistancetothestarcanbecalculatedfromitsapparentmagnitude,md=10(m−M+5)/5,wheredis in units of parsecs. This method of distance determination, calledspectroscopicparallax, is responsible for many of the distances measured for stars,2but its accuracy islimited because there is not a perfect correlation between stellar absolute magnitudes andluminosity classes. The intrinsic scatter of roughly±1 magnitude for a speciﬁc luminosityclass rendersduncertain by a factor of about 101/5=1.6.24Edith Kellman of Yerkes printed the 55 spectra and was a co-author of the atlas; hence the additional “K” inMKK Atlas.25ecause the atmospheres of more luminous stars are less dense,there are fewercollisions between atoms. Collisions can distort the energies of atomic orbitals, leading to broadening of thespectral lines.26Betelgeuse, a pulsating variable star, is sometimes given the intermediate classiﬁcation M2 Iab.2Since the technique of parallax is not involved, the termspectroscopic parallaxis a misnomer, although thename does at least imply a distance determination.456
7
7BThe Classification of Stellar Spectra
,


<<<PAGE 263>>>

FIGURE 15A comparison of the strengths of the hydrogen Balmer lines in types A0 Ia, A0 Ib,A0 III, A0 IV , A0 V , and a white dwarf, showing the narrower lines found in supergiants. Thesespectra are displayed as negatives, so absorption lines appear bright. (Figure from Yamashita, Nariai,and Norimoto,An Atlas of Representative Stellar Spectra, University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1978.)The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 264>>>

FIGURE 16Luminosity classes on the H–R diagram. (Figure from Kaler,Stars and StellarSpectra, © Cambridge University Press 1989. Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge UniversityPress.)The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 265>>>

TABLE 3Morgan–Keenan Luminosity Classes.Class Type of StarIa-O Extreme, luminous supergiantsIa Luminous supergiantsIb Less luminous supergiantsII Bright giantsIII Normal giantsIV SubgiantsV Main-sequence (dwarf) starsVI, sd SubdwarfsD White dwarfsSUGGESTED READINGGeneralAller, Lawrence H.,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,New York, 1991.Dobson, Andrea K., and Bracher, Katherine, “A Historical Introduction to Women in As-tronomy,”Mercury, January/February 1992.Hearnshaw, J. B.,The Analysis of Starlight, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.Herrmann, Dieter B.,The History of Astronomy from Hershel to Hertzsprung, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 1984.Hofﬂeit, Dorrit, “Reminiscenses on Antonia Maury and thec-Characteristic,”The MKProcess at 50 Years, Corbally, C. J., Gray, R. O., and Garrison, R. F. (editors),ASPConference Series,60, 215, 1994.Kaler, James B.,Stars and Their Spectra, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.TechnicalAller, Lawrence H.,The Atmospheres of the Sun and Stars, Ronald Press, New York, 1963.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Stellar Astrophysics, Volume 2: Stellar Atmospheres, Cambridge Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, 1989.Cox, Arthur N. (editor),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, AIP Press, NewYork, 2000.Geballe, T. R., et al., “Toward Spectral Classiﬁcation of L and T Dwarfs: Infrared andOptical Spectroscopy and Analysis,”The Astrophysical Journal,564, 466, 2002.Kirkpatrick, J. Davy, et al., “Dwarfs Cooler Than “M”: The Deﬁnition of Spectral Type “L”Using Discoveries From the 2-Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS),”The AstrophysicalJournal,519, 802, 1999.Mihalas, Dimitri,Stellar Atmospheres, Second Edition, W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1978.Novotny, Eva,Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interiors, Oxford University Press,New York, 1973.Padmanabhan, T.,Theoretical Astrophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.The Classification of Stellar Spectra


<<<PAGE 266>>>

PROBLEM SET1Show that at room temperature, the thermal energykT≈1/40 eV . At what temperature iskTequal to 1 eV? to 13.6 eV?2Verify that Boltzmann’s constant can be expressed in terms of electron volts rather than joulesask=8.6173423×10−5eV K−1.3Use Fig. 6, the graph of the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution for hydrogen gas at 10,000 K,to estimate the fraction of hydrogen atoms with a speed within 1 km s−1of the most probablespeed,vmp.
4Show that the most probable speed of the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution of molecular speeds(Eq. 1) is given by Eq. (2).
5For a gas of neutral hydrogen atoms, at what temperature is the number of atoms in the ﬁrstexcited state only 1% of the number of atoms in the ground state? At what temperature is thenumber of atoms in the ﬁrst excited state 10% of the number of atoms in the ground state?The Classiﬁcation of Stellar Spectra
01234vmpvrmsSpeed (104 m s–1)01234567nv/n (10–5 s m–1)Hydrogen atoms with T = 10,000 Kvmp = 1.29 ¥ 104 m s–1vrms = 1.57 ¥ 104 m s–1
FIGURE 6Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function,nv/n, for hydrogen atoms at a temperatureof 10,000 K. The fraction of hydrogen atoms in the gas having velocities between 2×104ms−1and2.5×104ms−1is the shaded area under the curve between those two velocities; see Example 1.1.nvdv=n/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,(1)vmp=/radicalbigg2kTm.(2)
From Chapter 8 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.,

<<<PAGE 267>>>

(b)At a temperature of 85,400 K, when equal numbers (N) of atoms are in the ground state andin the ﬁrst excited state, how many atoms are in the second excited state (n=3)? Expressyour answer in terms ofN.(c)As the temperatureT→∞, how will the electrons in the hydrogen atoms be distributed,according to the Boltzmann equation? That is, what will be the relative numbers of electronsin then=1, 2, 3,...orbitals? Will this in fact be the distribution that actually occurs? Whyor why not?7In Example 1.4,of the H I atoms are in the groundstate, so Eq. ( 7) for the partition function simpliﬁes toZI≃g1=2(1)2=2.” Verify that thisstatement is correct for a temperature of 10,000 Kevaluating the ﬁrst three terms in Eq. (7)for the partition function.8Equation ( 7) for the partition function actually diverges asn→∞. Why can we ignore theselarge-nterms?9Consider a box of electrically neutral hydrogen gas that is maintained at a constant volumeV. In this simple situation, the number of free electrons must equal the number of H II ions:neV=NII. Also, the total number of hydrogen atoms (both neutral and ionized),Nt, is related tothe density of the gas byNt=ρV /(mp+me)≃ρV/mp, wherempis the mass of the proton.(The tiny mass of the electron may be safely ignored in this expression forNt.) Let the densityof the gas be 10−6kg m−3, typical of the photosphere of an A0 star.(a)Make these substitutions into Eq. ( 8) to derive a quadratic equation for the fraction ofionized atoms:/parenleftbiggNIINt/parenrightbigg2+/parenleftbiggNIINt/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggmpρ/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χI/kT−/parenleftbiggmpρ/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χI/kT=0.
(b)Solve the quadratic equation in part (a) for the fraction of ionized hydrogen,NII/Nt, for arange of temperatures between 5000 K and 25,000 K. Make a graph of your results, andcompare it with Fig. 8.from The Classification of stellar byZ=∞/summationdisplayj=1gje−(Ej−E1)/kT.(7)Z=∞/summationdisplayj=1gje−(Ej−E1)/kT.(7)
Ni+1Ni=2Zi+1neZi/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χi/kT.(8)“6Consider a gas of neutral hydrogen atoms, as in Example 1.3 from The Classification of Stellar  (a)At what temperature will equal numbers of atoms have electrons in the ground state and inthe second excited state (n=3)?“”
,”The Classification of Stellar Spectra: Problem SetSpectra .
 the statement was made that “nearly all


<<<PAGE 268>>>

5000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000Temperature (K)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0NII/Ntotal
FIGURE 8NII/Ntotalfor hydrogen from the Saha equation whenPe=20 N m−2. Fifty percentionization occurs atT≃9600 K.10In this problem, you will follow a procedure similar to that of Example 1.4stellar atmosphere composed of pure helium to ﬁnd the temp-partial ionization zone, where half of the He I atoms have beenwould be found on a white dwarf of spectral type DB.) Theof neutral helium and singly ionized helium areχI=24.6 eV andχII=The partition functions areZI=1,ZII=2, andZIII=1 (as expected foratom). UsePe=20 N m−2for the electron pressure.(a)Use Eq. ( 9) to ﬁndNII/NIandNIII/NIIfor temperatures of 5000 K, 15,000 K, and 25,000 K.How do they compare?(b)Show thatNII/Ntotal=NII/(NI+NII+NIII)can be expressed in terms of the ratiosNII/NIandNIII/NII.(c)Make a graph ofNII/Ntotalsimilar to Fig. 8 for a range of temperatures from 5000 Kto 25,000 K. What is the temperature at the middle of the He I partial ionization zone?Because the temperatures of the middle of the hydrogen and He I partial ionization zonesare so similar, they are sometimes considered to be a single partial ionization zone with acharacteristic temperature of 1–1.5×104K.from The Classification of Stellar Spectra  for the case of aerature at the middle of the He Iionized. (Such an atmosphereionization energies54.4 eV , respectively.any completely ionizedNi+1Ni=2kT Zi+1PeZi/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χi/kT.(9)“”The Classification of Stellar Spectra: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 269>>>

5000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000Temperature (K)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0NII/Ntotal
FIGURE 8NII/Ntotalfor hydrogen from the Saha equation whenPe=20 N m−2. Fifty percentionization occurs atT≃9600 K.11Follow the procedure of Problem 10 to ﬁnd the temperature at the middle of the He II partialionization zone, where half of the He II atoms have been ionized. This ionization zone is found ata greater depth in the star, and so the electron pressure is larger—use a value ofPe=1000 N m−2.Let your temperatures range from 10,000 K to 60,000 K. This particular ionization zone playsa crucial role in pulsating stars.12Use the Saha equation to determine the fraction of hydrogen atoms that are ionized,NII/Ntotal,at the center of the Sun. Here the temperature is 15.7 million K and the number density ofelectrons is aboutne=6.1×1031m−3. (UseZI=2.) Does your result agree with the fact thatpracticallyallof the Sun’s hydrogen is ionized at the Sun’s center? What is the reason for anydiscrepancy?13Use the information in Example 1.5atoms (Ca III/Ca II) in the Sun’s photosphere. TheUseZIII=1f o rt h ep a r t i t i o nf u n c t i o no fC aI I I .  I sExample 1.5 that in the solar photosphere, “nearlyforming the H and K lines of calcium”?14Consideragiantstarandamain-sequencestarofthesamespectraltype.themain-sequencestar.UsetheSahaequationtoexplainwhythisisso.Notethatthismeansthatthereisnotaperfectcorrespondencebetweentemperatureandspectraltype!from The Classification  of Stellar Spectra  to calculatethe ratio of doubly to singly ionized calciumionization energy of Ca II isχII=11.9 eV .your result consistent with the statement inall of the calcium atoms are available for“”Thegiantstar,whichhasaloweratmosphericdensity,hasaslightlylowertemperaturethanThe Classification of Stellar Spectra: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 270>>>

16The blue-white star Fomalhaut (“the ﬁsh’s mouth” in Arabic) is in the southern constella-tion of Pisces Austrinus. Fomalhaut has an apparent visual magnitude ofV=1.19. Use theH–R diagram in Fig. 16 to determine the distance to this star.40,000 20,000 10,000 6000 3000Te (K)–4–3–2–101234567Log10 (L/L )0.01 R1 R100 R
White dwarfsMain sequenceO5B0A0F0G0K0M0M7GiantsSupergiants
FIGURE  14The theorist’s Hertzsprung–Russell diagram. The dashed lines indicate lines of con-stant radius.15Figure 14 shows that a white dwarf star typically has a radius that is only 1% of the Sun’s.Determine the average density of a 1-M⊙white dwarf.The Classification of Stellar Spectra: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 271>>>

FIGURE 16Luminosity classes on the H–R diagram. (Figure from Kaler,Stars and StellarSpectra, © Cambridge University Press 1989. Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge UniversityPress.)The Classification of Stellar Spectra: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 272>>>

Stellar Atmospheres1The Description of the Radiation Field2Stellar Opacity3Radiative Transfer4The Transfer Equation5The Proﬁles of Spectral Lines1THE DESCRIPTION OF THE RADIATION FIELDThe light that astronomers receive from a star comes from the star’s atmosphere, the layersof gas overlying the opaque interior. A ﬂood of photons pours from these layers, releasingthe energy produced by the thermonuclear reactions, gravitational contraction, and coolingin the star’s center. The temperature, density, and composition of the atmospheric layersfrom which these photons escape determine the features of the star’s spectrum. To interpretthe observed spectral lines properly, we must describe how light travels through the gas thatmakes up a star.The Speciﬁc and Mean IntensitiesFigure 1 shows a ray of light with a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλpassing througha surface of areadAat an angleθinto a cone of solid angledϵOmegaα.1The angleθis measuredfrom the direction perpendicular to the surface, sodAcosθis the areadAprojected ontoa plane perpendicular to the direction in which the radiation is traveling. DeﬁningEλ≡∂E∂λ,Eλdλis assumed to be the amount of energy that these rays carry into the cone in a timeintervaldt. Then thespeciﬁc intensityof the rays is deﬁned asIλ≡∂I∂λ≡Eλdλdλdt dAcosθd ϵOmegaα.(1)1The surface is a mathematical location in space and is not necessarily a real physical surface.
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.9by 

<<<PAGE 273>>>

xyz
dAI/H9261(T)dW = sin /H9258 d/H9258 d/H9278d/H9278/H9278/H9258d/H9258
FIGURE 1IntensityIλ.Although the energyEλdλin the numerator is vanishingly small, the differentials in thedenominator are also vanishingly small, so the ratio approaches a limiting value ofIλ. Thespeciﬁc intensity is usually referred to simply as theintensity. Thus, in spherical coordinates,Eλdλ=Iλdλdt dAcosθd ϵOmegaα=Iλdλdt dAcosθsinθd θd φ(2)is the amount of electromagnetic radiation energy having a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλthat passes in timedtthrough the areadAinto a solid angledϵOmegaα=sinθd θd φ. TheImagine a light ray of intensityIλas it propagates through a vacuum. BecauseIλisdeﬁned in the limitdϵOmegaα→0, the energy of the raydoes not spread out (or diverge). Theintensity is thereforeconstantalong any ray traveling through empty space.In general, the speciﬁc intensityIλdoes vary with direction, however.Themean intensityof the radiation is found by integrating the speciﬁc intensity over all directions and dividingthe result by 4πsr, the solid angle enclosed by a sphere, to obtain an average value ofIλ.In spherical coordinates, this average value is3⟨Iλ⟩≡14π/integraldisplayIλdϵOmegaα=14π/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0Iλsinθd θd φ .(3)For an isotropic radiation ﬁeld (one with the same intensity in all directions),⟨Iλ⟩=Iλ.Blackbody radiation is isotropic and has⟨Iλ⟩=Bλ.Wm−3indicates an energy per second per unit areaper unit wavelength interval,Wm−2m−1,notan energy per second per unit volume.3Many texts refer to the average intensity asJλinstead of⟨Iλ⟩. However, in this text the notation⟨Iλ⟩has beenselected to explicitly illustrate the average nature of the quantity.2Stellar Atmospheres
speciﬁc intensity therefore has units of W m−3 sr −1.2 The Planck function Bl is an example of the speciﬁc intensity for the special case of blackbody radiation. In general, however, the energy of the light need not vary with wavelength in the same way as it does for black-body radiation. Later we will see under what circumstances we may set Il = Bl.


<<<PAGE 274>>>

The Speciﬁc Energy DensityTo determine how much energy is contained within the radiation ﬁeld, we can use a “trap”consisting of a small cylinder of lengthdL, open at both ends, with perfectly reﬂectingwalls inside; see Fig. 2. Light entering the trap at one end travels and (possibly) bouncesback and forth until it exits the other end of the trap. The energy inside the trap is the sameas what would be present at that location if the trap were removed. The radiation that entersthe trap at an angleθtravels through the trap in a timedt=dL/(ccosθ). Thus the amountof energy inside the trap with a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλthat is due to the radiationthat enters at angleθisEλdλ=Iλdλdt dAcosθd ϵOmegaα=IλdλdAdϵOmegaαdLc.The quantitydAdLis just the volume of the trap, so thespeciﬁc energy density(energyper unit volume having a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλ) is found by dividingEλdλbydLdA, integrating over all solid angles, and using Eq. (3):uλdλ=1c/integraldisplayIλdλdϵOmegaα=1c/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0Iλdλsinθd θd φ=4πc⟨Iλ⟩dλ.(4)
zdA
Light entering trapLight leaving trapdWdL/H9258
FIGURE 2Cylindrical “trap” for measuring energy densityuλ.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 275>>>

For an isotropic radiation ﬁeld,uλdλ=(4π/c)Iλdλ, and for blackbody radiation,uλdλ=4πcBλdλ=8πhc/λ5ehc/λkT−1dλ.(5)At times it may be more useful to express the blackbody energy density in terms of thefrequency,ν, of the light by employinguνdν=4πcBνdν=8πhν3/c3ehν/kT−1dν.(6)Thusuνdνis the energy per unit volume with a frequency betweenνandν+dν.The total energy density,u, is found by integrating over all wavelengths or over allfrequencies:u=/integraldisplay∞0uλdλ=/integraldisplay∞0uνdν.For blackbody radiation (Iλ=Bλ), the equation shows thatu=4πc/integraldisplay∞0Bλ(T ) dλ=4σT4c=aT4,(7)wherea≡4σ/cis known as theradiation constantand has the valuea=7.565767×10−16Jm−3K−4.The Speciﬁc Radiative FluxAnother quantity of interest isFλ, thespeciﬁc radiative ﬂux.Fλdλis thenetenergyhaving a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλthat passes each second through a unit area inthe direction of thez-axis:Fλdλ=/integraldisplayIλdλcosθd ϵOmegaα=/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0Iλdλcosθsinθd θd φ .(8)The factor of cosθdetermines thez-component of a light ray and allows the cancelation ofoppositely directed rays. For an isotropic radiation ﬁeld there is no net transport of energy,and soFλ=0.Both the radiative ﬂux and the speciﬁc intensity describe the light received from acelestial source, and you may wonder which of these quantities is actually measured by atelescope’s photometer, pointed at the source of light. The answer depends on whether thesource is resolved by the telescope. Figure 3(a) shows a source of light, uniform overits entire surface,4that is resolved by the telescope; the angleθsubtended by the sourceas a whole is much larger thanθmin, the smallest angle resolvable according to Rayleigh’s4The assumption of a uniform light source precludes dimming effects such as limb darkening.:Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 276>>>

/H9258/H9258mindWAperture
ApertureResolved sourceUnresolved sourceAiry disk(a)
(b)/H9258minFIGURE 3The measurement of (a) the speciﬁc intensity for a resolved source and (b) the radiativeﬂux for an unresolved source. Note that any object with an angular resolution smaller thanθminonthe surface of the resolved source (such as a surface feature on a planet) remains unresolved.criterion. In this case, what is being measured is thespeciﬁc intensity, the amount of energyper second passing through the aperture area into the solid angledeﬁned byθmin. Forexample, at a wavelength of 501 nm, the measured value of the speciﬁc intensity at thecenter of the Sun’s disk isI501=4.03×1013Wm−3sr−1.4, resulting in the same amount of energy reaching each square meter of the detector. Thespeciﬁc intensity of light rays from the source is thus measured to be constant.5However, it is theradiative ﬂuxthat is measured for an unresolved source. As the sourcerecedes farther and farther, it will eventually subtend an angleθsmaller thanθmin, andit can no longer be resolved by the telescope. Whenθ<θmin, the energy received fromdecreases as 1/r2, as expected.5he image and object intensities of a resolvedobject are the same.TStellar Atmospheres
Now imagine that the source is moved twice as far away. According to the inverse square law for light, there will be only (1/2)2 = 1/4 as much energy received from each square meter of the source. If the source is still resolved, however, then the amount of source area that contributes energy to the solid angle  has increased by a factor ofthe entire source will disperse throughout the diffraction pattern (the Airy disk and rings) determined by the telescope’s aperture. Because the light arriving at the detec-tor leaves the surface of the source at all angles [see Fig.  3(b)], the detector is effec-tively integrating the speciﬁc intensity over all directions. This is just the deﬁnition of the radiative ﬂux, Eq. (  8). As the distance r to the source increases further, the amount of energy falling within the Airy disk (and consequently the value of the radiative ﬂux)ϵOmegaαmin
ϵOmegaαmin


<<<PAGE 277>>>

Radiation Pressurereﬂected at an angleθfrom a perfectly reﬂecting surface of areadAinto a solid angledϵOmegaα. Because the angle of incidence equals the angle of reﬂection, the solid angles shownfor the incident and reﬂected photons are the same size and inclined by the same angleθon opposing sides of thez-axis. The change in thez-component of the momentum ofphotons with wavelengths betweenλandλ+dλthat are reﬂected from the areadAin atime intervaldtisdpλdλ=/bracketleftbig(pλ)ﬁnal,z−(pλ)initial,z/bracketrightbigdλ=/bracketleftbiggEλcosθc−/parenleftbigg−Eλcosθc/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbiggdλ=2Eλcosθcdλ=2cIλdλdt dAcos2θd ϵOmegaα ,where the last expression was obtained from Eq. ( 2). DividingdpλbydtanddAgives(dpλ/dt)/dA. But from Newton’s second and third laws,−dpλ/dtis the force exerted bythe photons on the areadA, although we will ignore the minus sign, which merely saysthat the force is in the−z-direction. Thus the radiation pressure is the force per unit area,(dpλ/dt)/dA, produced by the photons within the solid angledϵOmegaα. Integrating over thehemisphere of all incident directions results inPrad,λdλ, the radiation pressure exerted by
/H9258/H9258zdWdW
dAFIGURE 4Radiation pressure produced by incident photons from the solid angledϵOmegaα.Stellar AtmospheresBecause a photon possesses an energy E, Einstein’s relativistic energy equation tells us that even though it is massless, a photon also carries a momentum of p = E/c and thus can exert a radiation pressure. This radiation pressure can be derived in the same way that gas pressure is found for molecules bouncing off a wall. Figure  4 shows photons


<<<PAGE 278>>>

those photons having a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλ:Prad,λdλ=2c/integraldisplayhemisphereIλdλcos2θd ϵOmegaα(reﬂection)=2c/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπ/2θ=0Iλdλcos2θsinθd θd φ .Just as the pressure of a gas exists throughout the volume of the gas and not just at thecontainer walls, the radiation pressure of a “photon gas” exists everywhere in the radia-tion ﬁeld. Imagine removing the reﬂecting surfacedAin Fig. 4 and replacing it with amathematical surface. The incident photons will now keep on going throughdA; instead ofreﬂected photons, photons will be streaming throughdAfrom the other side. Thus, for anisotropic radiation ﬁeld, there will be no change in the expression for the radiation pressureif the leading factor of 2 (which originated in the change in momentum upon reﬂection ofthe photons) is removed and the angular integration is extended over all solid angles:Prad,λdλ=1c/integraldisplaysphereIλdλcos2θd ϵOmegaα(transmission)(9)=1c/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0Iλdλcos2θsinθd θd φ=4π3cIλdλ(isotropic radiation ﬁeld).(10)However, it may be that the radiation ﬁeld isnotisotropic. In that case, Eq. ( 9) for the ra-diation pressure is still valid but the pressure depends on the orientation of the mathematicalsurfacedA.The total radiation pressure produced by photons of all wavelengths is found by inte-grating Eq. (10):Prad=/integraldisplay∞0Prad,λdλ.For blackbody radiation, it is left as a problem to show thatPrad=4π3c/integraldisplay∞0Bλ(T ) dλ=4σT43c=13aT4=13u.(11)Thus theblackbody radiation pressureis one-third of the energy density. (For comparison,the pressure of an ideal monatomic gas is two-thirds of its energy density.)Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 279>>>

2STELLAR OPACITYfrom the shape of the blackbody Planck function,Bλ, because solar absorption lines removelight from the Sun’s continuous spectrum at certain wavelengths. The decrease in intensityproduced by the dense series of metallic absorption lines in the solar spectrum is especiallyeffective; this effect is calledline blanketing. In other wavelength regimes (e.g., X-ray andUV), emission lines may augment the intensity of the continuous spectrum.Temperature and Local Thermodynamic EquilibriumAlthough we often think in terms ofthe temperatureat a particular location, there areactually many different measures of temperature within a star, deﬁned according to thephysical process being described:• Theeffective temperature, which is obtained from the Stefan–Boltzmann lawis uniquely deﬁned for a speciﬁc level within a star and is an importantglobaldescriptorofthatstar.• Theexcitation temperatureis deﬁned by the Boltzmann equation.• Theionization temperatureis deﬁned by the Saha equation
0123456Energy (104 W m–2 sr–1)
350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 800 850 900 950 1000Wavelength (nm)Calcium KG Band
Sodium DHH/H9251
FIGURE 5The spectrum of the Sun in 2 nm wavelength intervals. The dashed line is the curve ofan ideal blackbody having the Sun’s effective temperature. (Figure adapted from Aller,Atoms, Stars,and Nebulae, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1991.)6The “surface” of a star is deﬁned as the region where the emergent visual continuum forms, namely thephotosphere7See Böhm-Vitense (1981) for more details concerning the determination of temperatures...Stellar AtmospheresThe classiﬁcation of stellar spectra is an ongoing process. Even the most basic task, such as ﬁnding the “surface”6 temperature of a particular star, is complicated by the fact that stars are not actually blackbodies. The Stefan–Boltzmann relation deﬁnes a star’s  effective temperature, but some effort is required to obtain a more accurate value of the “surface” temperature.7 Figure  5 shows that the Sun’s spectrum deviates substantially


<<<PAGE 280>>>

• Thekinetic temperatureis contained in the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution• Thecolor temperatureis obtained by ﬁtting the shape of a star’s continuous spectrumto the Planck functionWith the exception of the effective temperature, the remaining temperatures apply to anylocation within the star and vary according to the conditions of the gas. Although deﬁneddifferently, the excitation temperature, the ionization temperature, the kinetic temperature,and the color temperature are the same for the simple case of a gas conﬁned within an“ideal box.” The conﬁned gas particles and blackbody radiation will come into equilibrium,individually and with each other, and can be described by a single well-deﬁned temperature.In such a steady-state condition, no net ﬂow of energy through the box or between thematter and the radiation occurs. Every process (e.g., the absorption of a photon) occurs atthe same rate as its inverse process (e.g., the emission of a photon). This condition is calledthermodynamic equilibrium.However, a star cannot be in perfect thermodynamic equilibrium. A net outward ﬂowof energy occurs through the star, and the temperature, however it is deﬁned, varies withlocation. Gas particles and photons at one position in the star may have arrived therefrom other regions, either hotter or cooler (in other words, there is no “ideal box”). Thedistribution in particle speeds and photon energies thus reﬂects a range of temperatures. Asthe gas particles collide with one another and interact with the radiation ﬁeld by absorbingand emitting photons, the description of the processes of excitation and ionization becomesquite complex. However, the idealized case of a single temperature can still be employedif the distance over which the temperature changes signiﬁcantly is large compared with thedistances traveled by the particles and photons between collisions (theirmean free paths).In this case, referred to aslocal thermodynamic equilibrium(LTE), the particles andphotons cannot escape the local environment and so are effectively conﬁned to a limitedvolume (an approximated “box”) of nearly constant temperature.Example 2.1.The photosphere is the surface layer of the Sun’s atmosphere where theHT≡T|dT /dr|=5685 K(5790 K−5580 K)/(25.0 km)=677 km,where the average temperature has been used for the value ofT.How does the temperature scale height of 677 km compare with the average dis-tance traveled by an atom before hitting another atom? The density of the photosphere atthat level is aboutρ=2.1×10−4kg m−3, consisting primarily of neutral hydrogen atomsin the ground state.Assuming a pure hydrogen gas for convenience, the number of hydrogencontinued..Stellar Atmospheres
photons can escape into space. According to a model solar atmosphere, the temperature in one region of the photosphere varies from 5580 K to 5790 K over a distance of 25.0 km. The characteristic distance over which the temperature varies, called the temperature scale height, HT , is given by


<<<PAGE 281>>>

2a0Collision cross section /H9268
vtvPoint atoms
FIGURE 6Mean free path,ℓ, of a hydrogen atom.atoms per cubic meter is roughlyn=ρmH=1.25×1023m−3,wheremHis the mass of a hydrogen atom. In an approximate sense, two of these atoms will“collide” if their centers pass within two Bohr radii, 2a0, of each other.8As shown in Fig. 6,we may consider the equivalent problem of a single atom of radius 2a0moving with speedvthrough a collection of stationary points that represent the centers of the other atoms. In anamount of timet, this atom has moved a distancevtand has swept out a cylindrical volumeV=π(2a0)2vt=σvt, whereσ≡π(2a0)2is the collisioncross sectionof the atom in thisclassical approximation.9Within this volumeVarenV=nσvtpoint atoms with whichthe moving atom has collided. Thus the average distance traveled between collisions isℓ=vtnσvt=1nσ.(12)The distanceℓis themean free pathbetween collisions.10For a hydrogen atom,σ=π(2a0)2=3.52×10−20m2.Thus the mean free path in this situation isℓ=1nσ=2.27×10−4m.The mean free path is several billion times smaller than the temperature scale height. As aresult, the atoms in the gas see an essentially constant kinetic temperature between collisions.They are effectively conﬁned within a limited volume of space in the photosphere. Of coursethis cannot be true for the photons as well, since the Sun’s photosphere is the visible layer8This treats the atoms as solid spheres, a classical approximation to the quantum atom.9The concept ofcross sectionactuallyrepresentsaprobabilityofparticleinteractionsbuthasunitsofcross-sectionalarea.10A more careful calculation, using a Maxwellian velocity distribution for all of the atoms, results in a mean freepath that is smaller by a factor of√2.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 282>>>

of the solar surface that we observe from Earth. Thus, by the very deﬁnition of photosphere,the photons must be able to escape freely into space. To say more about the photon meanfree path and the concept of LTE, and to better understand the solar spectrum shown inFig. 5, we must examine the interaction of particles and photons in some detail.The Deﬁnition of OpacityWe now turn to a consideration of a beam of parallel light rays traveling through a gas. Anyprocess that removes photons from a beam of light will be collectively termedabsorption.I nthis sense then, absorption includes thescatteringof photons (such as Compton scatteringThe change in the intensity,dIλ, of a ray of wavelengthλas it travels through a gas isproportional to its intensity,Iλ, the distance traveled,ds, and the density of the gas,ρ. Thatis,dIλ=−κλρIλds.(13)The distancesis measured along the path traveled by the beam and increases in the directionthat the beam travels; the minus sign in Eq. ( 13) shows that the intensitydecreaseswithdistance due to the absorption of photons. The quantityκλis called theabsorption coefﬁ-cient,o ropacity, with theλsubscript implicitly indicating that the opacity is wavelength-dependent (κλis sometimes referred to as amonochromatic opacity). The opacity is thecross section for absorbing photons of wavelengthλper unit mass of stellar material andhas units of m2kg−1. In general, the opacity of a gas is a function of its composition, density,and temperature.11Example 2.2.Consider a beam of light traveling through a gas with initial intensityIλ,0ats=0. The ﬁnal intensityIλ,fafter the light has traveled a distancesmay be found byintegrating Eq. (13):/integraldisplayIλ,fIλ,0dIλIλ=−/integraldisplays0κλρd s .This leads toIλ=Iλ,0e−/integraltexts0κλρd s,(14)where thefsubscript has been dropped. For the speciﬁc case of a uniform gas of constantopacity and density,Iλ=Iλ,0e−κλρs.continued11Note that there is some inconsistency in the terminology; some authors refer toopacityas the inverse of themean free path of the photons.)Stellar Atmospheres
as well as the true absorption of photons by atomic electrons making upward transitions. In sufﬁciently cool gases, molecular energy-level transitions may also occur and must be included.


<<<PAGE 283>>>

For pure absorption (with emission processes neglected), there is no way of replenishingthe photons lost from the beam. The intensity declines exponentially, falling by a factorofe−1over a characteristic distance ofℓ=1/κλρ. In the solar photosphere where thedensity is approximatelyρ=2.1×10−4kg m−3, the opacity (at a wavelength of 500 nm)isκ500=0.03 m2kg−1. Thus the characteristic distance traveled by a photon before beingremoved from the beam at this level in the photosphere isℓ=1κ500ρ=160 km.Recalling Example 2.1, this distance is comparable to the temperature scale heightHT=677 km. This implies that the photospheric photons do not see a constant temperature,and so local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) is not strictly valid in the photosphere.The temperature of the regions from which the photons have traveled will be somewhatdifferent from the local kinetic temperature of the gas.Although LTE is a commonly invokedassumption in stellar atmospheres, it must be used with caution.Optical DepthFor scattered photons, the characteristic distanceℓis in fact the mean free path of thephotons. From Eq. ( 12),ℓ=1κλρ=1nσλ.Bothκλρandnσλcan be thought of as the fraction of photons scattered per meter of distancetravelled. Note that the mean free path is different for photons of different wavelengths.It is convenient to deﬁne anoptical depth,τλ, back along a light ray bydτλ=−κλρd s ,(15)wheresis the distance measured along the photon’s path in its direction of motion (whenobserving the light from a star, we arelooking backalong the path traveled by the photon;see Fig. 7). The difference in optical depth between a light ray’s initial position (s=0)and its ﬁnal position after traveling a distancesisϵDeltaατλ=τλ,f−τλ,0=−/integraldisplays0κλρd s .(16)Note thatϵDeltaατλ<0; as the light approaches an observer, it is traveling through materialwith diminishing optical depth. The outermost layers of a star may be taken to be atτλ=0for all wavelengths, after which the light travels unimpeded to observers on Earth. Withthis deﬁnition ofτλ=0, Eq. ( 16) gives the initial optical depth,τλ,0, of a ray of light thatStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 284>>>

zLight rayObserver'sline of sightIncreasing s/H9270/H9261 = 0/H9270/H9261 > 0/H92580
FIGURE 7Optical depthτλmeasured back along a ray’s path.traveled a distancesto reach the top of the atmosphere:0−τλ,0=−/integraldisplays0κλρd sτλ=/integraldisplays0κλρd s .(17)The “0” subscript has been dropped with the understanding thatτλis the optical depth ofthe ray’s initial position, a distances(s>0) from the top of the atmosphere.Combining Eq. ( 17) with Eq. ( 14) of Example 2.2 for the case of pure absorption,we ﬁnd that the decline in the intensity of a ray that travels through a gas from an opticaldepthτλto reach the observer is given byIλ=Iλ,0e−τλ.(18)Thus, if the optical depth of the ray’s starting point isτλ=1, the intensity of the ray willdecline by a factor ofe−1before escaping from the star.The optical depth may be thoughtof as the number of mean free paths from the original position to the surface, as measuredalong the ray’ s path.As a result, we typically see no deeper into an atmosphere at a givenwavelength thanτλ≈1. Of course, for pure absorption the intensity of the ray declinesexponentially regardless of its direction of travel through the gas. But we can observe onlythose rays traveling toward us, and this is reﬂected in our choice ofτλ=0 at the top of theatmosphere. Other choices of whereτλ=0 may be more useful in some situations.Ifτλ≫1 for a light ray passing through a volume of gas, the gas is said to beopticallythick;i fτλ≪1, the gas isoptically thin. Because the optical depth varies with wavelength,a gas may be optically thick at one wavelength and optically thin at another. For exam-ple, Earth’s atmosphere is optically thin at visible wavelengths (we can see the stars), butoptically thick at X-ray wavelengths.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 285>>>

z
Increasing s/H9270/H9261,0/H9270/H9261 = 0/H9258hln I/H9261,0ln I/H92610123sec /H9258(a)(b)FIGURE 8(a) A light ray entering Earth’s atmosphere at an angleθ. (b) lnIλvs. secθ.Example 2.3.easurementsofastar’sradiativeﬂuxandapparent magnitude are routinely corrected for the absorption of light by Earth’s atmosphere.Figure 8(a) shows a ray of intensityIλ,0entering Earth’s atmosphere at an angleθandtraveling to a telescope on the ground. The intensity of the light detected at the telescopeisIλ; the problem is to determine the value ofIλ,0. If we takeτλ=0 at the telescope andhto be the height of the atmosphere, then the optical depth of the light ray’s path through theatmosphere may be found from Eq. ( 17). Usingds=−dz/cosθ=−secθdzyieldsτλ=/integraldisplays0κλρd s=−/integraldisplay0hκλρdzcosθ=secθ/integraldisplayh0κλρd z=τλ,0secθ,whereτλ,0is the optical depth for a vertically traveling photon (θ=0). Substituting intoEq. ( 18), the intensity of the light received at the telescope is therefore given byIλ=Iλ,0e−τλ,0secθ.(19)There are two unknowns in this equation,Iλ,0andτλ,0; neither can be determined bya single observation. However, as time passes and as Earth rotates on its axis, the angleθwill change, and a semilog graph of several measurements of the received intensityIλas afunction of secθcan be made. As shown in Fig. 8(b), theslopeof the best-ﬁtting straightline is−τλ,0. Extrapolating the best-ﬁtting line to secθ=0 provides the value ofIλ,0atthe point where the line intercepts theIλ-axis.12In this way, measurements of the speciﬁcintensity or radiative ﬂux can be corrected for absorption by Earth’s atmosphere.General Sources of OpacityThe opacity of the stellar material is determined by the details of how photons interact withparticles (atoms, ions, and free electrons). If the photon passes withinσλof the particle,12Note that since secθ≥1, the best-ﬁtting straight line must be extrapolated to the mathematically unavailablevalue of 0.MStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 286>>>

whereσλis the particle’s cross-sectional area (or effective target area), the photon maybe either absorbed or scattered. In an absorption process, the photon ceases to exist andits energy is given up to the thermal energy of the gas. In a scattering process the photoncontinues on in a different direction. Both absorption and scattering can remove photonsfrom a beam of light, and so contribute to the opacity,κλ, of the stellar material. If theopacity varies slowly with wavelength, it determines the star’s continuous spectrum (orcontinuum). The dark absorption lines superimposed on the continuum are the result of arapid variation in the opacity with wavelengthIn general, there are four primary sources of opacity available for removing stellarphotons from a beam. Each involves a change in the quantum state of an electron, and thetermsboundandfreeare used to describe whether the electron is bound to an atom or ionin its initial and ﬁnal states.1.Bound–bound transitions(excitations and de-excitations) occur when an electronin an atom or ion makes a transition from one orbital to another. An electron can makean upward transition from a lower- to a higher-energy orbital when a photon of theappropriate energy is absorbed. Thusκλ,bb, the bound–bound opacity, is small exceptat those discrete wavelengths capable of producing an upward atomic transition. Itisκλ,bbthat is responsible for forming the absorption lines in stellar spectra. Thereverse process, emission, occurs when the electron makes a downward transitionfrom a higher- to a lower-energy orbital.If an electron absorbs a photon and then returns directly to its initial orbital(where it was before absorbing the photon), then a single photon is emitted in arandom direction. The net result of this absorption–emission sequence is essentiallya scattered photon. Otherwise, if the electron makes a transition to an orbital otherthan its initial one, the original photon is not recovered and the process is one of trueabsorption. If, while in its excited state, the atom or ion collides with a neighboringparticle, collisional de-excitation may result. When this occurs, the energy lost by theatom or ion becomes a part of the thermal energy of the gas.An important by-product of this absorption process is degrading of the averageenergy of the photons in the radiation ﬁeld. For example, if one photon is absorbedbut two photons are emitted as the electron cascades down to its initial orbital, thenthe average photon energy has been reduced by half. There is no simple equationfor bound–bound transitions that describes all of the contributions to the opacity byindividual spectral lines.2.Bound–free absorption, also known asphotoionization, occurs when an incidentphoton has enough energy to ionize an atom. The resulting free electron can haveany energy, so any photon with a wavelengthλ≤hc/χn, whereχnis the ionizationenergy of thenth orbital, can remove an electron from an atom. Thusκλ,bf, thebound–free opacity, is one source of the continuum opacity. The cross section for thephotoionization of a hydrogen atom in quantum statenby a photon of wavelengthλisσbf=1.31×10−191n5/parenleftbiggλ500 nm/parenrightbigg3m2,.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 287>>>

ElectronIonPhotonFIGURE 9Free–free absorption of a photon.which is comparable to the collision cross section for hydrogen found in Exam-ple 2.1. The inverse process of free–bound emission occurs when a free electronrecombines with an ion, emitting one or more photons in random directions. As withbound–bound emission, this also contributes to reducing the average energy of thephotons in the radiation ﬁeld.3.Free–free absorptionis a scattering process, shown in Fig. 9, that takes place whena free electron in the vicinity of an ion absorbs a photon, causing the speed of theelectron to increase. In this process the nearby ion is necessary in order to conserveboth energy and momentum. (It is left as an exercise to show that an isolated freeelectron cannot absorb a photon.) Since this mechanism can occur for a continuousrange of wavelengths, free–free opacity,κλ,ff, is another contributor to the continuumopacity. It may also happen that as it passes near an ion, the electron loses energyby emitting a photon, which causes the electron to slow down. This process of free–free emission is also known asbremsstrahlung, which means “braking radiation” inGerman.4.Electron scatteringis as advertised: A photon is scattered (not absorbed) by a freeelectron through the process ofThomson scattering. In this process, the electron canbe thought of as being made to oscillate in the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the photon.However, because the electron is tiny, it makes a poor target for an incident photon,resulting in a small cross section. The cross section for Thomson scattering has thesame value for photons of all wavelengths:σT=16πϵ20/parenleftbigge2mec2/parenrightbigg2=6.65×10−29m2.(20)This is typically two billion times smaller than the hydrogen cross section for pho-toionization,σbf. The small size of the Thomson cross section means that electronscattering is most effective as a source of opacity when the electron density is veryhigh, which requires high temperature. In the atmospheres of the hottest stars (and inthe interiors of all stars), where most of the gas is completely ionized, other sources ofopacity that involve bound electrons are eliminated. In this high-temperature regime,the opacity due to electron scattering,κes, dominates the continuum opacity.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 288>>>

Thomson cross section; it is proportional to 1/λ4and so decreases with increas-ing photon wavelength. Rayleigh scattering can be neglected in most atmospheres,but it is important in the UV for the extended envelopes of supergiant stars, and incool main-sequence stars.13The scattering of photons from small particles is alsoresponsible for the reddening of starlight as it passes through interstellar dust.Example 2.4.The energy of an electron in then=2 orbit of a hydrogen atom is givenbyE2=−13.622eV=−3.40 eV.A photon must have an energy of at leastχ2=3.40 eV to eject this electron from the atom.Thus any photon with a wavelengthλ≤hcχ2=364.7 nmis capable of ionizing a hydrogen atom in the ﬁrst excited state (n=2). The opacity ofthe stellar material suddenly increases at wavelengthsλ≤364.7 nm, and the radiative ﬂuxmeasured for the star accordingly decreases. The abrupt drop in the continuous spectrumof a star at this wavelength, called theBalmer jump, is evident in the Sun’s spectrum(Fig. 5). The size of the Balmer jump in hot stars depends on the fraction of hydrogenatoms that are in the ﬁrst excited state. This fraction is determined by the temperature via
continued13Rayleigh scattering is also important in planetary atmospheres and is responsible for Earth’s blue sky, forinstance.Stellar AtmospheresA photon may also be scattered by an electron that is loosely bound to an atomic  nucleus. This result is called Compton scattering if the photon’s  wavelength is much smaller than the atom or Rayleigh scattering if the pho-ton’s wavelength is much larger. In Compton scattering, the change in the wavelength and energy of the scattered photon is very small, so Compton scattering is usually lumped together with Thomson scattering. The cross sec-tion for Rayleigh scattering from a loosely bound electron is smaller than the
the Boltzmann equation, so a measurement of the size of the Balmer jump can be used to determine the temperature of the atmosphere. For cooler or very hot stars with other signiﬁcant sources of opacity, the analysis is more complicated, but the size of the Balmer jump can still be used as a probe of atmospheric temperatures. The wavelength 364.7 nm is right in the middle of the bandwidth of the ultravi-olet (U) ﬁlter in the UBV system. As a result, the Balmer jump will tend to decrease the amount of light received in the bandwidth of the U ﬁlter and so increase both the ultraviolet magnitude U and the color index (U – B) observed for a star. This effect will be strongest when N2   / Ntotal, the fraction of all hydrogen atoms that are in the ﬁrst


<<<PAGE 289>>>

excited state, is a maximum.about the tempratureofanA0staronthemainsequence.Acarefulexaminationof thediagramireveals that this is indeed the spectral type at which thevalue ofU−Bdiffers most from its blackbody value. The effect of line blanketing affectsthe measured color indices, making the star appear more red than a model blackbody star ofthe same effective temperature, and thus increasing the values of bothU−BandB−V.This occurs at a temperature of 9600 K.
BlackbodyB0A0F0G0K0M0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0B – VU – B–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.5FIGUREColor–color diagram for main-sequence stars. The dashed line is for a blackbody.Continuum Opacity and the H−IonThe primary source of the continuum opacity in the atmospheres of stars later than F0 is thephotoionization of H−ions. An H−ion is a hydrogen atom that possesses an extra electron.Because of the partial shielding that the nucleus provides, a second electron can be looselybound to the atom on the side of the ion opposite that of the ﬁrst electron. In this positionthe second electron is closer to the positively charged nucleus than it is to the negativelycharged electron. Therefore, according to Coulomb’s law, the net force on theextraelectronisattractive.The binding energy of the H−ion is only 0.754 eV , compared with the 13.6 eV requiredto ionize the ground state hydrogen atom. As a result, any photon with energy in excessof the ionization energy can be absorbed by an H−ion, liberating the extra electron; theremaining energy becomes kinetic energy. Conversely, an electron captured by a hydrogenatom to form H−will release a photon corresponding to the kinetic energy lost by theelectron together with the ion’s binding energy,H+e−/harpoonleftrightH−+γ.e-      color–colorn the below figureStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 290>>>

Since 0.754 eV corresponds to a photon with a wavelength of 1640 nm, any photon with awavelength less than that value can remove an electron from the ion (bound–free opacity).At longer wavelengths, H−can also contribute to the opacity through free–free absorption.Consequently, H−ions are an important source of continuum opacity for stars cooler thanF0. However, the H−ions become increasingly ionized at higher temperatures and thereforemake less of a contribution to the continuum opacity. For stars of spectral types B and A,the photoionization of hydrogen atoms and free–free absorption are the main sources of thecontinuum opacity. At the even higher temperatures encountered for O stars, the ionizationof atomic hydrogen means that electron scattering becomes more and more important, withthe photoionization of helium also contributing to the opacity.Molecules can survive in cooler stellar atmospheres and contribute to the bound–boundand bound–free opacities; the large number of discrete molecular absorption lines is anefﬁcient impediment to the ﬂow of photons. Molecules can also be broken apart into theirconstituent atoms by the absorption of photons in the process ofphotodissociation, whichplays an important role in planetary atmospheres.The total opacity is the sum of the opacities due to all of the preceding sources:κλ=κλ,bb+κλ,bf+κλ,ff+κes+κH−(the H−opacity is explicitly included because of its unique and critical contribution to theopacity in many stellar atmospheres, including our Sun). The total opacity depends not onlyStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 291>>>

on the wavelength of the light being absorbed but also on the composition, density, andtemperature of the stellar material.14The Rosseland Mean OpacityIt is often useful to employ an opacity that has been averaged over all wavelengths (orfrequencies) to produce a function that depends only on the composition, density, andtemperature. Although a variety of different schemes have been developed to compute awavelength-independent opacity, by far the most commonly used is theRosseland meanopacity, often simply referred to as theRosseland mean.15Thisharmonic meangivesthe greatest contribution to the lowest values of opacity. In addition, the Rosseland meanincorporates a weighting function that depends on the rate at which the blackbody spectrumvaries with temperatureFormally, the Rosseland mean opacity is deﬁnedas1κ≡/integraldisplay∞01κν∂Bν(T )∂Tdν/integraldisplay∞0∂Bν(T )∂Tdν.(21)Unfortunately, there is no simple equation that is capable of describing all of the complexcontributions to the opacity by individual spectral lines in bound–bound transitions, andso an analytic expression for the Rosseland mean cannot be given for these processes.However, approximation formulae have been developed for both the average bound–freeand free–free opacities:κbf=4.34×1021gbftZ(1+X)ρT3.5m2kg−1(22)κff=3.68×1018gff(1−Z)(1+X)ρT3.5m2kg−1,(23)whereρis the density (in kg m−3) andTis the temperature (in kelvins).XandZare themass fractions, or fractional abundances (by mass), of hydrogen and metals, respectively.1614The additional dependencies of the opacity on the electron number density, states of excitation and ionizationof the atoms and ions, and other factors can all be calculated from the composition, density, and temperature.15This wavelength-averaged opacity was introduced in 1924 by the Norwegian astronomer Svein Rosseland(1894–1985).1other constituents are frequently lumped together and referred to asmetals. In certain applications, however, it isnecessary to specify the composition in greater detail. In these cases, each species is represented by its own massfraction.6Because the primary components of most stellar gases are hydrogen and helium, all.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 292>>>

Together with the mass fraction of helium,Y, their formal deﬁnitions areX≡total mass of hydrogentotal mass of gasY≡total mass of heliumtotal mass of gasZ≡total mass of metalstotal mass of gas.(24)(25)(26)Clearly,X+Y+Z=1.TheGaunt factors,gbfandgff, are quantum-mechanical correction terms ﬁrst calcu-lated by J. A. Gaunt. These Gaunt factors are both≈1 for the visible and ultravioletwavelengths of interest in stellar atmospheres. The additional correction factor,t,i nt h eequation for the bound–free opacity is called theguillotine factorand describes the cutoffof an atom’s contribution to the opacity after it has been ionized. Typical values oftliebetween 1 and 100.Both of these formulae have the functional formκ=κ0ρ/T3.5, whereκ0is approxi-mately constant for a given composition. The ﬁrst forms of these expressions were derivedby H. A. Kramers (1894–1952) in 1923 using classical physics and the Rosseland mean.Any opacity having this density and temperature dependence is referred to as aKramersopacity law.Because the cross section for electron scattering is independent of wavelength, the Rosse-land mean for this case has the particularly simple formκes=0.02(1+X)m2kg−1.(27)An estimate of the contribution to the mean opacity provided by the H−ion may alsobe included over the temperature range 3000 K≤T≤6000 K and for densities between10−7kg m−3≤ρ≤10−2kg m−3whenX∼0.7 and 0.001<Z<0.03 (the values ofXandZare typical of main-sequence stars). Speciﬁcally,κH−≈7.9×10−34(Z/0.02)ρ1/2T9m2kg−1.(28)The total Rosseland mean opacity,κ, is the average of the sum of the individual contrib-utors to the opacity:κ=κbb+κbf+κff+κes+κH−.Figure10showstheresultsofanextensivecomputercalculationoftheRosselandmeanopacity from ﬁrst principles using detailed quantum physics. The calculation was carriedout by Carlos Iglesias and Forrest Rogers for a composition withX=0.70 andZ=0.02.17The values ofκare plotted as a function of the temperature for several densities.1A speciﬁc mixture of elements known as the Anders–Grevesse abundances were used to calculate the opacitiesshown.7Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 293>>>

456789Log10 T (K)Log10 /H9260 (m2 kg–1)
–3–2–1012–6–4–20246X = 0.7Z = 0.02
FIGURE 10Rosseland mean opacity for a composition that is 70% hydrogen, 28% helium, and2% metals by mass. The curves are labeled by the logarithmic value of the density (log10ρin kg m−3).(Data from Iglesias and Rogers,Ap. J.,464, 943, 1996.)Considering the details of Fig. 10, ﬁrst notice that the opacity increases with increasingdensity for a given temperature. Next, starting at the left-hand side of the ﬁgure, followa constant-density plot as it rises steeply with increasing temperature. This reﬂects theincrease in the number of free electrons produced by the ionization of hydrogen and helium.temperatureof10,000K,andneutralheliumisionizedataboutthesametemperature.Thedecline of the plot after the peak in the opacity roughly follows a Kramers law,κ∝T−3.5,and is due primarily to the bound–free and free–free absorption of photons. The He II ionloses its remaining electron at a characteristic temperature of 40,000 K for a wide rangeof stellar parameters; the slight increase in the number of free electrons produces a small“bump” seen near that temperature. Another bump, evident above 105K, is the result ofthe ionization of certain metals, most notably iron. Finally, the plot reaches a ﬂat ﬂoor atthe right-hand side of the ﬁgure. Electron scattering dominates at the highest temperatures,when nearly all of the stellar material is ionized and there are few bound electrons availablefor bound–bound and bound–free processes. The form of Eq. ( 27) for electron scattering,with no density or temperature dependence, requires that all of the curves in Fig. 10converge to the same constant value in the high-temperature limit.3RADIATIVE TRANSFERIn an equilibrium, steady-state star, there can be no change in the total energy containedwithin any layer of the stellar atmosphere or interior.18In other words, the mechanisms1This is not the case for a star that isnotin equilibrium. For instance, pulsating starsperiodicallyabsorbor“damup”theoutwardﬂowofenergy,drivingtheoscillations.,The hydrogenpartialionizationzonehasacharacteristic
8Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 294>>>

involved in absorbing and emitting energy must be precisely in balance throughout thestar. In this section, the competition between the absorption and emission processes will bedescribed, ﬁrst in qualitative terms and later in more quantitative detail.Photon Emission ProcessesAny process that adds photons to a beam of light will be calledemission. Thus emissionincludes the scattering of photons into the beam, as well as the true emission of photonsby electrons making downward atomic transitions. Each of the four primary sources ofopacity listed in Section 2 has an inverse emission process: bound–bound and free–boundemission, free–free emission (bremsstrahlung), and electron scattering. The simultaneousand complementary processes of absorption and emission hinder the ﬂow of photons throughthe star by redirecting the paths of the photons and redistributing their energy. Thus in a starthere is not a direct ﬂow of photons streaming toward the surface, carrying energy outwardat the speed of light. Instead, the individual photons travel only temporarily with the beamas they are repeatedly scattered in random directions following their encounters with gasparticles.The Random WalkAs the photons diffuse upward through the stellar material, they follow a haphazard pathcalled arandom walk. Figure 11 shows a photon that undergoes a net vector displacementdas the result of making a large numberNof randomly directed steps, each of lengthℓ(the mean free path):d=ℓ1+ℓ2+ℓ3+···+ℓN.Taking the vector dot product ofdwith itself givesd·d=ℓ1·ℓ1+ℓ1·ℓ2+···+ℓ1·ℓN+ℓ2·ℓ1+ℓ2·ℓ2+···+ℓ2·ℓN+···+ℓN·ℓ1+ℓN·ℓ2+···+ℓN·ℓN=N/summationdisplayi=1N/summationdisplayj=1ℓi·ℓj,ord2=Nℓ2+ℓ2[cosθ12+cosθ13+···+cosθ1N+cosθ21+cosθ23+···+cosθ2N+···+cosθN1+cosθN2+···+cosθN(N−1)]=Nℓ2+ℓ2N/summationdisplayi=1N/summationdisplayj=1j̸=icosθij,Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 295>>>

/H5129/H51293/H5129/H51294/H5129/H51291/H5129/H51292/H5129/H51295/H5129/H51296/H5129/H51297/H5129/H51298/H5129/H51299/H5129/H512912/H5129/H512910/H5129/H512911dFIGURE 11Displacementdof a random-walking photon.whereθijis the angle between the vectorsℓiandℓj. For a large number of randomly directedsteps, the sum of all the cosine terms approaches zero. As a result, for a random walk, thedisplacementdis related to the size of each step,ℓ, byd=ℓ√N.(29)Thus the transport of energy through a star by radiation may be extremely inefﬁcient.As a photon follows its tortuous path to the surface of a star, it takes 100 steps to travela distance of 10ℓ; 10,000 steps to travel 100ℓ; and one million steps to travel 1000ℓ.20Because the optical depth at a point is roughly the number of photon mean free paths fromthat point to the surface (as measured along a light ray’s straight path), Eq. ( 29) impliesthat the distance to the surface isd=τλℓ=ℓ√N. The average number of steps needed fora photon to travel the distancedbefore leaving the surface is thenN=τ2λ,(30)forτλ≫1. As might be expected, whenτλ≈1, a photon may escape from that level of thestar. A more careful analysis (performed in Section 4) shows that the average level in theatmosphere from which photons of wavelengthλescape is at a characteristic optical depthof aboutτλ=2/3.Looking into a star at any angle, we always look back to an opticaldepth of aboutτλ=2/3, as measured straight back along the line of sight. In fact, a star’sphotosphere is deﬁned as the layer from which its visible light originates—that is, whereτλ≈2/3 for wavelengths in the star’s continuum.The realization that an observer looking vertically down on the surface of a star seesphotons fromτλ≈2/3 offers an important insight into the formation of spectral lines.Strictly speaking, an individual photon does not make the entire journey, but rather, along with being scattered,photons may be absorbed and re-emitted during the “collisions.”that another transport process,convection, must take over.The process of transporting energy by radiation is sometimes so inefﬁcient19
1920Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 296>>>

Recalling the deﬁnition of optical depth, Eq. (17),τλ=/integraldisplays0κλρd s ,we see that if the opacityκλincreases at some wavelength, then the actual distance back alongthe ray to the level whereτλ=2/3 decreases for that wavelength. One cannot see as far intomurky material, so an observer will not see as deeply into the star at wavelengths where theopacity is greater than average (i.e., greater than the continuum opacity). This implies that ifthe temperature of the stellar atmosphere decreases outward, then these higher regions of theatmosphere will be cooler. As a result, the intensity of the radiation atτλ≈2/3 will declinethe most for those wavelengths at which the opacity is greatest, resulting in absorptionlines in the continuous spectrum. Therefore, the temperaturemustdecrease outward for theformation of absorption lines. This is the analog for stellar atmospheres of Kirchhoff’s lawthat a cool, diffuse gas in front of a source of a continuous spectrum produces dark spectrallines in the continuous spectrum.Limb DarkeningAnother implication of receiving radiation from an optical depth of about two-thirds isshown in Fig. 12. The line of sight of an observer on Earth viewing the Sun is verticallydownward at the center of the Sun’s disk but makes an increasingly larger angleθwith thevertical near the edge, orlimb, of the Sun. Looking near the limb, the observer will not seeas deeply into the solar atmosphere and will therefore see a lower temperature at an opticaldepth of two-thirds (compared to looking at the center of the disk). As a result, the limb of
r1r2 > r1Line of sighttoward the star's center/H9270/H9261 = 2/3/H9270/H9261 = 2/3Line of sight/H9258
FIGURE 12Limb darkening. The distance traversed within the atmosphere of the star to reacha speciﬁed radial distancerfrom the star’s center increases along the line of sight of the observerasθincreases. This implies that to reach a speciﬁed optical depth (e.g.,τλ=2/3), the line of sightterminates at greater distances (and cooler temperatures) from the star’s center asθincreases. Notethat the physical scale of the photosphere has been greatly exaggerated for illustration purposes. Thethickness of a typical photosphere is on the order of 0.1% of the stellar radius.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 297>>>

the Sun appears darker than its center. Thislimb darkeninghasbeenobservedinthelightcurvesofsomeeclipsingbinaries.Moredetailedinformationonlimbdarkeningmaybefoundlaterinthissection.The Radiation Pressure GradientConsidering the meandering nature of a photon’s journey to the surface, it may seem sur-prising that the energy from the deep interior of the star ever manages to escape into space.At great depth in the interior of the star, the photon’s mean free path is only a fraction ofa centimeter. After a few scattering encounters, the photon is traveling in a nearly randomdirection, hundreds of millions of meters from the surface. This situation is analogous tothe motions of air molecules in a closed room. An individual molecule moves about witha speed of nearly 500 m s−1, and it collides with other air molecules several billion timesper second. As a result, the molecules are moving in random directions. Because there is nooverall migration of the molecules in a closed room, a person standing in the room feels nowind. However, opening a window may cause a breeze if a pressure difference is establishedbetween one side of the room and the other. The air in the room responds to this pressuregradient, producing a net ﬂux of molecules toward the area of lower pressure.In a star the same mechanism causes a “breeze” of photons to move toward the surface ofthe star. Because the temperature in a star decreases outward, the radiation pressure is smallerat greater distances from the center (cf., Eq. 11 for the blackbody radiation pressure). Thisgradient in the radiation pressure produces the slight net movement of photons toward thesurface that carries the radiative ﬂux. As we will discover later in this section, this processis described bydPraddr=−κρcFrad.(31)Thus the transfer of energy by radiation is a subtle process involving the slow upwarddiffusion of randomly walking photons, drifting toward the surface in response to minutedifferences in the radiation pressure. The description of a “beam” or a “ray” of light isonly a convenient ﬁction, used to deﬁne the direction of motion momentarily shared by thephotons that are continually absorbed and scattered into and out of the beam. Nevertheless,we will continue to use the language of photons traveling in a beam or ray of light, realizingthat a speciﬁc photon is in the beam for only an instant.4THE TRANSFER EQUATIONIn this section, we will focus on a more thorough examination of the ﬂow of radiationthrough a stellar atmosphere.21We will develop and solve the basic equation of radiativetransfer using several standard assumptions. In addition, we will derive the variation oftemperature with optical depth in a simple model atmosphere before applying it to obtain aquantitative description of limb darkening.2Although the focus of this discussion is on stellar atmospheres, much of the discussion is applicable to otherenvironments as well, such as light traversing an interstellar gas cloud.1Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 298>>>

The Emission CoefﬁcientIn the following discussions of beams and light rays, the primary consideration is the netﬂow of energy in a given direction, not the speciﬁc path taken by individual photons. First,we will examine the emission process that increases the intensity of a ray of wavelengthλas it travels through a gas. The increase in intensitydIλis proportional to bothds, thedistance traveled in the direction of the ray, andρ, the density of the gas. For pure emission(no absorption of the radiation),dIλ=jλρd s ,(32)wherejλis theemission coefﬁcientof the gas. The emission coefﬁcient, which has unitsof m s−3sr−1, varies with the wavelength of the light.As a beam of light moves through the gas in a star, its speciﬁc intensity,Iλ, changes asphotons traveling with the beam are removed by absorption or scattering out of the beam,and are replaced by photons emitted from the surrounding stellar material, or scatteredinto the beam. Combining Eq. ( 13) for the decrease in intensity due to the absorption ofradiation with Eq. ( 32) for the increase produced by emission gives the general resultdIλ=−κλρIλds+jλρd s .(33)The ratio of the rates at which the competing processes of emission and absorption occurdetermines how rapidly the intensity of the beam changes. This is similar to describing theﬂow of trafﬁc on an interstate highway. Imagine following a group of cars as they leave LosAngeles, traveling north on I-15. Initially, nearly all of the cars on the road have Californialicense plates. Driving north, the number of cars on the road declines as more individualsexit than enter the highway. Eventually approaching Las Vegas, the number of cars on theroad increases again, but now the surrounding cars bear Nevada license plates. Continuingonward, the trafﬁc ﬂuctuates as the license plates eventually change to those of Utah, Idaho,and Montana. Most of the cars have the plates of the state they are in, with a few cars fromneighboring states and even fewer from more distant locales. At any point along the way,the number of cars on the road reﬂects the local population density. Of course, this is to beexpected; the surrounding area is the source of the trafﬁc entering the highway, and the rateat which the trafﬁc changes is determined by the ratio of the number of entering to exitingautomobiles. This ratio determines how rapidly the cars on the road from elsewhere arereplaced by the cars belonging to the local population. Thus the trafﬁc constantly changes,always tending to resemble the number and types of automobiles driven by the people livingnearby.The Source Function and the Transfer EquationIn a stellar atmosphere or interior, the same considerations describe the competition betweenthe rates at which photons are plucked out of a beam of light by absorption, and introducedinto the beam by emission processes. The ratio of the rates of emission and absorptiondetermines how rapidly the intensity of the beam of light changes and describes the tendencyof the population of photons in the beam to resemble the local source of photons in thesurrounding stellar material. To introduce the ratio of emission to absorption, we divideStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 299>>>

Eq. (33) by−κλρd s:−1κλρdIλds=Iλ−jλκλ.The ratio of the emission coefﬁcient to the absorption coefﬁcient is called thesource func-tion,Sλ≡jλ/κλ. It describes how photons originally traveling with the beam are removedand replaced by photons from the surrounding gas.2The source function,Sλ, has the sameunits as the intensity, W m−3sr−1. Therefore, in terms of the source function,−1κλρdIλds=Iλ−Sλ.(34)This is one form of theequation of radiative transfer(usually referred to as thetransferequation).23According to the transfer equation, if the intensity of the light does not vary(so that the left-hand side of the equation is zero), then the intensity is equal to the sourcefunction,Iλ=Sλ. If the intensity of the light isgreaterthan the source function (the right-hand side of the transfer equation is greater than 0), thendIλ/dsis less than 0, and theintensitydecreaseswith distance. On the other hand, if the intensity islessthan the sourcefunction, the intensityincreaseswith distance. This is merely a mathematical restatementof the tendency of the photons found in the beam to resemble the local source of photonsin the surrounding gas. Thusthe intensity of the light tends to become equal to the localvalue of the source function, although the source function itself may vary too rapidly withdistance for an equality to be attained.The Special Case of Blackbody RadiationThe source function for the special case of blackbody radiation can be found by consideringa box of optically thick gas maintained at a constant temperatureT. The conﬁned particlesand blackbody radiation are in thermodynamic equilibrium, with no net ﬂow of energythrough the box or between the gas particles and the radiation. With the particles andphotons in equilibrium, individually and with each other, every process of absorption isbalanced by an inverse process of emission. The intensity of the radiation is described bythe Planck function,Iλ=Bλ. Furthermore, because the intensity is constant throughout thebox,dIλ/ds=0, and soIλ=Sλ.For the case of thermodynamic equilibrium, the sourcefunction is equal to the Planck function,Sλ=Bλ.As mentioned in Section 2, a star cannot be in perfect thermodynamic equilibrium; thereis a net ﬂow of energy from the center to the surface. Deep in the atmosphere, whereτλ≫1as measured along a vertical ray, a random-walking photon will take at leastτ2λsteps toreach the surface (recall Eq. 30) and so will suffer many scattering events before escapingfrom the star. Thus, at a depth at which the photon mean free path is small compared to the22As a ratio involving the inverse processes of absorption and emission, the source function is less sensitive to thedetailed properties of the stellar material than arejλandκλindividually.2It is assumed that the atmosphere is in a steady state, not changing with time. Otherwise, a time-derivative termwould have to be included in the transfer equation.2
3Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 300>>>

01234 0 1 2 3012
s/H9260/H9261/H9267s(a)(b)I/H9261,0
I/H9261/I/H9261,0I/H9261S/H9261 = 2I/H9261,0
FIGURE 13Transformation of the intensity of a light ray traveling through a volume of gas. (a) Alight ray entering a volume of gas. (b) Intensity of the light ray. The horizontal axis has units ofκλρs,the number of optical depths traveled into the gas.temperature scale height, the photons are effectively conﬁned to a limited volume, a regionof nearly constant temperature. The conditions for local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE)are satisﬁed, and so, as already seen, the source function is equal to the Planck function,Sλ=Bλ. Making the assumption of LTE in a problem means settingSλ=Bλ. However,even in LTE, the intensity of the radiation,Iλ, will not necessarily be equal toBλunlessτλ≫1. In summary, saying thatIλ=Bλis a statement that the radiation ﬁeld is describedby the Planck function, whileSλ=Bλdescribes the physical source of the radiation,jλ/κλ,as one that produces blackbody radiation.Example 4.1.To see how the intensity of a light ray tends to become equal to the localvalue of the source function, imagine a beam of light of initial intensityIλ,0ats=0 enteringa volume of gas of constant density,ρ, that has aconstantopacity,κλ, and aconstantsourcefunction,Sλ. Then it is left as an exercise to show that the transfer equation (Eq. 34) maybe easily solved for the intensity of the light as a function of the distancestraveled into thegas:Iλ(s)=Iλ,0e−κλρs+Sλ(1−e−κλρs).(35)As shown in Fig. 13 for the case ofSλ=2Iλ,0, this solution describes the transformationof the intensity of the light ray from its initial value ofIλ,0toSλ, the value of the sourcefunction. The characteristic distance for this change to occur iss=1/κλρ, which is onephoton mean free path (recall Example 2.2), or one optical depth into the gas.The Assumption of a Plane-Parallel AtmosphereAlthough the transfer equation is the basic tool that describes the passage of light through astar’s atmosphere, a reader seeing it for the ﬁrst time may be prone to despair. In this trou-blesome equation, the intensity of the light must depend on the direction of travel to accountStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 301>>>

for the net outward ﬂow of energy. And although absorption and emission coefﬁcients arethe same for light traveling in all directions (implying that the source function is indepen-dent of direction), the absorption and emission coefﬁcients depend on the temperature anddensity in a rather complicated way.However, if astronomers are to learn anything about the physical conditions in stellaratmospheres, such as temperature or density, they must know where (at what depth) aspectral line is formed. A vast amount of effort has therefore been devoted to solving andunderstanding the implications of the transfer equation, and several powerful techniqueshave been developed that simplify the analysis considerably.We will begin by rewriting Eq. ( 34) in terms of the optical depthτλ, deﬁned byEq. ( 15), resulting indIλdτλ=Iλ−Sλ.(36)Unfortunately, because the optical depth is measured along the path of the light ray, neitherthe optical depth nor the distancesin Eq. ( 34) corresponds to a unique geometric depth inthe atmosphere. Consequently, the optical depth must be replaced by a meaningful measureof position.To ﬁnd a suitable replacement, we introduce the ﬁrst of several standard approximations.The atmospheres of stars near the main sequence are physically thin compared with the sizeof the star, analogous to the skin of an onion. The atmosphere’s radius of curvature is thusmuch larger than its thickness, and we may consider the atmosphere as aplane-parallelslab. As shown in Fig. 14, thez-axis is assumed to be in the vertical direction, withz=0at the top of thisplane-parallel atmosphere.Next, avertical optical depth,τλ,v(z), is deﬁned asτλ,v(z)≡/integraldisplay0zκλρd z .(37)Comparison with Eq. ( 17) reveals that this is just the initial optical depth of a ray travelingzLight ray0/H9258dz ds/H9270/H9261,v/H9270/H9261FIGURE 14Plane-parallel stellar atmosphere.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 302>>>

vertically upward from an initial position (z<0) to the surface (z=0) whereτλ,v=0.2However, a ray that travels upward at an angleθfrom the same initial positionzhas fartherto go through the same layers of the atmosphere in order to reach the surface. Therefore, theoptical depth measured along this ray’s path to the surface,τλ,i sgreaterthan the verticaloptical depth,τλ,v(z). Sincedz=dscosθ, the two optical depths are related byτλ=τλ,vcosθ=τλ,vsecθ.(38)The vertical optical depth is a true vertical coordinate, analogous toz, that increases inthe−z-direction. Its value does not depend on the direction of travel of a light ray, and soit can be used as a meaningful position coordinate in the transfer equation. Replacingτλbyτλ,vin Eq. ( 36) results incosθdIλdτλ,v=Iλ−Sλ.(39)This form of the transfer equation is usually employed when dealing with the approximationof a plane-parallel atmosphere.Of course, the value of the vertical optical depth at a levelzis wavelength-dependentbecause of the wavelength-dependent opacity in Eq. ( 37). In order to simplify the follow-ing analysis, and to permit the identiﬁcation of an atmospheric level with a unique value ofτv, the opacity is assumed to beindependent of wavelength(we usually take it to be equalto the Rosseland mean opacity,κ). A model stellar atmosphere, for which the simplifyingassumption is made that the opacity is independent of wavelength, is called agray atmo-sphere, reﬂecting its indifference to the spectrum of wavelengths. If we writeκinstead ofκλin Eq. ( 37), the vertical optical depth no longer depends on wavelength; we can there-fore writeτvinstead ofτλ,vin the transfer equation (Eq. 39). The remaining wavelengthdependencies may be removed by integrating the transfer equation over all wavelengths,usingI=/integraldisplay∞0IλdλandS=/integraldisplay∞0Sλdλ.With the preceding changes, the transfer equation appropriate for a plane-parallel grayatmosphere iscosθdIdτv=I−S.(40)This equation leads to two particularly useful relations between the various quantitiesdescribing the radiation ﬁeld. First, integrating over all solid angles, and recalling thatSdepends only on the local conditions of the gas, independent of direction, we getddτv/integraldisplayIcosθd ϵOmegaα=/integraldisplayId ϵOmegaα−S/integraldisplaydϵOmegaα.(41)2Recall that as the light approaches the surface (and the observer on Earth), it is traveling through smaller andsmaller values of the optical depth.4
4Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 303>>>

Using/integraltextdϵOmegaα=4πtogether with the deﬁnitions of the radiative ﬂuxFrad(Eq. 8) and themean intensity⟨I⟩(Eq. 3), both integrated over all wavelengths, we ﬁnddFraddτv=4π(⟨I⟩−S).The second relation is found by ﬁrst multiplying the transfer equation ( 40) by cosθand again integrating over all solid angles:ddτv/integraldisplayIcos2θd ϵOmegaα=/integraldisplayIcosθd ϵOmegaα−S/integraldisplaycosθd ϵOmegaα .The term on the left is the radiation pressure multiplied by the speed of light (recall Eq. 9).The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the radiative ﬂux. In spherical coordinates, the secondintegral on the right-hand side evaluates to/integraldisplaycosθd ϵOmegaα=/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0cosθsinθd θd φ=0.ThusdPraddτv=1cFrad.(42)center of the star, this equation isdPraddr=−κρcFrad,which is just Eq. ( 31). As mentioned previously, this result can be interpreted as sayingthat the net radiative ﬂux is driven by differences in the radiation pressure, with a “photonwind” blowing from high to lowPrad.In an equilibrium stellar atmosphere, every process of absorption is balanced by aninverse process of emission; no net energy is subtracted from or added to the radiation ﬁeld.In a plane-parallel atmosphere, this means that the radiative ﬂux must have the same valueat every level of the atmosphere, including its surface.Frad=constant=Fsurf=σT4e.(43)Because the ﬂux is a constant,dFrad/dτv=0, so Eq. ( 4) implies that the mean intensitymust be equal to the source function,⟨I⟩=S.(44)Equation ( 42) may now be integrated to ﬁnd the radiation pressure as a function of thevertical optical depth:Prad=1cFradτv+C,(45)whereCis the constant of integration.In a spherical coordinate system with its origin at theStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 304>>>

The Eddington ApproximationIf we knew how the radiation pressure varied with temperature for the general case (andnot just for blackbody radiation), we could use Eq. ( 45) to determine the temperaturestructure of our plane-parallel gray atmosphere. We would have toassumea description ofthe angular distribution of the intensity. In an approximation that we owe to the brilliantEnglish physicist Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882–1944), the intensity of the radiationﬁeld is assigned one value,Iout,i nt h e+z-direction (outward) and another value,Iin,i nt h e−z-direction (inward); see Fig. 15. BothIoutandIinvary with depth in the atmosphere,and in particular,Iin=0 at the top of the atmosphere, whereτv=0. It is left as an exerciseto show that with thisEddington approximation,26the mean intensity, radiative ﬂux, andradiation pressure are given by⟨I⟩=12(Iout+Iin)(46)Frad=π( Iout−Iin)(47)Prad=2π3c(Iout+Iin)=4π3c⟨I⟩.(48)[Note that because the ﬂux is a constant, Eq. ( 47) shows that there is a constant differencebetweenIoutandIinat any level of the atmosphere.]Inserting the last relation for the radiation pressure into Eq. ( 45), we ﬁnd that4π3c⟨I⟩=1cFradτv+C.(49)The constantCcan be determined by evaluating Eqs. ( 46) and ( 47) at the top of theatmosphere, whereτv=0 andIin=0. The result is that⟨I (τv=0)⟩=Frad/2π. Inserting
Iout
Iinz
FIGURE 15The Eddington approximation.26Actually, there are several more mathematical ways of implementing the Eddington approximation, but they areall equivalent.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 305>>>

this into Eq. ( 49) withτv=0 shows thatC=23cFrad.With this value ofC, Eq. ( 49) becomes4π3⟨I⟩=Frad/parenleftbiggτv+23/parenrightbigg.(50)Of course, we already know that the radiative ﬂux is a constant, given by Eq. ( 43). Usingthis results in an expression for the mean intensity as a function of the vertical optical depth:⟨I⟩=3σ4πT4e/parenleftbiggτv+23/parenrightbigg.(51)We may now derive the ﬁnal approximation to determine the temperature structure of ourmodel atmosphere. If the atmosphere is assumed to be in local thermodynamic equilibrium,another expression for the mean intensity can be found and combined with Eq. ( 51). By thedeﬁnition of LTE, the source function is equal to the Planck function,Sλ=Bλ. IntegratingBλover all wavelengthsshows that for LTE,S=B=σT4π,and so, from Eq. ( 44),⟨I⟩=σT4π.(52)Equating expressions ( 51) and ( 52) ﬁnally results in the variation of the temperature withvertical optical depth in a plane-parallel gray atmosphere in LTE, assuming the Eddingtonapproximation:27T4=34T4e/parenleftbiggτv+23/parenrightbigg.(53)This relation is well worth the effort of its derivation, because it reveals some importantaspects of real stellar atmospheres. First, notice thatT=Teatτv=2/3,notatτv=0.optical depth ofτv≈2/3, averaged over the disk of the star27You are encouraged to refer to Mihalas, Chapter 3, for a more detailed discussion of the gray atmosphere, includ-ing a more sophisticated development of the relationT4=34T4e[τv+q(τv)], where the Eddington approximation[q(τv)≡23] is a special case..Stellar Atmospheres
Thus the “surface” of a star, which by deﬁnition has temperature Te [recall the  Stefan–Boltzmann equation], is not at the top of the atmosphere, where  = 0, but deeper down, where  = 2/3. This result may be thought of as the average point of origin of the  observed photons. Although this result came at the end of a string of assumptions, it can be generalized to the statement that when looking at a star, we see down to a verticalτvτv


<<<PAGE 306>>>

Limb Darkening RevisitedWe now move on to take a closer look at limb darkening (recall Fig. 12). A comparisonof theory and observations of limb darkening can provide valuable information about howthe source function varies with depth in a star’s atmosphere. To see how this is done, weﬁrst solve the general form of the transfer equation (Eq. 36),dIλdτλ=Iλ−Sλ,at least formally, rather than by making assumptions. (The inevitable assumptions will berequired soon enough.) Multiplying both sides bye−τλ, we havedIλdτλe−τλ−Iλe−τλ=−Sλe−τλddτλ(e−τλIλ)=−Sλe−τλd(e−τλIλ)=−Sλe−τλdτλ.If we integrate from the initial position of the ray, at optical depthτλ,0whereIλ=Iλ,0,to the top of the atmosphere, at optical depthτλ=0 whereIλ=Iλ(0), the result for theemergent intensity at the top of the atmosphere,Iλ(0), isIλ(0)=Iλ,0e−τλ,0−/integraldisplay0τλ,0Sλe−τλdτλ.(54)This equation has a very straightforward interpretation. The emergent intensity on the leftis the sum of two positive contributions. The ﬁrst term on the right is the initial intensityof the ray, reduced by the effects of absorption along the path to the surface. The secondterm, also positive,28represents the emission at every point along the path, attenuated bythe absorption between the point of emission and the surface.We now return to the geometry of a plane-parallel atmosphere and the vertical opticaldepth,τv. However, we donotassume a gray atmosphere, LTE, or make the Eddingtonapproximation. As shown in Fig. 16, the problem of limb darkening amounts to determin-ing the emergent intensityIλ(0)as a function of the angleθ. Equation ( 54), the formalsolution to the transfer equation, is easily converted to this situation by using Eq. ( 38) toreplaceτλwithτλ,vsecθ(the vertical optical depth) to getI(0)=I0e−τv,0secθ−/integraldisplay0τv,0secθSsecθe−τvsecθdτv.Although bothIandτvdepend on wavelength, theλsubscript has been dropped to simplifythe notation; the approximation of a gray atmosphere hasnotbeen made. To include thecontributions to the emergent intensity from all layers of the atmosphere, we take the value28Remember that the optical depth, measured along the ray’s path, decreases in the direction of travel, sodτλisnegative.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 307>>>

zLight ray
d/H9270vd/H9270 = d/H9270v sec /H9258/H9258FIGURE 16FindingI(0)as a function ofθfor limb darkening in plane-parallel geometry.of the initial position of the rays to be atτv,0=∞. Then the ﬁrst term on the right-handside vanishes, leavingI(0)=/integraldisplay∞0Ssecθe−τvsecθdτv.(55)If we knew how the source function depends on the vertical optical depth, this equationcould be integrated to ﬁnd the emergent intensity as a function of the direction of travel,θ, of the ray. Although the form of the source function is not known, a good guess will beenough to estimateI(0). Suppose that the source function has the formS=a+bτv,(56)whereaandbare wavelength-dependent numbers to be determined. Inserting this intoEq. ( 55) and integrating (the details are left as an exercise) show that the emergent intensityfor this source function isIλ(0)=aλ+bλcosθ,(57)where theλsubscripts have been restored to the appropriate quantities to emphasize theirwavelength dependence. By making careful measurements of the variation in the speciﬁcintensity across the disk of the Sun, the values ofaλandbλfor the solar source functioncan be determined for a range of wavelengths. For example, for a wavelength of 501 nm,Böhm-Vitense (1989) supplies values ofa501=1.04×1013Wm−3sr−1andb501=3.52×1013Wm−3sr−1.Example 4.2.Solar limb darkening provides an opportunity to test the accuracy ofour “plane-parallel gray atmosphere in LTE using the Eddington approximation.” In thepreceding discussion of an equilibrium gray atmosphere, it was found that the mean intensityis equal to the source function,⟨I⟩=ScontinuedStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 308>>>

(Eq. 44). Then, with the additional assumptions of the Eddington approximation andLTE, Eqs. ( 52) and ( 53) can be used to determine the mean intensity and thus the sourcefunction:S=⟨I⟩=σT4π=3σ4πT4e/parenleftbiggτv+23/parenrightbigg.Taking the source function to have the form of Eq. ( 56),S=a+bτv, as used earlier forlimb darkening (after integrating over all wavelengths), the values of the coefﬁcients area=σ2πT4eandb=3σ4πT4e.The emergent intensity then will have the form of Eq. ( 57),I(0)=a+bcosθ(againafter integrating over all wavelengths). The ratio of the emergent intensity at angleθ,I (θ),to that at the center of the star,I (θ=0), is thusI (θ)I (θ=0)=a+bcosθa+b=25+35cosθ.(58)We can compare the results of this calculation with observations of solar limb darken-ing in integrated light (made by summing over all wavelengths). Figure 17 shows boththe observed values ofI (θ)/I (θ=0)and the values from Eq. ( 58). The agreement isremarkably good, despite our numerous approximations. However, be forewarned that theagreement is much worse for observations made at a given wavelength (see Böhm-Vitense,1989) as a consequence of wavelength-dependent opacity effects such as line blanketing.
0.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0I(/H9258)/I(/H9258 = 0)
Angle /H9258 (deg)FIGURE 17A theoretical Eddington approximation of solar limb darkening for light integratedover all wavelengths. The dots are observational data for the Sun. Although a good ﬁt, the Eddingtonapproximation is not perfect, which implies that a more detailed model must be developed.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 309>>>

5THE PROFILES OF SPECTRAL LINESWe now have a formidable theoretical arsenal to bring to bear on the analysis of spectrallines. The shape of an individual spectral line contains a wealth of information about theenvironment in which it was formed.Equivalent WidthsFigure 18 shows a graph of the radiant ﬂux,Fλ, as a function of wavelength for a typicalabsorption line. In the ﬁgure,Fλis expressed as a fraction ofFc, the value of the ﬂuxfrom the continuous spectrum outside the spectral line. Near the central wavelength,λ0, isthecoreof the line, and the sides sweeping upward to the continuum are the line’swings.Individual lines may be narrow or broad, shallow or deep. The quantity(Fc−Fλ)/Fcisreferred to as thedepthof the line. The strength of a spectral line is measured in terms ofitsequivalent width. The equivalent widthWof a spectral line is deﬁned as the width of abox (shaded in Fig. 18) reaching up to the continuum that has the same area as the spectralline. That is,W=/integraldisplayFc−FλFcdλ,(59)where the integral is taken from one side of the line to the other. The equivalent width of aline in the visible spectrum, shaded in Fig. 18, is usually on the order of 0.01 nm. Anothermeasure of the width of a spectral line is the change in wavelength from one side of theline to the other, where its depth(Fc−Fλ)/(Fc−Fλ0)=1/2; this is called thefull widthat half-maximumand will be denoted by(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2.The spectral line shown in Fig. 18 is termedoptically thinbecause there is no wave-length at which the radiant ﬂux has been completely blocked. The opacityκλof the stellarW1.00.50.0F/H9261/Fc
/H92610WavelengthFIGURE 18The proﬁle of a typical spectral line.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 310>>>

Processes That Broaden Spectral LinesThree main processes are responsible for the broadening of spectral lines. Each of thesemechanisms produces its own distinctive line shape orline proﬁle.1.Natural broadening.Spectral lines cannot be inﬁnitely sharp, even for motionless,only a brief instant,ϵDeltaαt, the orbital’s energy,E, cannot have a precise value. Thus theuncertainty in the energy,ϵDeltaαE, of the orbital is approximatelyϵDeltaαE≈/planckover2pi1ϵDeltaαt.(The electron’s lifetime in the ground state may be taken as inﬁnite, so in that caseϵDeltaαE=0.) Electrons can make transitions from and to anywhere within these “fuzzy”energy levels, producing an uncertainty in the wavelength of the photon absorbed oremitted in a transition. Using the following equation for the energy of a photon,Ephoton=hc/λ,weﬁndthattheuncertaintyinthephoton’swavelengthhasamagnitudeof roughlyϵDeltaαλ≈λ22πc/parenleftbigg1ϵDeltaαti+1ϵDeltaαtf/parenrightbigg,(60)whereϵDeltaαtiis the lifetime of the electron in its initial state andϵDeltaαtfis the lifetime inthe ﬁnal state. (The proof is left as a problem.)Example 5.1.The lifetime of an electron in the ﬁrst and second excited states ofhydrogen is aboutϵDeltaαt=10−8s. The natural broadening of the Hαline of hydrogen,λ=656.3 nm, is thenϵDeltaαλ≈4.57×10−14m=4.57×10−5nm.A more involved calculation shows that the full width at half-maximum of theline proﬁle for natural broadening is(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2=λ2πc1ϵDeltaαt0,(61)Stellar Atmospheresmaterial is greatest at the wavelength  at the line’s center and decreases moving into the wings. This means that the center of the line is formed at higher (and cooler) regions of the stellar atmosphere. Moving into the wings from , the line formation occurs at progres-sively deeper (and hotter) layers of the atmosphere, until it merges with the continuum-producing region at an optical depth of 2/3.λ0λ0
isolated atoms. According to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, as the time  available for an energy measurement decreases, the inherent uncertainty of the  result increases. Because an electron in an excited state occupies its orbital for


<<<PAGE 311>>>

whereϵDeltaαt0is the average waiting time for a speciﬁc transition to occur. This resultsin a typical value of(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2≃2.4×10−5nm,in good agreement with the preceding estimate.2.Doppler broadening.In thermal equilibrium, the atoms in a gas, each of massm,are moving randomly about with a distribution of speeds that is described by theMaxwell–Boltzmanndistributionfunction,withthemostprobablespeedgiven byvmp=√2kT/m. The wavelengths of the light absorbed or emittedbytheatomsinthegasareDoppler-shiftedaccordingto(nonrelativistic)ϵDeltaαλ/λ=±|vr|/c.ThusthewidthofaspectrallineduetoDopplerbroadeningshouldbe approximatelyϵDeltaαλ≈2λc/radicalbigg2kTm.Example 5.2.For hydrogen atoms in the Sun’s photosphere (T=5777 K), theDoppler broadening of the Hαline should be aboutϵDeltaαλ≈0.0427 nm,roughly 1000 times greater than for natural broadening.Amore in-depth analysis, taking into account the different directions of the atoms’motions with respect to one another and to the line of sight of the observer, showsthat the full width at half-maximum of the line proﬁle for Doppler broadening is(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2=2λc/radicalbigg2kTln 2m.(62)Although the line proﬁle for Doppler broadening is much wider at half-maximumthan for natural broadening, the line depth for Doppler broadening decreasesexpo-nentiallyas the wavelength moves away from the central wavelengthλ0. This rapiddecline is due to the high-speed exponential “tail” of the Maxwell–Boltzmann veloc-ity distribution and is a much faster falloff in strength than for natural broadening.Doppler shifts caused by the large-scale turbulent motion of large masses of gas (asopposed to the random motion of the individual atoms) can also be accommodated byEq. ( 62) if the distribution of turbulent velocities follows the Maxwell–Boltzmanndistribution. In that case,(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2=2λc/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg2kTm+v2turb/parenrightbiggln 2,(63)wherevturbis the most probable turbulent speed. The effect of turbulence on lineproﬁles is particularly important in the atmospheres of giant and supergiant stars. In,,Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 312>>>

fact, the existence of turbulence in the atmospheres of these stars was ﬁrst deducedfrom the inordinately large effect of Doppler broadening on their spectra.Other sources of Doppler broadening involve orderly, coherent mass motions,such as stellar rotation, pulsation, and mass loss. These phenomena can have a sub-stantial effect on the shape and width of the line proﬁles but cannot be combinedwith the results of Doppler broadening produced by random thermal motions obey-ing the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution.3.Pressure (and collisional) broadening.The orbitals of an atom can be perturbedin a collision with a neutral atom or by a close encounter involving the electric ﬁeldof an ion. The results of individual collisions are calledcollisional broadening, andthe statistical effects of the electric ﬁelds of large numbers of closely passing ionsis termedpressure broadening; however, in the following discussion, both of theseeffects will be collectively referred to as pressure broadening. In either case, the out-come depends on the average time between collisions or encounters with other atomsand ions.Calculating the precise width and shape of a pressure-broadened line is quite com-plicated. Atoms and ions of the same or different elements, as well as free electrons,are involved in these collisions and close encounters. The general shape of the line,however, is like that found for natural broadening, Eq. ( 61), and the line proﬁleshared by natural and pressure broadening is sometimes referred to as adampingproﬁle(also known as aLorentz proﬁle), so named because the shape is characteristicof the spectrum of radiation emitted by an electric charge undergoing damped simpleharmonic motion. The values of the full width at half-maximum for natural and pres-sure broadening usually prove to be comparable, although the pressure proﬁle can attimes be more than an order of magnitude wider.An estimate of pressure broadening due to collisions with atoms of a single ele-ment can be obtained by taking the value ofϵDeltaαt0in Eq. ( 61) to be the average timebetween collisions. This time is approximately equal to the mean free path betweencollisions divided by the average speed of the atoms. Using Eq. ( 12) for the meanfree path and for the speed, we ﬁnd thatϵDeltaαt0≈ℓv=1nσ√2kT/m,wheremis the mass of an atom,σis its collision cross section, andnis the numberdensity of the atoms. Thus the width of the spectral line due to pressure broadeningis on the order ofϵDeltaαλ=λ2c1πϵDeltaαt0≈λ2cnσπ/radicalbigg2kTm.(64)Note that the width of the line is proportional to the number densitynof the atoms.The physical reason for the Morgan–Keenan luminosity classes is now clear. Thenarrower lines observed for the more luminous giant and supergiant stars are due toStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 313>>>

the lower number densities in their extended atmospheres. Pressure broadening (withthe width of the line proﬁle proportional ton) broadens the lines formed in the denseratmospheres of main-sequence stars, where collisions occur more frequently.Example 5.3.Again, consider the hydrogen atoms in the Sun’s photosphere,where the temperature is 5777 K and the number density of hydrogen atoms is about1.5×1023m−3. Then the pressure broadening of the Hαline should be roughlyϵDeltaαλ≈2.36×10−5nm,which is comparable to the result for natural broadening found earlier. However, ifthe number density of the atoms in the atmosphere of a star is larger, the line widthwill be larger as well—more than an order of magnitude larger in some cases.The Voigt ProﬁleThe total line proﬁle, called aVoigt proﬁle, is due to the contributions of both the Dopplerand damping proﬁles. The wider line proﬁle for Doppler broadening dominates near thecentral wavelengthλ0. Farther fromλ0, however, the exponential decrease in the line depthfor Doppler broadening means that there is a transition to a damping proﬁle in the wings ata distance of about 1.8 times the Doppler value of(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2from the center of the line. Thusline proﬁles tend to haveDoppler coresanddamping wings.F i g u r e1 9s c h e m a t i c a l l yshows the Doppler and damping line proﬁles.1.00.50.0DampingDopplerF/H9261/Fc
/H92610WavelengthFIGURE 19Schematic damping and Doppler line proﬁles, scaled so they have the same equiv-alent width.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 314>>>

Example 5.4.
ofτλ=2/3. The forest of metallic lines (which are already weakened by the low metalabundance of the subdwarfs) appears even weaker against the brighter continuum. Thus,as a result of an under-abundance of metals, the spectrum of a subdwarf appears to be thatof a hotter and brighter star of earlier spectral type with less prominent metal linesThis is why it is more accurate to say that these stars are displaced to theleftofthe main sequence, toward higher temperatures, rather than one magnitude below the mainsequence.The simplest model used for calculating a line proﬁle assumes that the star’s photosphereacts as a source of blackbody radiation and that the atoms above the photosphere removephotons from this continuous spectrum to form absorption lines. Although thisSchuster–Schwarzschild modelis inconsistent with the idea that photons of wavelengthλoriginateat an optical depth ofτλ=2/3, it is still a useful approximation. In order to carry outthe calculation, values for the temperature, density, and composition must be adopted forthe region above the photosphere where the line is formed. The temperature and densitydetermine the importance of Doppler and pressure broadening and are also used in theBoltzmann and Saha equations.The calculation of a spectral line depends not only on the abundance of the elementforming the line but also on the quantum-mechanical details of how atoms absorb photons.LetNbe the number of atoms of a certain element lyingabove a unit areaof the photosphere.Nis acolumn densityand has units of m−2. (In other words, suppose a hollow tube witha cross section of 1 m2was stretched from the observer to the photosphere; the tube wouldthen containNatoms of the speciﬁed type.) To ﬁnd the number of absorbing atoms per unitarea,Na, that have electrons in the proper orbital for absorbing a photon at the wavelength ofthe spectral line, the temperature and density are used in the Boltzmann and Saha equationsto calculate the atomic states of excitation and ionization. Our goal is to determine the valueofNaby comparing the calculated and observed line proﬁles.This task is complicated by the fact that not all transitions between atomic orbitals areequally likely. For example, an electron initially in then=2 orbital of hydrogen is aboutﬁve times more likely to absorb an Hαphoton and make a transition to then=3 orbitalthan it is to absorb an Hβphoton and jump to then=4 orbital. The relative probabilitiesof an electron making a transition from the same initial orbital are given by thef-valuesoroscillator strengthsfor that orbital. For hydrogen,f=0.637 for the Hαtransition andf=0.119 for Hβ. The oscillator strengths may be calculated numerically or measured inthe laboratory, and they are deﬁned so that thef-values for transitions from the same initial.Stellar AtmospheresConsider the subdwarfs of luminosity class VI or “sd,” which reside to the left of the main sequence The spectra of these subdwarfs show that they are deﬁ-cient in the atoms of metals (elements heavier than helium). Because ionized met-als are an important source of electrons in stellar atmospheres, the electron number density is reduced. Fewer electrons with which ions may recombine means that a higher degree of ionization for all atoms can be achieved at the same temperature. Speciﬁcally, this reduces the number of H− ions in the atmosphere by ionizing them, thereby diluting this dominant source of continuum opacity. As a consequence of a low-er opacity, we can see longer distances into these stars before reaching an optical depth.


<<<PAGE 315>>>

10.50–0.02–0.03–0.01 0 0.01 0.02 0.03F/H9261/Fc
D/H9261 (nm)FIGURE 20V oigt proﬁles of the K line of Ca II. The shallowest line is produced byNa=3.4×1015ions m−2, and the ions are ten times more abundant for each successively broader line.(Adapted from Novotny,Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interiors, Oxford University Press,New York, 1973.)orbital add up to the number of electrons in the atom or ion. Thus the oscillator strength isthe effective number of electrons per atom participating in a transition, and so multiplyingthe number of absorbing atoms per unit area by thef-value gives the number of atomslying above each square meter of the photosphere that are actively involved in producinga given spectral line,fNa. Figure 20 shows the V oigt proﬁles of the K line of Ca II(λ=393.3 nm) for various values of the number of absorbing calcium ions.The Curve of GrowthThecurve of growthis an important tool that astronomers use to determine the value ofNaand thus the abundances of elements in stellar atmospheres. As seen in Fig. 20, theequivalent width,W, of the line varies withNa. A curve of growth, shown in Fig. 21,is a logarithmic graph of the equivalent width,W, as a function of the number of absorb-ing atoms,Na. To begin with, imagine that a speciﬁc element is not present in a stellaratmosphere. As some of that element is introduced, a weak absorption line appears thatis initially optically thin. If the number of the absorbing atoms is doubled, twice as muchlight is removed, and the equivalent width of the line is twice as great. SoW∝Na, and thecurve of growth is initially linear with lnNa. As the number of absorbing atoms continuesto increase, the center of the line becomes optically thick as the maximum amount of ﬂuxat the line’s center is absorbed.29With the addition of still more atoms, the line bottomsout and becomes saturated. The wings of the line, which are still optically thin, continue todeepen. This occurs with relatively little change in the line’s equivalent width and producesa ﬂattening on the curve of growth whereW∝√lnNa. Increasing the number of absorbingatoms still further increases the width of the pressure-broadening proﬁle [recall Eq. ( 64)],29The zero ﬂux at the center of the line shown in Fig. 20 is a peculiarity of the Schuster–Schwarzschild model.Actually, there is alwayssomeﬂux received at the central wavelength,λ0, even for very strong, optically thicklines. As a rule, the ﬂux at any wavelength cannot fall belowFλ=πSλ(τλ=2/3), the value of the source functionat an optical depth of 2/3.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 316>>>

Na(ln Na)1/2Na1/2
Log10 Na (m–2)Log10 W (nm)
–4–20
1416182022FIGURE 21The curve of growth for the K line of Ca II. AsNaincreases, the functional depen-dence of the equivalent width (W) changes. At various positions along the curve of growth,Wisproportional to the functional forms indicated. (Figure adapted from Aller,The Atmospheres of theSun and Stars, Ronald Press, New York, 1963.)enabling it to contribute to the wings of the line. The equivalent width grows more rapidly,although not as steeply as at ﬁrst, with approximatelyW∝√Nafor the total line proﬁle.Using the curve of growth and a measured equivalent width, we can obtain the number ofabsorbing atoms. The Boltzmann and Saha equations are then used to convert this valueinto the total number of atoms of that element lying above the photosphere.To reduce the errors involved in using a single spectral line, it is advantageous to locate,on a single curve of growth, the positions of the equivalent widths of several lines formed bytransitions from the same initial orbital.30This can be accomplished by plotting log10(W/λ)on the vertical axis and log10[fNa(λ/500 nm)]on the horizontal axis. This scaling resultsin a general curve of growth that can be used for several lines. Figure 22 shows a generalcurve of growth for the Sun. The use of such a curve of growth is best illustrated by anexample.Example 5.5.We will use Fig. 22 to ﬁnd the number of sodium atoms above eachsquare meter of the Sun’s photosphere from measurements of the 330.238-nm and 588.997-nm absorption lines of sodium (Table 1). Values ofT=5800 K andPe=1Nm−2wereused for the temperature and electron pressure, respectively, to construct this curve of growthand will be adopted in the calculations that follow.Both of these lines are produced when an electron makes an upward transition from theground state orbital of the neutral Na I atom, and so these lines have the same value ofNa,30This is just one of several possible ways of scaling the curve of growth. The assumptions used to obtain such ascaling are not valid for all broad lines (such as hydrogen) and may lead to inaccurate results.Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 317>>>

Log10 [f Na (/H9261/500 nm)]Log10 (W//H9261)
15 16 17 18 19 20–5.5–5.0–4.5–4.0–3.5
FIGURE 22A general curve of growth for the Sun. The arrows refer to the data used in Exam-ple 5.5. (Figure adapted fromAller,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Revised Edition, Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)TABLE 1Data for Solar Sodium Lines. (From Aller,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, RevisedEdition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)λ(nm)W(nm)flog10(W/λ)log10[f (λ/500 nm)]330.238 0.0088 0.0214−4.58−1.85588.997 0.0730 0.645−3.90−0.12the number of absorbing sodium atoms per unit area above the continuum-forming layer ofthe photosphere. This number can be found using the values of log10(W/λ)with the generalcurve of growth, Fig. 22, to obtain a value of log10[fNa(λ/500 nm)]for each line. Theresults arelog10/parenleftbiggfNaλ500 nm/parenrightbigg=17.20 for the 330.238 nm line=18.83 for the 588.997 nm line.To obtain the value of the number of absorbing atoms per unit area,Na, we use the measuredvalues of log10[f (λ/500 nm)]together withlog10Na=log10/parenleftbiggfNaλ500 nm/parenrightbigg−log10/parenleftbiggfλ500 nm/parenrightbigg,to ﬁndlog10Na=17.15−(−1.85)=19.00 for the 330.238 nm linecontinuedStellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 318>>>

andlog10Na=18.80−(−0.12)=18.92 for the 588.997 nm line.The average value of log10Nais 18.96; thus there are about 1019Na I atoms in the groundstate per square meter of the photosphere.e−(Eb−Ea)/kT=e−hc/λkT=5.45×10−4for the 330.238 nm line=1.48×10−2for the 588.997 nm line,so nearly all of the neutral Na I atoms are in the ground state.All that remains is to determine the total number of sodium atoms per unit area in allstages of ionization. If there areNI=1019neutral sodium atoms per square meter, then thenumber of singly ionized atoms,NII, comes from the Saha equation:NIINI=2kT ZIIPeZI/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χI/kT.UsingZI=2.4 andZII=1.0 for the partition functions andχI=5.14 eV for the ionizationenergy of neutral sodium leads toNII/NI=2.43×103. There are about 2430 singly ionizedsodium atoms for every neutral sodium atom in the Sun’s photosphere,31so the total numberof sodium atoms per unit area above the photosphere is aboutN=2430NI=2.43×1022m−2.The mass of a sodium atom is 3.82×10−26kg, so the mass of sodium atoms above eachsquare meter of the photosphere is roughly 9.3×10−4kg m−2. (A more detailed analysisleads to a slightly lower value of 5.4×10−4kg m−2.) For comparison, the mass of hydrogenatoms per unit area is about 11 kg m−2.Thus the number of absorbing atoms can be determined by comparing the equivalentwidths measured for different absorption lines produced by atoms or ions initially in the samestate (and so having the same column density in the stellar atmosphere) with a theoreticalcurve of growth. A curve-of-growth analysis can also be applied to lines originating fromatoms or ions in different initial states; then applying the Boltzmann equation to the relativenumbers of atoms and ions in these different states of excitation allows the excitationtemperature to be calculated. Similarly, it is possible to use the Saha equation to ﬁnd eitherthe electron pressure or the ionization temperature (if the other is known) in the atmospherefrom the relative numbers of atoms at various stages of ionization.31The ionization energy for Na II is 47.3 eV . This is sufﬁciently large to guarantee thatNIII≪NII, so higher statesof ionization can be neglected.Stellar AtmospheresTo ﬁnd the total number of sodium atoms, the Boltzmann and Saha equations must be used. The difference in energy between the ﬁnal and initial states [Eb − Ea] is just the  energy of the emitted photon. The exponential term in the Boltzmann equation is


<<<PAGE 319>>>

Computer Modeling of Stellar AtmospheresThe ultimate reﬁnement in the analysis of stellar atmospheres is the construction of amodelatmosphereon a computer. Each atmospheric layer is involved in the formation of lineproﬁles and contributes to the spectrum observed for the star. All of the ingredients ofthe preceding discussion, plus the equations of hydrostatic equilibrium, thermodynamics,statistical and quantum mechanics, and the transport of energy by radiation and convection,are combined with extensive libraries of opacities to calculate how the temperature, pressure,anddensityvarywithdepthbelowthesurface.Thesemodelsnotonlyprovidedetailsregarding line proﬁles; they also provide information about such fundamental propertiesas the effective temperature and surface gravity of the star. Only when the variables ofthe model have been “ﬁne-tuned” to obtain good agreement with the observations canastronomers ﬁnally claim to have decoded the vast amount of information carried in thelight from a star.This basic procedure has led astronomers to an understanding of the abundances of theelements in the Sun (see Table 2) and other stars. Hydrogen and helium are by far themost common elements, followed by oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen; for every 1012atomsof hydrogen, there are 1011atoms of helium and about 109atoms of oxygen. These ﬁguresare in very good agreement with abundances obtained from meteorites, giving astronomersTABLE 2The Most Abundant Elements in the Solar Photosphere. The relative abundance of anelement is given by log10(Nel/NH)+12. (Data from Grevesse and Sauval,Space Science Reviews,85, 161, 1998.)Atomic Log RelativeElement Number AbundanceHydrogen 1 12.00Helium 2 10.93±0.004Oxygen 8 8.83±0.06Carbon 6 8.52±0.06Neon 10 8.08±0.06Nitrogen 7 7.92±0.06Magnesium 12 7.58±0.05Silicon 14 7.55±0.05Iron26 7.50±0.05Sulfur 16 7.33±0.11Aluminum 13 6.47±0.07Argon 18 6.40±0.06Calcium 20 6.36±0.02Sodium 11 6.33±0.03Nickel 28 6.25±0.04Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 320>>>

conﬁdence in their results.32This knowledge of the basic ingredients of the universe providesinvaluable observational tests and constraints for some of the most fundamental theoriesin astronomy: the nucleosynthesis of light elements as a result of stellar evolution, the pro-duction of heavier elements by supernovae, and the Big Bang that produced the primordialhydrogen and helium that started it all.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralHearnshaw, J. B.,The Analysis of Starlight, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.Kaler, James B.,Stars and Their Spectra, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.TechnicalAller, Lawrence H.,The Atmospheres of the Sun and Stars, Ronald Press, New York, 1963.Aller, Lawrence H.,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,New York, 1991.Böhm-Vitense, Erika, “The Effective Temperature Scale,”Annual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics,19, 295, 1981.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Stellar Astrophysics, Volume 2: Stellar Atmospheres, Cambridge Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, 1989.Cox, Arthur N. (editor),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, AIP Press, NewYork, 2000.Gray, David F.,The Observation and Analysis of Stellar Photospheres, Third Edition, Cam-bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005.Grevesse, N., and Sauval, A. J., “Standard Solar Composition,”Space Science Reviews,85,161, 1998.Iglesias, Carlos J., and Rogers, Forrest J., “Updated OPAL Opacities,”The AstrophysicalJournal,464, 943, 1996.Mihalas, Dimitri,Stellar Atmospheres, Second Edition, W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1978.Mihalas, Dimitri, and Weibel-Mihalas, Barbara,Foundations of Radiation Hydrodynamics,Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola, NY , 1999.Novotny, Eva,Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interiors, Oxford University Press,New York, 1973.Rogers, Forrest, and Iglesias, Carlos, “The OPAL Opacity Code,”http://www-phys.llnl.gov/Research/OPAL/opal.html.Rybicki, George B., and Lightman,Alan P.,Radiative Processes in Astrophysics, John Wileyand Sons, New York, 1979.3A notable exception is lithium, whose solar relative abundance of 101.16is signiﬁcantly less than the value of103.31obtained from meteorites. The efﬁcient depletion of the Sun’s lithium, sparing only one of every 140 lithiumatoms, is probably due to its destruction by nuclear reaction processes when the lithium is transported into the hotinterior of the star by convection.2Stellar Atmospheres


<<<PAGE 321>>>



<<<PAGE 322>>>

PROBLEM SET1Evaluate the energy of the blackbody photons inside your eye. Compare this with the visibleenergy inside your eye while looking at a 100-W light bulb that is 1 m away. You can assume thatthe light bulb is 100% efﬁcient, although in reality it converts only a few percent of its 100 wattsinto visible photons. Take your eye to be a hollow sphere of radius 1.5 cm at a temperature of37◦C. The area of the eye’s pupil is about 0.1 cm2. Why is it dark when you close your eyes?2 (a)Find an expression fornλdλ, the number density of blackbody photons (the number ofblackbody photons per m3) with a wavelength betweenλandλ+dλ.(b)Find the total number of photons inside a kitchen oven set at 400◦F (477 K), assuming avolume of 0.5 m3.3 (a)Use the results of Problem 2 above to ﬁnd the total number density,n,of blackbodyphotonsofall wavelengths. Also show that the average energy per photon,u/n, isun=π4kT15(2.404)=2.70kT.(65)(b)Find the average energy per blackbody photon at the center of the Sun, whereT=1.57×107K, and in the solar photosphere, whereT=5777 K. Express your answers in units ofelectron volts (eV).4Derive Eq. (11) for the blackbody radiation pressure.5Consider a spherical blackbody of radiusRand temperatureT. By integrating Eq. ( 8) for theradiative ﬂux withIλ=Bλover all outward directions, derive the Stefan–Boltzmann equationin the form of(You will also have to integrate over allsurface area of the sphere.)6Using the root-mean-square speed,vrms, estimate the mean free path of the nitrogen moleculesin your classroom at room temperature (300 K). What is the average time between collisions?Take the radius of a nitrogen molecule to be 0.1 nm and the density of air to be 1.2k gm−3.A nitrogen molecule contains 28 nucleons (protons and neutrons).7Calculate how far you could see through Earth’s atmosphere if it had the opacity of the solarphotosphere. Use the value for the Sun’s opacity from Example 2.2 from  Stellar Atmospheresdensity of Earth’s atmosphere.Stellar Atmospheres
Prad=4π3c/integraldisplay∞0Bλ(T ) dλ=4σT43c=13aT4=13u.(11)Fλdλ=/integraldisplayIλdλcosθd ϵOmegaα=/integraldisplay2πφ=0/integraldisplayπθ=0Iλdλcosθsinθd θd φ .(8)L=4πR2σT4e.wavelengths and
and 1.2k gm−3for theFrom Chapter 9 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 20078In Example 2.3, from  Stellar Atmospheres  suppose that only twoavailable, made at anglesθ1andθ2.measurements ofthespeciﬁc intensity,I1andI2, areDetermine expressionsby Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.“”“”,

<<<PAGE 323>>>

(b)Calculate the average time it would take for the photon to escape from the Sun if this meanfree path remained constant for the photon’s journey to the surface. (Ignore the fact thatidentiﬁable photons are constantly destroyed and created through absorption, scattering,and emission.)12If the temperature of a star’s atmosphere isincreasingoutward, what type of spectral lines wouldyou expect to ﬁnd in the star’s spectrum at those wavelengths where the opacity is greatest?13Consider a large hollow spherical shell of hot gas surrounding a star. Under what circumstanceswould you see the shell as a glowingringaround the star? What can you say about the opticalthickness of the shell?14Verify that the emission coefﬁcient,jλ, has units of m s−3sr−1.15Derive Eq. (35) in Example 4.1, which shows how the intensityoffrom its initial intensityIλto the valueSλof the source function.10By measuring the slope of the curves in Fig. 10, verify that the decline of the curves after thepeak in the opacity follows a Kramers law,κ∝T−n, wheren≈3.5.11According to one model of the Sun, the central density is 1.53×105kg m−3and the Rosselandmean opacity at the center is 0.217 m2kg−1.(a)Calculate the mean free path of a photon at the center of the Sun.
456789Log10 T (K)Log10 /H9260 (m2 kg–1)
–3–2–1012–6–4–20246X = 0.7Z = 0.02
FIGURE 10Rosseland mean opacity for a composition that is 70% hydrogen, 28% helium, and2% metals by mass. The curves are labeled by the logarithmic value of the density (log10ρin kg m−3).(Data from Iglesias and Rogers,Ap. J.,464, 943, 1996.)
Iλ(s)=Iλ,0e−κλρs+Sλ(1−e−κλρs).(35)16The transfer equation, Eq. ( 34), is written in terms of the distance,s, measured along the pathof a light ray. In different coordinate systems, the transfer equation will look slightly different,and care must be taken to include all of the necessary terms.above Earth’s atmosphere and for the vertical optical depth ofthese two measurements.9Use the laws of conservation of relativistic energy and momentum to prove that an isolatedelectron cannot absorb a photon.for the intensityIλ,0of the lightthe atmosphere,τλ,0, in terms ofStellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 324>>>

22Consider a horizontal plane-parallel slab of gas of thicknessLthat is maintained at a constanttemperatureT. Assume that the gas has optical depthτλ,0, withτλ=0 at the top surface of17For a plane-parallel atmosphere, show that the Eddington approximation leads to expressionsfor the mean intensity, radiative ﬂux, and radiation pressure given by Eqs. (46–48).
18Using the Eddington approximation for a plane-parallel atmosphere, determine the values ofIinandIoutas functions of the vertical optical depth. At what depth is the radiation isotropic towithin 1%?19Using the results for the plane-parallel gray atmosphere in LTE, determine the ratio of theeffective temperature of a star to its temperature at the top of the atmosphere. IfTe=5777 K,what is the temperature at the top of the atmosphere?20Show that for a plane-parallel gray atmosphere in LTE, the (constant) value of the radiative ﬂuxis equal toπtimes the source function evaluated at an optical depth of 2/3:Frad=πS(τv=2/3).This function, called theEddington–Barbier relation, says that the radiative ﬂux received fromthe surface of the star is determined by the value of the source function atτv=2/3.21Consider a horizontal plane-parallel slab of gas of thicknessLthat is maintained at a constanttemperatureT. Assume that the gas has optical depthτλ,0, withτλ=0 at the top surface ofthe slab. Assume further that no radiation enters the gas from outside. Use the general solutionof the transfer equation ( 54) to show that when looking at the slab from above, you seeblackbody radiation ifτλ,0≫1 and emission lines (wherejλis large) ifτλ,0≪1. You mayassume that the source function,Sλ, does not vary with position inside the gas. You may alsoassume thermodynamic equilibrium whenτλ,0≫1.(a)Show that in a spherical coordinate system, with the center of the star at the origin, thetransfer equation has the form−cosθ′κλρdIλdr=Iλ−Sλ,whereθ′is the angle between the ray and the outward radial direction. Note that you cannotsimply replaceswithr!(b)Use this form of the transfer equation to derive Eq. (31).dPraddr=−κρcFrad.(31)⟨I⟩=12(Iout+Iin)(46)Frad=π( Iout−Iin)(47)Prad=2π3c(Iout+Iin)=4π3c⟨I⟩.(48)−1κλρdIλds=Iλ−Sλ.(34)
Iλ(0)=Iλ,0e−τλ,0−/integraldisplay0τλ,0Sλe−τλdτλ.(54)Stellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 325>>>

Iλ(0)=Iλ,0e−τλ,0−/integraldisplay0τλ,0Sλe−τλdτλ.(54)23Verify that if the source function isSλ=aλ+bλτλ,v, then the emergent intensity is given byEq. ( 57),I(λ0)=aλ+bλcosθ.24Suppose that the shape of a spectral line is ﬁt with one-half of an ellipse, such that the semimajoraxisais equal to the maximum depth of the line (letFλ=0) and the minor axis 2bis equal tothe maximum width of the line (where it joins the continuum). What is the equivalent width ofthis line?Hint:You may ﬁnd the following useful:25Derive Eq. ( 60) for the uncertainty in the wavelength of a spectral line due to Heisenberg’suncertainty principle.26The two solar absorption lines given in the Table below are produced when an electron makes an
(a)Using the general curve of growth for the Sun, Fig. 22, repeat the procedure of Exam-ple 5.5 of Stellar Atmospheres  to ﬁndNa,t h en u m b e ro fa b s o r b i n gs o d i u ma t o m sp e ru n i tarea of the photosphere.Iλ(0)=aλ+bλcosθ,(57)
ϵDeltaαλ≈λ22πc/parenleftbigg1ϵDeltaαti+1ϵDeltaαtf/parenrightbigg,(60)two cases correspond to the spectral lines formed in the Sun’s photosphere and chromosphere,respectively.)You may assume that the source function,Sλ, does not vary withpositioninsidethegas.Youmayalsoassumethermodynamicequilibriumwhenτλ,0≫1.
A=πab.(4)
upward transition from the ground state orbital of the neutral Na I atom.see absorption lines superimposed on the spectrum of the incident radiation ifIλ,0>Sλandemission lines superimposed on the spectrum of the incident radiation ifIλ,0<Sλ. (These latter
(b)the slab. Assume further that incident radiation of intensityIλ,0enters the bottom of the slabfrom outside. Use the general solution of the transfer equation ( 54) to show that when lookingat the slab from above, you see blackbody radiation ifτλ,0≫1. Ifτλ,0≪1, show that you
“”TABLE 3Data for Solar Sodium Lines for Problem 26. (Data from Aller,Atoms, Stars, andNebulae, Revised Edition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)λ(nm)W(nm)f330.298 0.0067 0.0049589.594 0.0560 0.325Stellar Atmospheres: Problem Set
Combine your results with those of Example 5.5 of Stellar Atmospheres to ﬁnd an aver-age value of Na . Use this value to plot the positions of the four sodium absorption lines on Fig. 22, and conﬁrm that they do all lie on the curve of growth.“”

<<<PAGE 326>>>

Log10 [f Na (/H9261/500 nm)]Log10 (W//H9261)
15 16 17 18 19 20–5.5–5.0–4.5–4.0–3.5
FIGURE 22A general curve of growth for the Sun. The arrows refer to the data used in Exam-ple 5.5. (Figure adapted fromAller,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Revised Edition, Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)27Pressure broadening (due to the presence of the electric ﬁelds of nearby ions) is unusuallyeffective for the spectral lines of hydrogen. Using the general curve of growth for the Sun withthese broad hydrogen absorption lines will result in an overestimate of the amount of hydrogenpresent. The following calculation nevertheless demonstrates just how abundant hydrogen is inthe Sun.The two solar absorption lines given in Table 4 belong to the Paschen series, producedwhen an electron makes an upward transition from then=3 orbital of the hydrogen atom.(a)Using the general curve of growth for the Sun, Fig. 22, repeat the procedure of Exam-(those with electrons initially in then=3 orbital).(b)Use the Boltzmann and Saha equations to calculate the total number of hydrogen atomsabove each square meter of the Sun’s photosphere.ple 5.5 of Stellar Atmospheres  to ﬁndNa,t h en u m b e ro fa b s o r b i n g a t o m sp e rhydrogenunit area of the photosphere.TABLE 4Data for Solar Hydrogen Lines for Problem 9.27. (Data from Aller,Atoms, Stars, andNebulae, Revised Edition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)λ(nm)W(nm)f1093.8 (Paγ)0.22 0.05541004.9 (Paδ)0.16 0.0269“”Stellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 327>>>

Log10 [f Na (/H9261/500 nm)]Log10 (W//H9261)
15 16 17 18 19 20–5.5–5.0–4.5–4.0–3.5
FIGURE 22A general curve of growth for the Sun. The arrows refer to the data used in Exam-ple 5.5. (Figure adapted fromAller,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Revised Edition, Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, MA, 1971.)COMPUTER PROBLEMS28In this problem, you will use the values of the density and opacity at various points near thesurface of the star to calculate the optical depth of these points. The data in Table 5 wereobtained from the stellar model building programStatStar,Appendix: StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code. The ﬁrst point listed is at the surface of the(a)Find the optical depth at each point by numerically integrating Eq. ( 15). Use a simpletrapezoidal rule such thatdτ=−κρ dsbecomesτi+1−τi=−/parenleftbiggκiρi+κi+1ρi+12/parenrightbigg(ri+1−ri),whereiandi+1 designate adjacent zones in the model. Note that becausesis measuredalong the path traveled by the photons,ds=dr.(b)Make a graph of the temperature (vertical axis) vs. the optical depth (horizontal axis).(c)For each value of the optical depth, use Eq. ( 53) to calculate the temperature for a plane-parallel gray atmosphere in LTE. Plot these values ofTon the same graph.stellar model.dτλ=−κλρd s ,(15)
T4=34T4e/parenleftbiggτv+23/parenrightbigg.(53)described in Stellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 328>>>

TABLE 5A1M⊙StatStarModel for Problem 28.Te=5504 K.ir(m)T(K)ρ/parenleftbigkg m−3/parenrightbigκ/parenleftbigm2kg−1/parenrightbig0 7.100764E+08 0.000000E+00 0.000000E+00 0.000000E+001 7.093244E+08 3.379636E+03 2.163524E−08 2.480119E+012 7.092541E+08 3.573309E+03 3.028525E−08 2.672381E+013 7.091783E+08 3.826212E+03 4.206871E−08 2.737703E+014 7.090959E+08 4.133144E+03 5.814973E−08 2.708765E+015 7.090062E+08 4.488020E+03 8.015188E−08 2.625565E+016 7.089085E+08 4.887027E+03 1.103146E−07 2.517004E+017 7.088019E+08 5.329075E+03 1.517126E−07 2.399474E+018 7.086856E+08 5.815187E+03 2.085648E−07 2.281158E+019 7.085588E+08 6.347784E+03 2.866621E−07 2.165611E+0110 7.084205E+08 6.930293E+03 3.939580E−07 2.054686E+0111 7.082697E+08 7.566856E+03 5.413734E−07 1.948823E+0112 7.081052E+08 8.262201E+03 7.439096E−07 1.848131E+0113 7.079259E+08 9.021603E+03 1.022171E−06 1.752513E+0114 7.077303E+08 9.850881E+03 1.404459E−06 1.661785E+0115 7.075169E+08 1.075642E+04 1.929644E−06 1.575731E+0116 7.072843E+08 1.174520E+04 2.651111E−06 1.494128E+0117 7.070306E+08 1.282486E+04 3.642174E−06 1.416754E+0118 7.067540E+08 1.400375E+04 5.003513E−06 1.343396E+0119 7.064524E+08 1.529096E+04 6.873380E−06 1.273849E+0120 7.061235E+08 1.669643E+04 9.441600E−06 1.207917E+0121 7.057649E+08 1.823102E+04 1.296880E−05 1.145414E+0122 7.053741E+08 1.990656E+04 1.781279E−05 1.086165E+0123 7.049480E+08 2.173599E+04 2.446473E−05 1.030001E+0124 7.044836E+08 2.373341E+04 3.359882E−05 9.767631E+0025 7.039774E+08 2.591421E+04 4.614038E−05 9.263005E+0026 7.034259E+08 2.829519E+04 6.335925E−05 8.784696E+0027 7.028250E+08 3.089468E+04 8.699788E−05 8.331344E+0028 7.021704E+08 3.373266E+04 1.194469E−04 7.901659E+0029 7.014574E+08 3.683096E+04 1.639859E−04 7.494416E+0030 7.006810E+08 4.021337E+04 2.251132E−04 7.108452E+0031 6.998356E+08 4.390583E+04 3.089976E−04 6.742665E+0032 6.989155E+08 4.793666E+04 4.240980E−04 6.396010E+0033 6.979141E+08 5.233670E+04 5.820105E−04 6.067495E+0034 6.968247E+08 5.713961E+04 7.986295E−04 5.756179E+0035 6.956399E+08 6.238205E+04 1.095736E−03 5.461170E+0036 6.943518E+08 6.810401E+04 1.503169E−03 5.181621E+0037 6.929517E+08 7.434904E+04 2.061803E−03 4.916730E+0038 6.914307E+08 8.116461E+04 2.827602E−03 4.665735E+0039 6.897790E+08 8.860239E+04 3.877181E−03 4.427914E+0040 6.879861E+08 9.671869E+04 5.315384E−03 4.202584E+0041 6.860411E+08 1.055748E+05 7.285639E−03 3.989094E+00(d)TheStatStarprogram utilizes a simplifying assumption that the surface temperature iszero (see Appendix:StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code).Comment on the validity of thesurface value ofTthat you found.Stellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 329>>>

wherex=0.648 andy=0.207 for solar-type stars (other coefﬁcients are provided for othertypes of stars).(a)Plot Van Hamme’s formula for limb darkening over the range 0≤θ≤90◦. (Be sure tocorrectly treat the singularity in the function atθ=90◦.)(b)Plot Eq. (58), which is based on the Eddington approximation, on the same graph.(c)Where is the difference between the two formulae the greatest?(d)Compare the two curves to the observational data shown in Fig. 17. Which curve bestrepresents the solar data?I (θ)I (θ=0)=1−x(1−cosθ)−ycosθlog10(cosθ),
I (θ)I (θ=0)=a+bcosθa+b=25+35cosθ.(58)
0.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0I(/H9258)/I(/H9258 = 0)
Angle /H9258 (deg)FIGURE 17A theoretical Eddington approximation of solar limb darkening for light integratedover all wavelengths. The dots are observational data for the Sun. Although a good ﬁt, the Eddingtonapproximation is not perfect, which implies that a more detailed model must be developed; see, forexample, Problem 29.29The binary star codeTwoStars, discussed Appendix: ,  A Binary  empirical limb darkening formula developed by W. Van Hamme1096, 1993):Star Codemakesuse of an(Astrono-micalJournal,106,TwoStarsinStellar Atmospheres: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 330>>>

The Sun1The Solar Interior2The Solar Atmosphere3The Solar Cycle1THE SOLAR INTERIORtheoretical foundations of stellar structhe star as being composed of an atmosphere and an interior. The distinctionbetween the two regions is fairly nebulous. Loosely, the atmosphere is considered to be thatregion where the optical depth is less than unity and the simple approximation of photonsDue to its proximity to us, the star for which we have the greatest amount of observationaldata is our Sun. From ground-based and space-based observatories, we are able to measurewith high precision the composition of our Sun’s surface; its luminosity, effective temper-ature, radius, magnetic ﬁelds, and rotation rates; the oscillation frequencies (vibrations)throughout its interior; and the rate at which neutrinos are produced via nuclear reactionsin its core. This tremendous wealth of information provides us with rigorous tests of ourunderstanding of the physical processes operating within stellar atmospheres and interiors.The Evolutionary History of the SunBased on its observed luminosity and effective temperature, our Sun is classiﬁed as atypical main-sequence star of spectral class G2 with a surface composition ofX=0.74,Y=0.24, andZ=0.02 (the mass fractions of hydrogen, helium, and metals, respectively).To understand how it has evolved to this point, recall that according to the V ogt–Russelltheorem the mass and composition of a star dictate its internal structure. Our Sun hasbeen converting hydrogen to helium via the pp chain during most of its lifetime, therebychanging its composition and its structure. By comparing the results of radioactive datingtests of Moon rocks and meteorites with stellar evolution calculations and the present-dayIn investi ating  gture, we must treat    
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 1s ,diffusing through optically thick material is not justiﬁed. Instead, atomic line absorption and emission must be considered in detail in the stellar atmosphere. On the other hand, nu-clear reaction processes deep in the stellar interior plays a crucial role in the star’s energy output and its inevitable evolution.


<<<PAGE 331>>>

LRTe
0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.31.4Radius (R/R  ) and luminosity (L/L  )
Effective temperature (K)012345678Age (109 yr)Present age58005780576057405720570056805660564056205600FIGURE 1The evolution of the Sun on the main sequence. As a result of changes in its internalcomposition, the Sun has become larger and brighter. The solid line indicates its luminosity, the dashedline its radius, and the dash-dot line its effective temperature. The luminosity and radius curves arerelative to present-day values. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)observable Sun, the current age of the Sun is determined to be approximately 4.57×109yr.Furthermore, as depicted in Fig. 1, since becoming a main-sequence star, the Sun’sluminosity has increased nearly 48% (from 0.677 L⊙) while its radius has increased 15%from an initial value of 0.869 R⊙. The Sun’s effective temperature has also increased from5620 K to its present-day value of 5777 KYou may be wondering what impact this evolution has had on Earth. Interestingly, froma theoretical standpoint it is not at all clear how this change in solar energy output alteredour planet during its history, primarily because of uncertainties in the behavior of theterrestrial environment. Understanding the complex interaction between the Sun and Earthinvolves the detailed calculation of convection in Earth’s atmosphere, as well as the effectsof the atmosphere’s time-varying composition and the nature of the continually changingreﬂectivity, oralbedo, of Earth’s surface.The Present-Day Interior Structure of the SunConsistent with the current age of the Sun, asolar modelmay be constructed for thepresent-day Sun using the physical principles discussed in preceding chapters. Table 1gives the values of the central temperature, pressure, density, and composition for one suchRadioactive dating of the oldest known objects in the Solar System, calcium-aluminum-rich inclusions (CAIs)in meteorites, leads to a determination of the age of the Solar System of 4.5672±0.0006 Gyr.The data quoted here and in the following discussion are from the solar model of Bahcall, Pinsonneault, andBasu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.Earth’s albedo, the ratio of reﬂected to incident sunlight, is affected by the amount of surface water and ice.12
3
123.The Sun


<<<PAGE 332>>>

TABLE 1Central Conditions in the Sun. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)Temperature 1.570×107KPressure 2.342×1016Nm−2Density 1.527×105kg m−3X0.3397Y0.6405Cool, darksinking gasHot, brightrising gasConvectionRadiationNuclearreactions0.3 R0.714 R1.0 R
FIGURE 2A schematic diagram of the Sun’s interior.solar model, and a schematic diagram of the model is shown in Fig. 2. According tothe evolutionary sequence leading to this model, during its lifetime the mass fraction ofhydrogen (X) in the Sun’s center has decreased from its initial value of 0.71 to 0.34, whilethe central mass fraction of helium (Y) has increased from 0.27 to 0.64. In addition, dueto diffusive settling of elements heavier than hydrogen, the mass fraction of hydrogen nearthe surface has increased by approximately 0.03, while the mass fraction of helium hasdecreased by 0.03.Because of the Sun’s past evolution, its composition is no longer homogeneous butinstead shows the inﬂuence of ongoing nucleosynthesis, surface convection, and elementaldiffusion (settling of heavier elements). The composition structure of the Sun is shown inFig. 3 for11H,32He, and42He. Since the Sun’s primary energy production mechanism isthe pp chain,32He is an intermediate species in the reaction sequence. During the conversionofhydrogentohelium,32Heisproducedandthendestroyedagain.Atthetop of the hydrogen-burning region where the temperature is lower,32He is relatively moreabundant because it is produced more easily than it is destroyed. At greater depths, thehigher temperatures allow the32He–32He interaction to proceed more rapidly, and the32HeRecall that much higher temperatures are required for helium–helium interactions than proton–proton interactions.44The Sun


<<<PAGE 333>>>

11H
42He32He (¥100)0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Radius (r/R  )0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Mass fractions
FIGURE 3The abundances of11H,32He, and42He as a function of radius for the Sun. Note thatthe abundance of32He is multiplied by a factor of 100. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)abundance again decreases (the temperature proﬁle of the Sun is shown in Fig. 4). Theslight ramp in the11H and42He curves near 0.7R⊙reﬂects evolutionary changes in theposition of the base of the surface convection zone, combined with the effects of elementaldiffusion. Within the convection zone, turbulence results in essentially complete mixing anda homogeneous composition. The base of the present-day convection zone is at 0.714 R⊙.The largest contribution to the energy production in the Sun occurs at approximatelyone-tenth of the solar radius, as can be seen in the Sun’s interior luminosity proﬁle and thecurve of its derivative with respect to radius (Fig. 5). If this result seems unexpected,consider that the mass conservation equation,dMrdr=4πr2ρ,givesdMr=4πr2ρd r=ρd V,(1)indicating that the amount of mass within a certain radius interval increases with radiussimply because the volume of a spherical shell,dV=4πr2dr, increases withrfor a ﬁxedchoice ofdr. Of course, the mass contained in the shell also depends on the density ofthe gas. Consequently, even if the amount of energy liberated per kilogram of material (ϵ)decreases steadily from the center outward, the largest contribution to the total luminositywill occur, not at the center, but in a shell that contains a signiﬁcant amount of mass. Inthe case of the middle-aged Sun, the decrease in the amount of available hydrogen fuel atits center will also inﬂuence the location of the peak in the energy production region.The Sun


<<<PAGE 334>>>

0246810121416Temperature (106 K)
Pressure (1016 N m–2)TP0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Radius (r/R  )0.00.51.01.52.02.5
FIGURE 4The temperature and pressure proﬁles in the solar interior. (Data from Bahcall,Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Radius (r/R  )Luminosity (Lr/L  )
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Lr
dLr/dr012345dLr/dr (1018 W m–1)
FIGURE 5The interior luminosity proﬁle of the Sun and the derivative of the interior luminosityas a function of radius. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)Figures4and6showjusthowrapidlythepressureanddensitychangewithradiusin the Sun. These variations are forced on the solar structure by the condition of hydrostaticequilibrium,theidealgaslaw,andthecompositionstructureofthestar.Ofcourse,boundaryconditionsappliedtothestellarstructureequationsrequirethatbothρandPbecome negligible at the surface.The Sun


<<<PAGE 335>>>

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6Density (105 kg m–3)/H9267Mr
0.00.20.40.60.81.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Radius (r/R  )
Interior mass (Mr/M  )
FIGURE 6The density proﬁle and the interior mass of the Sun as a function of radius. (Datafrom Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)Figure 6 also shows the interior mass (Mr) as a function of radius. Notice that 90%of the mass of the star is located within roughly one-half of its radius. This should not comeas a complete surprise since the density increases signiﬁcantly as the center of the Sun isapproached. Integration of the density function over the volume of the star from the centeroutward (i.e., the integration of Eq. 1) yields the interior mass function.The question remains as to how the energy generated in the interior is transported out-ward.stellarinteriors,namelythatthetemperaturegradientbecomesuperadiabatic,/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledTdr/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleact>/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledTdr/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglead,where the “act” and “ad” subscripts designate the actual and adiabatic temperature gradients,respectively. Under the simplifying assumption of an ideal monatomic gas, this conditionbecomes,dlnPdlnT<2.5.dlnP/dlnTis plotted versusr/R⊙in Fig. 7. As can be seen, the Sun is purelyradiative belowr/R⊙=0.714 and becomes convective above that point. Physically thisoccurs because the opacity in the outer portion of the Sun becomes large enough to inhibit thetransport of energy by radiation; recall that the radiative temperature gradient is proportionaltotheopacity.Whenthetemperaturegradientbecomestoolarge,convectionbecomes the more efﬁcient means of energy transport. Throughout most of the regionof convective energy transport,dlnP/dlnT≃2.5, which is characteristic of the nearlyadiabatic temperature gradient of most convection zones. The rapid rise indlnP/dlnTAcriterionfortheonsetofconvectioninThe Sun


<<<PAGE 336>>>

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Radius (r/R  )2.03.04.05.06.0d lnP/d lnTRadiation zoneConvection zone
FIGURE 7The convection conditiondlnP/dlnTplotted versusr/R⊙. The dashed horizontalline represents the boundary between adiabatic convection and radiation for an ideal monatomic gas.The onset of convection does not exactly agree with the ideal adiabatic case because of the incorpora-tion of a sophisticated equation of state and a more detailed treatment of convection physics. The rapidrise indlnP/dlnTnear the surface is associated with the highly superadiabatic nature of convectionin that region (i.e., the adiabatic approximation that convection occurs whendlnP/dlnT<2.5i sinvalid near the surface of the Sun). [dlnP/dlnTwas computed using data from Bahcall, Pinson-neault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001. The data for the zones above 0.95 R⊙are from Cox, ArthurN. (editor),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, AIP Press, New York, 2000.]above 0.95 R⊙is due to the signiﬁcant departure of the actual temperature gradient froman adiabatic one. In this case convection must be described by a more detailed treatment,such as the mixing-length theory.Notice thatdlnP/dlnTalso decreases to almost 2.5 at the center of the Sun. Althoughthe Sun remains purely radiative in the center, the large amount of energy that must be trans-ported outward pushes the temperature gradient in the direction of becoming superadiabatic.tive in their centers because of the stronger temperature dependence of the CNO cycle ascompared to the pp chain.Clearly, an enormous amount of information is available regarding the solar interior,as derived from the direct and careful application of the stellar structure equations andthe fundamental physical principles.A very completeandreasonablemodeloftheSuncanbeproducedthatisconsistentwithevolutionarytimescalesandﬁtstheglobalcharacteristicsofthestar,speciﬁcallyitsmass,luminosity,radius,effectivetemperature,andsurfacecomposition;precisemeasurementsofoscillationfrequencies;and,aswewillseeinthenextsection,itsobservedsurfaceconvection zone.One aspect of the observed Sun that is not yet fully consistent with the current solarmodel is the abundance of lithium. The observed lithium abundance at the Sun’s surfaceStars only slightly more massive than the Sun are convec-The Sun


<<<PAGE 337>>>

is actually somewhat less than expected and may imply some need for adjustments in themodel through reﬁned treatments of convection, rotation, and/or mass loss.The Solar Neutrino Problem: A Detective Story SolvedAnother signiﬁcant discrepancy had existed between observations and the solar modelfor several decades, the resolution of which led to an important new understanding offundamental physics. Thesolar neutrino problemwas ﬁrst noticed when Raymond Davisbegan measuring the neutrino ﬂux from the Sun in 1970 using a detector located almostone mile below ground in the Homestake Gold Mine in Lead, South Dakota (Fig. 8).Because of the very low cross section of neutrino interactions with other matter, neutrinoscan easily travel completely through Earth while other particles originating from spacecannot.As a result, the underground detector was assured of measuring what it was designedto measure—neutrinos created eight minutes earlier in the solar core.The Davis neutrino detector contained 615,000 kg of cleaning ﬂuid, C2Cl4(tetra-chlorethylene) in a volume of 377,000 liters (100,000 gallons). One isotope of chlorine(3717Cl) is capable of interacting with neutrinos of sufﬁcient energy to produce a radioactiveisotope of argon that has a half-life of 35 days,3717Cl+νe/harpoonleftright3718Ar+e−.The threshold energy for this reaction, 0.814 MeV , is less than the energies of the neutrinosproduced in every step of the pp chain except the crucial ﬁrst one,11H+11H→21H+e++νe.
FIGURE 8Raymond Davis’s solar neutrino detector. The tank was located 1478 m (4850 ft)below ground in the Homestake Gold Mine in Lead, South Dakota, and was ﬁlled with 615,000 kg ofC2Cl4in a volume of 377,000 liters (100,000 gallons). (Courtesy of Brookhaven National Laboratory.)The Sun


<<<PAGE 338>>>

85B→84Be+e++νe.Unfortunately, this reaction is very rare, producing only for one pp chain termination in5000.John Bahcall (1935–2005), a colleague of Davis, was able to compute the anticipatedrate at which solar neutrinos should have been detected by the chlorine experiment (thecapture rate). The complex calculation was based on the rate of neutrino production by85Bdecay in the PP III chain as computed from the solar model, combined with the probabilitythat a solar neutrino will interact with a chlorine atom in the Homestake experiment.Once every few months Davis and his collaborators carefully purged the accumulatedargon from the tank and determined the number of argon atoms produced. The capturerate was measured in terms of thesolar neutrino unit, or SNU (1 SNU≡10−36reactionsper target atom per second). With approximately 2.2×1030atoms of3717Cl atoms in thetank, if only one argon atom was produced each day, this rate would have corresponded to5.35 SNU.Results of 108 extractions from the Davis experiment between 1970 and 1994 are shownin Fig. 9. Bahcall predicted that the experiment should have yielded a capture rate of7.9 SNU while the actual data gave an average of 2.56±0.16 SNU; only one argon atomwas produced every two days in that 100,000 gallon tank!Other neutrino experiments, fundamentally different from the3717Cl experiment, haveconﬁrmed the discrepancy between the prediction of the solar model and observed neu-trino counts. Japan’s underground Super-Kamiokande observatory (Fig. 10) detects the
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4
01234567837Ar production rate (Atoms/day)1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
SNUAvg.rate
YearFIGURE 9Results of the Davis solar neutrino experiment from 1970 to 1994. The uncertaintiesin the experimental data are shown by vertical error bars associated with each run. The predictedsolar neutrino capture rate for the3717Cl detector was 7.9 SNU based on solar models without neutrinooscillations. (Figure adapted from Cleveland, et al.,Ap. J.,496, 505, 1998.)The SunHowever,thereactionthataccountedfor77%oftheneutrinosdetectedintheDavisexperimentisthedecayof85B in the PP IIIchain,


<<<PAGE 339>>>

FIGURE 10Super-Kamiokande neutrino observatory in Japan contains 4.5×107kg (50,000tons) of pure water. As neutrinos pass through the water, they scatter electrons at speeds greaterthan the speed of light through water. The pale blue Cerenkov light that is produced is detected bythe 11,200 inwardly-directed photomultiplier tubes, signaling the presence of the passing neutrino.[Photo courtesy of Kamioka Observatory, ICRR (Institute for Cosmic Ray Research), The Universityof Tokyo.]Cerenkov lightthat is produced when neutrinos scatter electrons, causing the electronsto move at speeds greater than the speed of light in water. The number of neutrinos de-tected by Super-Kamiokande (and Kamiokande II before it) are less than half the numberexpected from solar models. The Soviet–American Gallium Experiment (SAGE), locatedat the Baksan Neutrino Laboratory (inside a mountain in the Caucasus), and GALLEX (atthe Gran Sasso underground laboratory in Italy) measure the low-energy pp chain neutrinosthat dominate the Sun’s neutrino ﬂux. SAGE and GALLEX make their detections via areaction that converts gallium into germanium,νe+7131Ga→7132Ge+e−.After considering the expected number of background counts from sources other than theSun, both experiments also conﬁrm the deﬁcit of neutrinos ﬁrst established by the Davisdetector.The search for a theoretical resolution to the solar neutrino problem considered twogeneral approaches: Either some fundamental physical process operating in the solar modelis incorrect, or something happens to the neutrinos on their way from the Sun’s core to Earth.The ﬁrst of these possibilities inspired an intense reexamination of a host of features of theNote that thisdoes notviolate Einstein’s special theory of relativity since the special theory applies to the speedof lightin a vacuum. The speed of light in any other medium is always less than the speed of light in a vacuum.5
5The Sun


<<<PAGE 340>>>

solar model, including nuclear reaction rates, the opacity of stellar material, the evolutionof the Sun up to its present state, variations in the composition of the solar interior, andseveral exotic suggestions (includingdark matterin the Sun’s core). However, none of thesesuggested solutions was able to satisfy all of the observational constraints simultaneously,particularly neutrino counts and solar oscillation frequencies.An elegant solution to the solar neutrino problem proposed that the solar model is essen-tially correct but that the neutrinos produced in the Sun’s core actually change before theyreach Earth. TheMikheyev–Smirnov–Wolfenstein(orMSW)effectinvolves the trans-formation of neutrinos from one type to another. This idea is an extension of theelectroweaktheoryof particle physics that combines the electromagnetic theory with the theory of weakinteractions governing some types of radioactive decay. The neutrinos produced in the var-ious branches of the pp chain are all electron neutrinos (νe); however, two otherﬂavorsofneutrinos also exist—the muon neutrino (νµ) and the tau neutrino (ντ). The MSW effectsuggests that neutrinos oscillate among ﬂavors, being electron neutrinos, muon neutrinos,and/or tau neutrinos during their passage through the Sun. The neutrino oscillations arecaused by interactions with electrons as the neutrinos travel toward the surface. Becausethe chlorine (Davis), water (Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande), and gallium detectors(SAGE and GALLEX) have different threshold energies and they are sensitive only to theelectron neutrino, their results were determined to be consistent with the MSW theory.One testable consequence of the MSW effect is that if neutrinos oscillate between ﬂavors,they must necessarily have mass. This is because a change of neutrino ﬂavor can occur onlybetween neutrinos having different masses. The required mass difference needed for theMSW solution to the solar neutrino problem is much less than the current experimentallyestablished upper limit on the mass of the electron neutrino of approximately 2.2 eV . Eventhough the standard electroweak theory does not predict masses for the neutrinos, manyreasonable extensions of this theory do allow for masses in the right range. These extendedtheories, known asgrand uniﬁed theories(GUTs), are currently the focus of intenseresearch by high-energy (particle) physicists.Conﬁrmation of neutrino oscillations came in 1998 when Super-Kamiokande was usedto detectatmospheric neutrinosthat are produced when high-energy cosmic rays (chargedparticles from space) collide with Earth’s upper atmosphere. Cosmic rays are capable ofcreating both electron and muon neutrinos, but not tau neutrinos. The Super-Kamiokandegroup was able to determine that the number of muon neutrinos traveling upward afterhaving traversed the diameter of Earth was signiﬁcantly reduced relative to the numbertraveling downward. The difference in numbers is in excellent agreement with the theoryof neutrino mixing (neutrinos oscillating among the three ﬂavors), demonstrating for theﬁrst time that neutrinos are not massless particles.Thus, after several decades of study, the solar neutrino problem was resolved by aprofound advance in our understanding of particle physics and the nature of the fundamentalforces.As a result of their contributions to this important scientiﬁc detective story, RaymondDavis and Masatoshi Koshiba, director of the Kamiokande research group that conﬁrmedthe neutrino detections, were two of the recipients of the 2002 Nobel Prize in physics.The third recipient of the 2002 Nobel Prize, Riccardo Giacconi, used a rocket experiment to detect X-rays inspace. Giacconi later designed the Uhuru and Einstein X-ray observatories and also served as the ﬁrst director ofthe Space Telescope Science Institute.66The Sun


<<<PAGE 341>>>

In 2004, John Bahcall wrote of the efforts to solve the solar neutrino problem:I am astonished when I look back on what has been accomplished in the ﬁeldof solar neutrino research over the past four decades. Working together, aninternational community of thousands of physicists, chemists, astronomers,and engineers has shown that counting radioactive atoms in a swimming poolfull of cleaning ﬂuid in a deep mine on Earth can tell us important things aboutthe center of the Sun and about the properties of exotic fundamental particlescalled neutrinos. If I had not lived through the solar neutrino saga, I would nothave believed it was possible.2THE SOLAR ATMOSPHEREWhen we observe the Sun visually, it appears as though there is a very abrupt and clearedge to this hot, gaseous ball (Fig. 11). Of course, an actual “surface” does not exist;rather, what we are seeing is a region where the solar atmosphere isoptically thinandphotons originating from that level travel unimpeded through space. Even this region is notclearly deﬁned, however, since some photons can always escape when the optical depth issomewhat greater than unity while others may be absorbed when the optical depth is lessthan unity, but the odds of a photon leaving the solar atmosphere diminish rapidly as theoptical depth increases. Consequently, the Sun’s atmosphere changes from being opticallythin to optically thick in only about 600 km. This relatively small distance (about 0.09% ofthe Sun’s radius) is what gives the “edge” of the Sun its sharp appearance.The PhotosphereThe region where the observed optical photons originate is known as the solarphotosphere.Deﬁning the base of the photosphere is somewhat arbitrary since some photons can originatefrom an optical depth signiﬁcantly greater than unity. For instance, if 1% of the photonsoriginating from a layer reach us, the optical depth would be approximately 4.5 at that level(e−4.5∼0.01); if 0.1% reach us, the optical depth would be about 6.9. Of course, since theopacity and optical depth are wavelength dependent, the base of the photosphere is alsowavelength dependent if it is deﬁned in terms of the optical depth. Given the arbitrarinessof the deﬁnition, the base of the photosphere for the Sun is sometimes simply deﬁned to be100 km below the level where the optical depth at a wavelength of 500 nm is unity. At thisdepth,τ500≃23.6 and the temperature is approximately 9400 K.Moving upward through the solar photosphere, the temperature of the gas decreasesfrom its base value to a minimum of 4400 K about 525 km above theτ500=1 level. It isthis temperature minimum that deﬁnes the top of the photosphere. Above this point, thetemperature begins to rise again. The approximate thicknesses of the various componentsof the Sun’s atmosphere to be discussed in this section are depicted in Fig. 12.n average the solar ﬂux is emitted from an optical depthofτ=2/3 (the Eddington approximation). This leads to the identiﬁcation of the effectivetemperature with the temperature of the gas at this depth, orTe=Tτ=2/3=5777 K.“Solving the Mystery of the Missing Neutrinos,” John N. Bahcall (2004), Nobele-Museum,http://nobelprize.org/physics/articles/bahcall/.7
7OThe Sun


<<<PAGE 342>>>

FIGURE 11The solar disk appears sharp because of the rapid increase in optical depth withdistance through the photosphere. Sunspots are visible on the surface of the disk in this image takenby SOHO/MDI on March 29, 2001. [SOHO (ESA & NASA)]2220 km525 km0 km–100 km2100 kmCoronaTransition regionChromospherePhotosphereInterior/H9270500 = 1FIGURE 12The thicknesses of the components of the Sun’s atmosphere.portions of the spectrum.This observation suggests that there exists a source of opacity that is basicallycontinuous across wavelength. The continuum opacity is due in part to the presence of theH−ions in the photosphere.UsingtheSahaequation,wecandeterminetheratioofthenumberofH−ionsto neutral hydrogen atoms. It is left as an exercise to show that in the Sun’s photosphere,The Sun radiates predominantly as a blackbody in the visible and infraredThe Sun


<<<PAGE 343>>>

only about one in 107hydrogen atoms actually forms an H−ion. The importance of H−inthe Sun is due to the fact that even though the abundance of the ion is quite low, neutralhydrogen is not capable of contributing signiﬁcantly to the continuum.Of course, optical depth is a function not only of the distance that a photon must traveltothesurfaceoftheSun,butalsoofthewavelength-dependentopacityofthesolarmaterial.Consequently, photons can originate from or be absorbed at different physicaldepths in the atmosphere, depending upon their wavelengths. Since a spectral line is notAbsorption lines, including Fraunhofer lines, are produced in the photosphere.According to Kirchhoff’s laws, the absorption lines must be produced where thegas is cooler than the bulk of the continuum-forming region. Line formation must alsooccur between the observer and the region where much of the continuum is produced. Inreality, the Fraunhofer lines are formed in the same layers where H−produces the contin-uum. However, the darkest part of the line (its center) originates from regions higher in thephotosphere, where the gas is cooler. This is because the opacity is greatest in the centerof the line, making it more difﬁcult to see deeper into the photosphere. Moving away fromthe central wavelength toward the wing of the line implies that absorption is occurring atprogressively deeper levels. At wavelengths sufﬁciently far from the central peak, the edgeof the line merges with the continuum being produced at the base of the photosphere. ThiseffectisillustratedinFig.13.
IncreasingheightIncreasingheightDeep in photosphere
Deep in photosphereContinuum
0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Relative intensity–0.5–0.4–0.3–0.2–0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5D/H9261 (nm)FIGURE 13The relationship between absorption line strength and depth in the photosphere fora typical spectral line. The wings of the line are formed deeper in the photosphere than is the centerof the line.The Sun
inﬁnitesimally thin, but actually covers a range of wavelengths, even different parts of the same line are formed at different levels of the atmosphere. Thus solar observations with high-wavelength resolution can be used to probe the atmosphere at various depths, provid-ing a wealth of information about its structure.


<<<PAGE 344>>>

Solar GranulationWhen the base of the photosphere is observed (see Fig. 14), it appears as a patchwork ofbright and dark regions that are constantly changing, with individual regions appearing andthen disappearing. With a spatial extent of roughly 700 km, the characteristic lifetime forone of these regions is ﬁve to ten minutes. This patchwork structure is known asgranulationand is the top of the convection zone protruding into the base of the photosphere.Figure 15 shows a high-resolution spectrum of solar granulation spanning a numberof convection cells. The appearance of wiggles in the absorption lines occurs because somepartsoftheregionareDopplerblueshiftedwhileothersareredshifted.
FIGURE 14Granulation at the base of the photosphere is due to the rising and falling gasbubbles produced by the underlying convection zone. (This three-dimensional image is from theSwedish 1-m Solar Telescope, operated on the island of La Palma by the Institute for Solar Physics ofthe Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in the Spanish Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachosof the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias.)
FIGURE 15A spectrum of a portion of the photospheric granulation showing absorption linesthat indicate the presence of radial motions. Wiggles to the left are toward shorter wavelengths and areblueshifted while wiggles to the right are redshifted. The wavelengths shown at the top of the image aregiven in angstroms. (Courtesy of W. Livingston and the National Optical Astronomy Observatories.)The Sun
Weﬁnd


<<<PAGE 345>>>

480460440420400380360W/2/H9266 (nHz)60º45º30º15º0º
0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00r/RTachoclineRadiationzoneConvectionzoneFIGURE 16The rotation period of the Sun varies with latitude and depth./Omega1, the angular fre-quency, has units of radians per second. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of NSF’s National SolarObservatory.)thatradialvelocitiesof0.4k m s−1arecommon;brighterregionsproducetheblueshiftedsections of the lines while darker regions produce the redshifted sections. Thus the brightcells are the vertically rising hot convective bubbles carrying energy from the solar interior.When those bubbles reach the optically thin photosphere, the energy is released via photonsand the resulting cooler, darker gas sinks back into the interior. The lifetime of a typicalgranule is the amount of time needed for a convective eddy to rise and fall the distance ofone mixing length. Solar granulation provides us with a visual veriﬁcation of the results ofthe stellar structure equations applied to our Sun.Differential RotationPhotospheric absorption lines may also be used to measure the rotation rate of the Sun.By measuring Doppler shifts at the solar limb, we ﬁnd that the Sun rotatesdifferentially(i.e., the rate of rotation depends on the latitude being observed). At the equator the rotationperiod is approximately 25 days, increasing to 36 days at the poles.Observations of solar oscillations have revealed that the Sun’s rotation also varies withradius; see Fig. 16. Near the base of the convection zone, the differing rotation rateswith latitude converge in a region known as thetachocline. The strong shear that is setup in this region is believed to result in electric currents in the highly conducting plasma,which in turn generate the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld. Thus the tachocline is probably the sourceof the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld. (The complex manifestations of the Sun’s dynamic magneticﬁeldwillbediscussedextensivelyinSection3.)The ChromosphereThechromosphere, with an intensity that is only about 10−4of the value for the pho-tosphere, is that portion of the solar atmosphere that lies just above the photosphere andThe Sun


<<<PAGE 346>>>

extends upward for approximately 1600 km (2100 km aboveτ500=1). Analysis of the lightproduced in the chromosphere indicates that the gas density drops by more than a factor of104and that the temperature begins toincreasewith increasing altitude, from 4400 K toabout 10,000 K.Reference to the Boltzmann and Saha equationsshows thatlinesthatarenotproducedatthelowertemperaturesandhigherdensitiesofthephotospherecanformintheenvironmentofthechromosphere.Forinstance,alongwiththehydrogenBalmerlines,thelinesofHeII,FeII,SiII,CrII,andCaII(inparticular,theCaIIHandKlines,396.8nmand393.3nm,respectively)canappearinthespectrum.Although certain Fraunhofer lines appear as absorption lines in the visible and nearultraviolet portions of the spectrum, others begin to appear as emission lines at shorter (andmuch longer) wavelengths. Again Kirchhoff’s laws offer an explanation, suggesting thata hot, low-density gas must be responsible. Because the interior of the Sun is opticallythick below the base of the photosphere, the area of emission line production must occurelsewhere. With the peak of the blackbody spectrum near 500 nm, the strength of thecontinuumdecreasesrapidlyatshorterandlongerwavelengths.Asaresult,emissionlinesproducedoutsideofthevisibleportionofthespectrumarenotoverwhelmedbytheblackbodyradiation.Visible wavelength emission lines are not normally seen against the bright solar disk, butthey can be observed near the limb of the Sun for a few seconds at the beginning and endof a total eclipse of the Sun; this phenomenon is referred to as aﬂash spectrum. Duringthis period, the portion of the Sun that is still visible takes on a reddish hue because of thedominance of the Balmer Hαemission line, a line that is normally observed only as anabsorption line in the Sun’s atmosphere.Using ﬁlters that restrict observations to the wavelengths of the emission lines producedin the chromosphere (particularly Hα), it is possible to see a great deal of structure in thisportion of the atmosphere.Supergranulationbecomes evident on scales of 30,000 km,showing the continued effects of the underlying convection zone. Doppler studies againreveal convective velocities on the order of 0.4k ms−1, with gas rising in the centers ofthe supergranules and sinking at their edges. Also present are vertical ﬁlaments of gas,known asspicules, extending upward from the chromosphere for 10,000 km (Fig. 17).An individual spicule may have a lifetime of only 15 minutes, but at any given momentspicules cover several percent of the surface of the Sun. Doppler studies show that massmotions are present in spicules, with material moving outward at approximately 15 km s−1.The Transition RegionAbove the chromosphere, the temperature rises very rapidly within approximately 100 km(see Fig. 18), reaching more than 105K before the temperature gradient ﬂattens some-what. The temperature then continues to rise more slowly, eventually exceeding 106K.Thistransition regionmay be selectively observed at various altitudes in the ultravioletand extreme ultraviolet parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. For instance, the 121.6-nmLyman-alpha (Lyα) emission line of hydrogen (n=2→n=1) is produced at the top ofthe chromosphere at 20,000 K, the C III 97.7-nm line originates at a level where the tem-perature is 90,000 K, the 103.2-nm line of O VI occurs at 300,000 K, and Mg X creates aThe Sun


<<<PAGE 347>>>

FIGURE 17Spicules in the chromosphere of the Sun. In addition, small sunspots are visible inthe upper left quadrant of the image, and brighter areas known as plage regions are also visible. Theobservations were made using the Hαemission line. Features as small as 130 km are evident in thisimage. (Courtesy of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.)62.5-nm line at 1.4×106K. Figure 19 shows images of the Sun at various wavelengthsand heights above the base of the photosphere.The CoronaWhen the Moon fully occults the photosphere during a total solar eclipse, the radiation fromthe faintcoronabecomes visible (Fig. 20). The corona, located above the transition re-gion, extends out into space without a well-deﬁned outer boundary and has an energy outputthat is nearly 106times less intense than that of the photosphere. The number density ofparticles at the base of the corona is typically 1015particles m−3, whereas in the vicinity ofEarth, the number density of particles originating from the Sun (solar wind particles) havea characteristic value of 107particles m−3(this can be compared with 1025particles m−3at sea level in Earth’s atmosphere). Because the density of the corona is so low, it is essen-tially transparent to most electromagnetic radiation (except long radio wavelengths) andis not in local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE). For gases that are not in LTE, a uniquetemperature is not strictly deﬁnable.However,thetemperaturesobtainedbyconsideringthermalmotions,ionizationlevels,andradioemissionsdogivereasonablyconsistentresults.Forinstance,thepresenceofFeXIVlinesindicatestemperaturesinexcessof2×106K, as do line widths produced by thermal Doppler broadening.Based on the radiation coming from the corona, three distinct structural components canbe identiﬁed:• TheK corona(fromKontinuierlich, the German word for “continuous”) producesthe continuous white light emission that results from photospheric radiation scatteredThe Sun


<<<PAGE 348>>>

chromospherecoronaphotosphereH/H9251coreH/H9251Al 205 nmO I130 nmHe I1083 nmCa II KwingCa II K coreMg II K coreLycont.Ly/H9251wingLy/H9251core10.7 cm
Mg II KwingwingHe I58.4 nmHe II30.40 nmcoronallinestransitionregionX-rays/H9267
103104105106T (K)
3000200010000Height (km)–11–9–7–5–3log /H9267 (kg m–3)
TT
FIGURE 18Logarithmic plots of the temperature structure (solid line) and mass density structure(dashed line) of the upper atmosphere of the Sun. The altitudes observed at various wavelengths arealso depicted. [Figure adapted from Avrett, inEncyclopedia of Astronomy and Astrophysics, PaulMurdin (ed.), Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 2001, page 2480.]by free electrons. Contributions to the coronal light due to the K corona primarilyoccur between 1 and 2.3 R⊙from the center of the Sun. The spectral lines evidentin the photosphere are essentially blended by the large Doppler shifts that are causedby the high thermal velocities of the electrons.• TheFcorona(for Fraunhofer) comes from the scattering of photospheric light by dustgrains that are located beyond 2.3 R⊙. Because dust grains are much more massiveand slower than electrons, Doppler broadening is minimal and the Fraunhofer linesare still detectable. The F corona actually merges with thezodiacal light, the faintglow found along the ecliptic that is a reﬂection of the Sun’s light from interplanetarydust.• TheE coronais the source of the emission lines that are produced by the highlyionized atoms located throughout the corona; the E corona overlaps the K and Fcoronas. Since the temperatures are extremely high in the corona, the exponential termin the Saha equation encourages ionization because thermal energies are comparableto ionization potentials. The very low number densities also encourage ionizationsince the chance of recombination is greatly reduced.The Sun


<<<PAGE 349>>>

FIGURE 19Visible features of the Sun at various wavelengths. The central image is a three-color composite of the corona obtained by TRACE at 17.1 nm, 19.5 nm, and 28.4 nm. Clockwisestarting from the top are a SOHO/MDI magnetic map, white light, TRACE 170 nm continuum,TRACELyα, TRACE 17.1 nm, TRACE 19.5 nm, TRACE 28.4 nm, and a Yohkoh/SXT X-ray image. [TheTransition Region and Coronal Explorer, TRACE, is a mission of the Stanford-Lockheed Institutefor Space Research (a joint program of the Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center’s Solarand Astrophysics Laboratory and Stanford’s Solar Observatories Group) and part of the NASA SmallExplorer program.]The low number densities allow forbidden transitions to occur, producing spectral linesthat are generally seen only in astrophysical environments where gases are extremelythin.The Sun
Forbidden transitions occur from atomic energy levels that are metastable; electrons do not readily make transitions from metastable states to lower energy states without assist-ance. Whereas allowed transitions occur on timescales on the order of s, spontane-ous forbidden transitions may require one second or longer. In gases at higher densities, electrons are able to escape from metastable states through collisions with other atoms or ions, but in the corona these collisions are rare. Consequently, given enough time, some electrons will be able to make spontaneous transitions from metastable states to lower energy states, accompanied by the emission of photons.10−8


<<<PAGE 350>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 20(a) The quiet solar corona seen during a total solar eclipse in 1954. The shape ofthe corona is elongated along the Sun’s equator. (Courtesy of J. D. R. Bahng and K. L. Hallam.)(b) The active corona tends to have a very complex structure. This image of the July 11, 1991, eclipseis a composite of ﬁve photographs that was processed electronically. (Courtesy of S. Albers.)Since the blackbody continuum emission from the Sun decreases likeλ−2for sufﬁciently
Photospheric emissions are negligible in the X-ray wavelength range as well. In thiscase the blackbody continuum decreases very rapidly, dropping off likeλ−5e−hc/λkT. Con-sequently, any emission in X-ray wavelengths from the corona will completely overwhelmthe output from the photosphere. In fact, because of the high temperatures of the corona, itsX-ray spectrum is very rich in emission lines. This is due to the high degree of ionizationthat exists for all of the elements present, together with the ability of the corona to excitea large number of atomic transitions. Given the many electrons that are present in heavyelements such as iron and the vast number of available energy levels, each such elementis capable of producing an extensive emission spectrum. Figure 21 shows a section ofthe X-ray emission spectrum of the solor corona. It displays a sample of the lines that areobserved in one portion of the X-ray wavelength band, along with the ions responsible fortheir production.The Sun
long wavelengths, the amount of photospheric radio emission is negligible. The solar co-rona, however, is a source of radio-wavelength radiation that is not associated with the blackbody continuum. Some radio emission arises from free–free transitions of electrons that pass near atoms and ions. During these close encounters, photons may be emitted as the electrons’ energies are decreased slightly. From the conservation of energy, the greater the change in the energy of an electron, the more energetic the resulting photon and the shorter its wavelength. Clearly, the closer an electron comes to an ion, the more likely it is that the electron’s energy will change appreciably. Since more frequent and closer en-counters are expected if the number density is larger, shorter-wavelength radio emissions should be observed nearer the Sun. Radio wavelengths of 1 to 20 cm are observed from the chromosphere through the lower corona, while longer wavelength radiation originates from the outer corona. It is important to note that synchrotron radiation by relativistic elec-trons also contributes to the observed radio emission from the solar corona.


<<<PAGE 351>>>

Fe XVIIIFe XVIIIFe XVIH Fe XVIHHO VIIINe IX|| ||O VIIIO VII||||| | ||||||| ||| | | | ||
ABCD EFG H4080120160200240280320Counts per 0.025 s14151617Wavelength (nm)FIGURE 21A section of the X-ray emission spectrum of the solar corona. (Figure adapted fromParkinson,Astron. Astrophys.,24, 215, 1973.)Coronal Holes and the Solar WindAn image of the X-ray Sun is shown in Fig. 22. This fascinating picture indicates that X-ray emission is not uniform. Active (bright and hot) regions exist, along with darker, coolerregions known ascoronal holes. Moreover, even in the coronal holes, localized bright spotsof enhanced X-ray emission appear and disappear on a timescale of several hours. Smallerfeatures are also apparent within the regions of generally bright X-ray emission.The weaker X-ray emission coming from coronal holes is characteristic of the lowerdensities and temperatures that exist in those regions, as compared to the rest of the corona.The explanation for the existence of coronal holes is tied to the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld and thegeneration of thefastsolar wind, a continuous stream of ions and electrons escaping fromthe Sun and moving through interplanetary space at speeds of approximately 750 km s−1.A gusty,slow solar wind, with speeds of roughly one-half those of the fast wind appears tobe produced by streamers in the corona associated with closed magnetic ﬁelds.Just like the magnetic ﬁeld that is produced by a current loop, the magnetic ﬁeld of theSun is generally that of a dipole, at least on a global scale (Fig. 23). Although its valuecan differ signiﬁcantly in localized regions (as we will see in the next section), the strengthof the ﬁeld is typically a few times 10−4T near the surface. Coronal holes correspondto those parts of the magnetic ﬁeld where the ﬁeld lines areopen, while the X-ray brightregions are associated withclosedﬁeld lines; open ﬁeld lines extend out to great distancesfrom the Sun, while closed lines form loops that return to the Sun.The magnetic ﬁeld near the surface of Earth is approximately 6×10−5T.8
8The Sun


<<<PAGE 352>>>

FIGURE 22An X-ray image of the Sun obtained by the Soft X-Ray Telescope on the YohkohSolar Observatory, May 8, 1992. Bright regions are hotter X-ray regions and darker regions are cooler.A dark coronal hole is evident at the top of the image. (From the Yohkoh mission of ISAS, Japan.The X-ray telescope was prepared by the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, the NationalAstronomical Observatory of Japan, and the University of Tokyo with the support of NASA andISAS.)The Lorentz force equation,F=q(E+v×B),(2)describing the force exerted on a charged particle of velocityvin an electric ﬁeldEand amagnetic ﬁeldBstates that the force due to the magnetic ﬁeld is always mutually perpendic-ular to both the direction of the velocity vector and the ﬁeld (the cross product). Providingthat electric ﬁelds are negligible, charged particles are forced to spiral around magneticﬁeld lines and cannot actually cross them except by collisions (Fig. 24). This impliesthat closed magnetic ﬁeld lines tend to trap charged particles, not allowing them to escape.In regions of open ﬁeld lines, however, particles can actually follow the lines out awayfrom the Sun. Consequently, the solar wind originates from the regions of open magneticﬁeld lines, namely the coronal holes. The details observed in the X-ray-bright regions, aswell as the localized bright spots in the coronal holes, are due to the higher densities of theelectrons and ions that are trapped in large and small magnetic ﬁeld loops.The existence of ongoing mass loss from the Sun was deduced long before it was everdetected directly, as evidenced by the tails of comets. The tails are generally composed oftwo parts, a curved dust tail and a straight ion tail, both of which are always pointed awayfrom the Sun (Fig. 25). The force exerted on dust grains by photons (radiation pressure)The Sun


<<<PAGE 353>>>

I(a)
(b)
NorthSouthFIGURE 23(a) The characteristic dipole magnetic ﬁeld of a current loop. (b) A generalizeddepiction of the global magnetic ﬁeld of the Sun. The dashed lines show the ﬁeld of a perfect magneticdipole.ElectronBFIGURE 24A charged particle is forced to spiral around a magnetic ﬁeld line because theLorentz force is mutually perpendicular to both the velocity of the particle and the direction of themagnetic ﬁeld.is sufﬁcient to push the dust tail back; the curvature of the tail is due to the different orbitalspeeds of the individual dust grains, which, according to Kepler’s third law, are a function oftheir varying distances from the Sun. However, the ion tail cannot be explained by radiationpressure; the interaction between photons and the ions is not efﬁcient enough. Rather, it isthe electric force between the ions of the solar wind and the ions in the comet that countsfor the direction of the ion tail. This interaction allows momentum to be transferred to thecometary ions, driving them straight away from the Sun.The Sun


<<<PAGE 354>>>

FIGURE 25Comet Mrkos in 1957. The dust tail of a comet is curved and its ion tail is straight.(Courtesy of Palomar/Caltech.)
FIGURE 26Aurora australis seen over the South Pole. (NASA)Theaurora borealisand theaurora australis(the northern and southern lights, respec-tively) are also products of the solar wind (see Fig. 26). As the ions from the Sun interactwith Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, they become trapped in it. Bouncing back and forth betweenthe north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole, these ions form theVan Allen radi-ation belts. Ions that are sufﬁciently energetic will collide with the atoms in Earth’s upperatmosphere near the magnetic poles, causing the atmospheric atoms to become excited orionized. The resulting de-excitations or recombinations emit the photons that produce thespectacular light displays observed from high northern and southern latitudes.The Sun


<<<PAGE 355>>>

Using rockets and satellites, characteristics of the two solar winds can be measured as theypass near Earth. In addition, the Ulysses spacecraft, placed in a polar orbit around the Sun,was able to detect the wind well out of the plane of Earth’s orbit. At a distance of 1 AU fromthe Sun, the solar wind velocity ranges from approximately 200 km s−1to 750 km s−1, witha typical density of 7×106ions m−3and characteristic kinetic temperatures of 4×104Kfor protons and 105K for electrons. Although the winds are composed primarily of protonsand electrons, heavier ions are present as well.Example 2.1.The mass loss rate of the Sun may be estimated from the data givenabove. We know that all of the mass leaving the Sun must also pass through a sphere ofradius 1 AU centered on the Sun; otherwise it would collect at some location in space. Ifwe further assume (for simplicity) that the mass loss rate is spherically symmetric, then theamount of mass crossing a spherical surface of radiusrin an amount of timetis just themass density of the gas multiplied by the volume of the shell of gas that can travel acrossthe sphere during that time interval, ordM=ρd V=(nmH)(4πr2v dt),wherenis the number density of ions (mostly hydrogen),mHis approximately the massof a hydrogen ion,vis the ion velocity, anddV=Adr≃4πr2vdtis the volume of ashell that crosses a spherical surface in an amount of timedt. Dividing both sides bydt,we obtain the mass loss rate,dMdt=4πr2nmHv=4πr2ρv.(3)By convention, stellar mass loss rates are generally given insolar masses per yearand sym-bolized by˙M≡dM/dt. Usingv=500 km s−1,r=1 AU, andn=7×106protons m−3,we ﬁnd that˙M⊙≃3×10−14M⊙yr−1.At this rate it would require more than 1013yr before the entire mass of the Sun isdissipated. However, the interior structure of the Sun is changing much more rapidly thanthis, so the effect of the present-day solar wind on the evolution of the Sun is minimal.As an interesting aside, in 1992 bothVoyagers IandIIdetected radio noise at frequenciesof 1.8 to 3.5 kHz originating from the outer reaches of the Solar System. It is believedthat the noise is produced where particles from the solar wind collide with the interstellarmedium, producing a termination shock.The 1992 observations represented the ﬁrst detectionof theheliopause, the outer limit of the Sun’s electromagnetic inﬂuence. In 2005, whenV oyager I was about 95 AU from Earth and traveling at 3.6 AU per year, it passed throughthe termination shock into the region known as theheliosheath. The strongest evidence thatV oyager I did in fact cross the termination shock comes from the measurement of a suddensigniﬁcant increase in the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld that is carried by the solar wind.This increased magnetic ﬁeld strength is due to the slowing of the solar wind particles andthe resulting increase in particle density.The Sun


<<<PAGE 356>>>

The Parker Wind ModelWe now consider how the expansion of the solar corona produces the solar wind. This is aresult of the corona’s high temperature, together with the high thermal conductivity of theionized gas, referred to as aplasma. The ability of the plasma to conduct heat implies thatthe corona is almost isothermal (recall Fig. 18).In 1958 Eugene Parker developed an approximately isothermal model of the solar windthat has been successful in describing many of its basic features. To see why the solar windisinevitable,beginbyconsideringtheconditionofhydrostaticequilibriu.IfthemassofthecoronaisinsigniﬁcantcomparedtothetotalmassoftheSun,thenMr≃M⊙in that region and the hydrostatic equilibrium equation becomesdPdr=−GM⊙ρr2.(4)Next, assuming for simplicity that the gas is completely ionized and composed entirely ofhydrogen, the number density of protons is given byn≃ρmpsincemp≃mH. From the ideal gas law,the pressure of the gas may be writtenasP=2nkT,whereµ=1/2 for ionized hydrogen andmH≃mp. Substituting expressions for the pres-sure and density into Eq. (4), the hydrostatic equilibrium equation becomesddr(2nkT)=−GM⊙nmpr2.(5)Making the assumption that the gas is isothermal, Eq. ( 5) can be integrated directlyto give an expression for the number density (and therefore the pressure) as a function ofradius. It is left as an exercise to show thatn(r)=n0e−λ(1−r0/r),(6)whereλ≡GM⊙mp2kT r0andn=n0at some radiusr=r0. Note thatλis approximately the ratio of a proton’sgravitational potential energy and its thermal kinetic energy at a distancer0from the centerof the Sun. We now see that the pressure structure is justP (r)=P0e−λ(1−r0/r),whereP0=2n0kT.mThe Sun


<<<PAGE 357>>>

An immediate consequence of Eq. ( 2) is that in our isothermal approximation thepressuredoes notapproach zero asrgoes to inﬁnity. To estimate the limiting values ofn(r)andP (r), letT=1.5×106K andn0=3×1013m−3at aboutr0=1.4R⊙, values typicalof the inner corona. Thenλ≃5.5,n(∞)≃1.2×1011m−3, andP(∞)≃5×10−6Nm−2.However,withtheexceptionoflocalizedcloudsofmaterial,theactualdensitiesandpressuresofinterstellardustandgasaremuchlowerthanthosejustderived.Given the inconsistency that exists between the isothermal, hydrostatic solution to thestructure of the corona and the conditions in interstellar space, at least one of the assump-tions made in the derivation must be incorrect. Although the assumption that the corona isapproximately isothermal is not completely valid, it is roughly consistent with observations.Recall that near Earth (r∼215 R⊙), the solar wind is characterized by temperatures onthe order of 105K, indicating that the temperature of the gas is not decreasing rapidly withdistance. It can be shown that solutions that allow for a realistically varying temperaturestructure still do not eliminate the problem of a predicted gas pressure signiﬁcantly in excessof the interstellar value. Apparently, it is the assumption that the corona is in hydrostaticequilibrium that is wrong. SinceP(∞)greatly exceeds the pressures in interstellar space,material must be expanding outward from the Sun, implying the existence of the solar wind.The Hydrodynamic Nature of the Upper Solar AtmosphereIf we are to develop an understanding of the structure of the solar atmosphere, the simpleapproximation of hydrostatic equilibrium must be replaced by a set ofhydrodynamicequationsthat describe the ﬂow. In particular, when we writed2rdt2=dvdt=dvdrdrdt=vdvdr,ρvdvdr=−dPdr−GMrρr2,(7)wherevis the velocity of the ﬂow. With the introduction of a new variable (velocity),another expression that describes the conservation of mass ﬂow across boundaries mustalso be included, speciﬁcally4πr2ρv=constant,which is just the relationship that was used in Example 2.1 to estimate the Sun’s massloss rate. This expression immediately implies thatd(ρvr2)dr=0.At the top of the convection zone, the motion of the hot, rising gas and the return ﬂow ofthe cool gas sets up longitudinal waves (pressure waves) that propagate outward through theThe Sun


<<<PAGE 358>>>

photosphere and into the chromosphere. The outward ﬂux of wave energy,FE, is governedby the expressionFE=12ρv2wvs,(8)wherevsis the local sound speed andvwis the velocity amplitude of the oscillatory wavemotion for individual particles being driven about their equilibrium positions by the “piston”of the convection zone.he sound speed is given byvs=/radicalbigγ P/ρ.Since, according to the ideal gas law,P=ρkT /µmH, the sound speed may also be writtenasvs=/radicalBiggγkTµmH∝√Tfor ﬁxedγandµ.When the wave is ﬁrst generated at the top of the convection zone,vw<vs. However,the density of the gas that these waves travel through decreases signiﬁcantly with altitude,dropping by four orders of magnitude in approximately 1000 km. If we assume that very littlemechanical energy is lost in moving through the photosphere (i.e., 4πr2FEis approximatelyconstant) and thatvsremains essentially unchanged since the temperature varies by onlyabout a factor of two across the photosphere and chromosphere, the rapid decrease in densitymeans thatvwmust increase signiﬁcantly (approximately two orders of magnitude). As aresult, the wave motion quickly becomessupersonic(vw>vs) as particles in the wave tryto travel through the medium faster than the local speed of sound. The result is that thewave develops into ashock wave, much like the shock waves that produce sonic boomsbehind supersonic aircraft.A shock wave is characterized by a very steep density change over a short distance,called theshock front.Asashockmovesthroughagas,itproducesagreatdealofheating via collisions, leaving the gas behind the shock highly ionized. This heating comesat the expense of the mechanical energy of the shock, and the shock quickly dissipates. Thusthe gas in the chromosphere and above is effectively heated by the mass motions created inthe convection zone.Magnetohydrodynamics and Alfvén WavesIt should be noted that our discussion of the hydrodynamic equations has failed to accountfor the inﬂuence of the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld. It is believed that the temperature structurethroughout the outer solar atmosphere, including the very steeppositivetemperature gra-dient in the transition region, is due at least in part to the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld,coupled with mass motions produced by the convection zone.MagnetohydrodynamicsTThe Sun


<<<PAGE 359>>>

(usually mercifully shortened toMHD) is the study of the interactions between magneticﬁelds and plasmas. Owing to the great complexity of the problem, a complete solution tothe set of MHD equations applied to the outer atmosphere of the Sun does not yet exist.However, some aspects of the solution can be described.The presence of the magnetic ﬁeld allows for the generation of a second kind of wavemotion. These waves may be thought of as transverse waves that propagate along themagnetic ﬁeld lines as a consequence of the restoring force of tension associated with themagnetic ﬁeld lines. To understand the origin of this restoring force, recall that establishing amagnetic ﬁeld (which is always generated by moving electric charges, or currents) requiresthat energy be expended. The energy used to establish the ﬁeld can be thought of as beingstored within the magnetic ﬁeld itself; thus the space containing the magnetic ﬁeld alsocontains a magnetic energy density. The value of the magnetic energy density is given byum=B22µ0.(9)If a volumeVof plasma containing a number of magnetic ﬁeld lines is compressed ina direction perpendicular to the lines, the density of ﬁeld lines necessarily increases. Butthe density of ﬁeld lines is just a description of the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld itself,so the energy density of the magnetic ﬁeld also increases during compression. An amountof mechanical work must therefore have been done in compressing the ﬁeld lines in thegas. Since work is given byW=/integraltextPd V, the compression of the plasma must imply theexistence of a magnetic pressure. It can be shown that the magnetic pressure is numericallyequal to the magnetic energy density, orPm=B22µ0.(10)When a magnetic ﬁeld line gets displaced by some amount perpendicular to the directionof the line, amagnetic pressure gradientbecomes established; the pressure in the directionof the displacement increases as indicated by an increase in the number density of ﬁeldlines, while at the same time the pressure in the opposite direction decreases. This pressurechange then tends to push the line back again, restoring the original density of ﬁeld lines.This process may be thought of as analogous to the oscillations that occur in a string whena portion of the string is displaced; it is the tension in the string that pulls it back whenit is plucked. The “tension” that restores the position of the magnetic ﬁeld line is just themagnetic pressure gradient.As with the traveling motion of a wave on a string, a disturbance in the magnetic ﬁeld linecan also propagate down the line. This transverse MHD wave is called anAlfvén wave.1f the electric ﬁeld is negligible, charged particles must spiral around ﬁeld lines. This implies that ifthe charged particles are pushed, they drag the ﬁeld lines with them; the ﬁeld lines are said to be “frozen in” theplasma.1Alfvén waves are named for Hannes Olof Gösta Alfvén, (1908–1995), who was awarded the Nobel Prize in1970 for his fundamental studies in magnetohydrodynamics.9
009IThe Sun


<<<PAGE 360>>>

The speed of propagation of the Alfvén wave may be estimated by making a comparisonwith the sound speed in a gas. Since the adiabatic sound speed is given byvs=/radicalBiggγPgρ,whereγis of order unity, by analogy theAlfvén speedshould be approximatelyvm∼/radicalBiggPmρ=B√2µ0ρ.A more careful treatment gives the resultvm=B√µ0ρ.(11)Example 2.2.Using Eq(11), the sound speed and Alfvén speed maybecomparedforthephotosphere.Thegaspressureatthetopofthephotosphereisroughly140 N m−2,withadensityof4.9×10−6kg m−3.Assuminganidealmonatomicgasforwhichγ=5/3,vs≃7000 m s−1.pparently, the sound speed is much larger in the Sun’s interior.Taking a typical surface magnetic ﬁeld strength to be 2×10−4T, the magnetic pressureis (from Eq. 10)Pm≃0.02 N m−2,and the Alfvén speed isvm≃10 m s−1.The magnetic pressure may generally be neglected in photospheric hydrostatic consid-erations since it is smaller than the gas pressure by roughly four orders of magnitude.However, we will see in the next section that much larger magnetic ﬁeld strengths can existin localized regions on the Sun’s surface.Since Alfvén waves can propagate along magnetic ﬁeld lines, they may also transportenergy outward. According to Maxwell’s equations, a time-varying magnetic ﬁeld producesan electric ﬁeld, which in turn creates electrical currents in the highly conductive plasma.This implies that some resistive Joule heating will occur in the ionized gas, causing thetemperature to rise. Thus MHD waves can also contribute to the temperature structure ofthe upper solar atmosphere.AThe Sun
.


<<<PAGE 361>>>

FIGURE 27The Sun’s rotation creates a spiral pattern in the solar magnetic ﬁeld in interplanetaryspace, known as the Parker spiral. The drag produced by the spiraling magnetic ﬁeld causes angularmomentum to be transferred away from the Sun. This diagram shows the heliospheric current sheetthat separates regions of space where the magnetic ﬁeld points toward or away from the Sun. Theorbits of the planets out to Jupiter are depicted. (Courtesy of Prof. John M. Wilcox and NASA artistWerner Heil.)Because of the Sun’s rotation, its open magnetic ﬁeld lines are dragged along throughinterplanetary space (Fig. 27). Since the solar wind is forced to move with the ﬁeld lines,a torque is produced that actually slows the Sun’s rotation. Said another way, the solar windis transferring angular momentum away from the Sun. As a result, the Sun’s rotation ratewill decrease signiﬁcantly over its lifetime. Interestingly, the differential rotation present inthe photosphere is not manifested in the corona. Apparently, the magnetic ﬁeld, which sostrongly inﬂuences the structure of the corona, does not exhibit differential rotation at thisheight.The Outer Atmospheres of Other StarsAlthough this chapter is devoted to our Sun, the most thoroughly studied of all stars, the outeratmospheres of other stars can be investigated as well. For instance, observations indicatethat the rotation rates of solar-type stars seem to decrease with age. Furthermore, late main-sequence stars, with their convective envelopes, generally have much slower rotation ratesthan stars on the upper end of the main sequence. Perhaps winds are transferring angularmomentum away from these lower-mass stars as well.A host of satellites such as EUVE, FUSE, ROSAT, ASCA, XMM-Newton, and the Chan-dra X-Ray Observatory have also provided us with valuable UV and X-ray observations ofother stars. It appears that stars along the main sequence that are cooler than spectral classF have emission lines in the ultraviolet that are similar to those observed coming from theSun’s chromosphere and transition region. In addition, X-ray observations indicate corona-like emissions. These stars are also those for which stellar structure calculations indicate thatsurface convection zones should exist. Apparently, the same mechanisms that are heatingthe outer atmosphere of our Sun are also in operation in other stars.The Sun


<<<PAGE 362>>>

3THE SOLAR CYCLESome of the most fascinating and complex features of the solar atmosphere are transient innature. However, as we will learn in this section, many observational features of the solaratmosphere are also cyclic.SunspotsIt was Galileo who made the ﬁrst telescopic observations ofsunspots(recall Fig. 11).Sunspots are even visible occasionally with the unaided eye, but making such observationsisstrongly discouragedbecause of the potential for eye damage.Reliable observations made over the past two centuries indicate that the number ofsunspots is approximately periodic, going from minimum to maximum and back to mini-mum again nearly every 11 years (Fig. 28). The average latitude of sunspot formation isalso periodic, again over an 11-year cycle. A plot of sunspot location as a function of timeis shown in Fig. 29, along with a plot of the percentage of the solar surface covered bysunspots. Because of its wing-like appearance, the top portion of Fig. 29 has come tobe known as thebutterﬂy diagram. Individual sunspots are short-lived features, typicallysurviving no more than a month or so. During its lifetime, a sunspot will remain at a constantlatitude, although succeeding sunspots tend to form at progressively lower latitudes. As thelast sunspots of one cycle vanish near the Sun’s equator, a new cycle begins near±40◦(north and south) of the equator. The largest number of spots (sunspot maximum) typicallyoccurs at intermediate latitudes.The key to understanding sunspots lies in their strong magnetic ﬁelds. A typical sunspotis shown in Fig. 30. The darkest portion of the sunspot is known as theumbraand
020406080100120140160180200Sunspot number1700 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000YearFIGURE 28The number of sunspots between 1700 and 2005 indicates an 11-year periodicity.(Data from the World Data Center for the Sunspot Index at the Royal Observatory of Belgium.)The Sun


<<<PAGE 363>>>

FIGURE 29The upper ﬁgure depicts the butterﬂy diagram, showing sunspot latitudes with time.The lower ﬁgure shows the percentage of the Sun’s surface covered by sunspots as a function of time.(Courtesy of Dr. David H. Hathaway, NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center.)may measure as much as 30,000 km in diameter. (For reference, the diameter of Earthis 12,756 km.) The umbra is usually surrounded by a ﬁlament-like structure, called thepenumbra, whose mere appearance suggests the presence of magnetic lines of force. Theexistence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld can be veriﬁed by observing individual spectral lines
Sunspots are generally located in groups. Typically, a dominant sunspot leads in thedirection of rotation, and one or more sunspots follow. During an 11-year cycle, the leadsunspot will always have the same polarity in one hemisphere—say, a north pole in thegeographic northern hemisphere—while the lead sunspot in the other hemisphere will havethe opposite polarity (e.g., a south pole in the geographic southern hemisphere); trailingsunspots have the opposite polarity. Even when a large collection of trailing spots exist,resulting from a tangled magnetic ﬁeld pattern, a basicallybipolarﬁeld is present. During thenext 11-year cycle, polarities will be reversed; the sunspot with a magnetic south polarity willlead in the northern hemisphere, and vice versa in the southern hemisphere. Accompanyingthis local polarity reversal is a global polarity reversal: the overall dipole ﬁeld of the SunThe Sun
produced within the spot. The strength and polarity of magnetic ﬁelds can be measured by observing the Zeeman effect, the splitting of spectral lines that results from removing the degeneracy inherent in atomic energy levels.The amount of splitting is proportional to the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld, whereas the polarization of the light corresponds to the direction of the ﬁeld. Figure 31 shows an example of the splitting of a spectral line measured across a sunspot. Magnetic ﬁeld strengths of several tenths of a tesla and greater have been measured in the centers of umbral regions, with ﬁeld strengths decreasing across penumbral regions. Furthermore, polarization measurements indicate that the direction of a typical umbral magnetic ﬁeld is vertical, becoming horizontal across the penumbra.


<<<PAGE 364>>>

FIGURE 30A typical sunspot group. The dark umbra of the central sunspot is clearly evident, asis the ﬁlamentary structure of its penumbra. (Courtesy of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.)will change so that the magnetic north pole of the Sun will switch from the geographic northpole to the geographic south pole. Polarity reversal always occurs during sunspot minimum,when the ﬁrst sunspots are beginning to form at the highest latitudes. When the polarityreversal is considered, the Sun is said to have a22-year cycle. This important magneticbehavior is illustrated in Fig. 32.The dark appearance of sunspots is due to their signiﬁcantly lower temperatures. In thecentralportionoftheumbrathetemperaturemaybeaslowas3900K,comparedwiththeSun’seffectivetemperatureof5777K.hisimpliesasurfacebolometricﬂux that is a factor of(5777/3900)4=4.8lowerthanthatofthesurroundingphotosphere.1Observations obtained from the Solar Maximum Mission satellite (SMM) have shown thatthis decrease in surface ﬂux affects the overall energy output of the Sun. When a number oflarge sunspots exist, the solar luminosity is depressed by roughly 0.1%. Since convectionis the principal energy transport mechanism just below the photosphere, and since strong1A 3900-K blackbody is very bright, of course. However, when seen through a ﬁlter dark enough to make viewingthe rest of the 5777-K photosphere comfortable, the sunspot appears dark.T1
1The Sun


<<<PAGE 365>>>

FIGURE 31The Zeeman splitting of the Fe 525.02-nm spectral line due to the presence ofa strong magnetic ﬁeld in a sunspot. The spectrograph slit was aligned vertically across a sunspot,resulting in a wavelength dependence that runs from left to right in the image. The slit extended beyondthe image of the sunspot. (Courtesy of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories/National SolarObservatory.)
SNN
S
NSNSSNNS
FIGURE 32The global magnetic ﬁeld orientation of the Sun, along with the magnetic polarityof sunspots during successive 11-year periods.magnetic ﬁelds inhibit motion through the “freezing in” of ﬁeld lines in a plasma, it is likelythat the mass motion of convective bubbles is inhibited in sunspots, thereby decreasing theﬂow of energy through the sunspots.Along with luminosity variations on a timescale of months (the typical lifetime of anindividual sunspot), the Sun’s luminosity seems to experience variability on a much longertimescale, as does the number of sunspots. For instance, very few sunspots were observedbetween 1645 and 1715; this time interval has come to be called theMaunder minimumThe Sun


<<<PAGE 366>>>

020406080100120140
1610 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700 1710 1720 1730YearSunspot numberFIGURE 33An unusually small number of sunspots were observed between 1645 and 1715(the Maunder minimum). (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of J. A. Eddy, High Altitude Observatory.)(see Fig. 33).1Surprisingly, during this period the average temperature in Europe wassigniﬁcantly lower, consistent with the solar luminosity being a few tenths of a percent lessthan it is today. John Eddy has proposed that there is a very long-term periodicity on whichthe solar cycle is superimposed. This long-period variation goes through grand sunspotmaxima and minima that may last for centuries. Evidence in support of this suggestionis found on Earth in the relative numbers of atmospheric carbon dioxide molecules thatcontain radioactive carbon atoms (146C), as preserved in the 7000-year-long record of treerings. The importance of146C in long-term sunspot studies lies in an inverse correlationbetween sunspots and the amount of146C present in Earth’s atmosphere.146C is a radioactiveisotope of carbon that is produced when extremely energetic charged particles from space,calledcosmic rays, collide with atmospheric nitrogen. Cosmic rays are affected by themagnetic ﬁeld of the Sun, which in turn is affected by solar activity. During the Maunderminimum, the amount of atmospheric146C increased signiﬁcantly and was incorporated intothe rings of living trees. The amount of146C also seems to correlate well with the advanceand retreat of glaciers over the past 5000 years.
PlagesA variety of other phenomena are also associated with sunspot activity.Plages(from theFrench word forbeach) are chromospheric regions of bright Hαemission located near1With the development and continual improvement of the telescope beginning during the early phase of theMaunder minimum (recall that Galileo died in 1642 and Newton was born in the same year), the Maunderminimum was not a manifestation of poor observations.2
2The Sun
With lower temperatures in sunspots, the gas pressure is necessarily lower than in the surrounding material. However, the gravitational force is essentially the same. From these considerations alone, it seems as though the gas within a sunspot ought to sink into the interior of the star, an effect that is not observed. Without the beneﬁt of a sufﬁciently large gas pressure gradient to support a sunspot, another component to the pressure must exist. As we have already seen in the last section, a magnetic ﬁeld is accompanied by a pressure term. It is this extra magnetic pressure that provides the support necessary to keep a sun-spot from sinking or being compressed by the surrounding gas pressure.


<<<PAGE 367>>>

active sunspots (recall Fig. 17). They usually form before the sunspots appear and usuallydisappear after the sunspots vanish from a particular area. Plages have higher densities thanthe surrounding gas and are products of the magnetic ﬁelds. Apparently the cause of thedecreased brightness of sunspots does not play an important role in plages.Solar FlaresSolar ﬂaresare eruptive events that are known to release from 1017J of energy at thelower detection limit to as much as 1025J of energy over time intervals ranging frommilliseconds to more than an hour.1The physical dimensions of a ﬂare are enormous,with a large ﬂare reaching 100,000 km in length (see Fig. 34a). During an eruption,the hydrogen Balmer line, Hα, appears locally in emission rather than in absorption, asis usually the case, implying that photon production occurs above much of the absorbingmaterial. When observed in Hα, a ﬂare is often seen on the disk as two ribbons of light(Fig. 34b). Along with Hα, other types of electromagnetic radiation are produced thatcan range from kilometer-wavelengthnonthermalradio waves due to synchrotron radiationto very short-wavelength hard X-ray and gamma-ray emission lines.Charged particles are also ejected outward at high speeds, many escaping into interplan-etary space assolar cosmic rays. In the largest ﬂares the ejected charged particles, mostlyprotons and helium nuclei, may reach Earth in 30 minutes, disrupting some communica-tions and posing a very serious threat to any unprotected astronauts. Shock waves are alsogenerated and can occasionally propagate several astronomical units before dissipating.
(a)(b)FIGURE 34(a) A solarﬂare seen at the limb of the Sun, observed by the Yohkoh Soft X-rayTelescope, March 18, 1999, 16:40 UT. (From the Yohkoh mission of ISAS, Japan. The X-ray telescopewas prepared by the Lockheed PaloAlto Research Laboratory, the NationalAstronomical Observatoryof Japan, and the University of Tokyo with the support of NASA and ISAS.) (b) A two-ribbonﬂareseen in Hαon October 19, 1989. (Courtesy of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories.)1For comparison, a one-megaton bomb releases approximately 1016J.3
3The Sun


<<<PAGE 368>>>

h = 22,000 km
h = 44,000 kmHXR source in cuspAcceleration siteEnergy release(X-type reconnection)
Trapping flare loop(SXR loop)Magnetic mirror chromosphereHXR footpoint sourcesFIGURE 35A model of the January 13, 1992, Masuda solarﬂare. Note the two hard X-ray(HXR) footpoint sources associated with Hαﬂare ribbons [see Fig. 34(b)]. Electrons are accelerateddownward along the magneticﬁeld lines until they collide with the chromosphere. The soft X-ray(SXR) loop may be compared to Fig. 34(a). (Figure adapted from Aschwanden, et al.,Ap. J.,464,985, 1996.)The answer to the question of what powers solarﬂares lies in the location of theﬂareeruption. Flares develop in regions where the magneticﬁeld intensity is great, namelyin sunspot groups. From the discussion of the previous section, the creation of magneticﬁelds results in energy being stored in those magneticﬁelds (Eq. 9). If a magneticﬁelddisturbance could quickly release the stored energy, aﬂare might develop. It is left as anexercise to show that both the amount of energy stored in the magneticﬁeld and the timescaleinvolved in perturbing it via Alfvén waves are consistent with the creation of a solarﬂare.However, details of the energy conversion, such as particle acceleration, are still a matterof active research.A model of a solarﬂare is illustrated in Fig. 35. The general mechanism of a solarﬂareinvolves thereconnectionof magneticﬁeld lines. A disturbance in magneticﬁeld loops(perhaps due to the Sun’s convection zone) causes the creation of a sheet of current in thehighly conducting plasma (recall Lenz’s law). Theﬁnite resistance in the plasma resultsin Joule heating of the gas, causing temperatures to reach 107K. Particles acceleratedaway from the reconnection point and away from the Sun may escape entirely, producingsolar cosmic rays. Radio-wavelength radiation is generated by the synchrotron process ofcharged particles spiraling around the magneticﬁeld lines. Soft X-ray emission results fromthe high temperatures in the loop below the acceleration (reconnection) point. Hαemissionat the base of the magneticﬁeld lines (the two Hαribbons) is produced by recombiningThe Sun


<<<PAGE 369>>>

electrons and protons that are accelerated away from the reconnection point, toward thechromosphere.In addition, high-energy particles accelerated toward the chromosphere produce hardX-rays and gamma rays due to surface nuclear reactions. Examples of important nuclearreactions associated with solarﬂares arespallation reactionsthat break heavier nuclei intolighter nuclei, such as11H+168O→126C∗+42He+11H,where C∗represents a carbon nucleus in an excited state, followed by the de-excitationreaction126C∗→126C+γ,withEγ=4.438 MeV, or11H+2010Ne→168O∗+42He+11H,followed by the de-excitation reaction168O∗→168O+γ,withEγ=6.129 MeV. Other examples of reactions produced byﬂares on the Sun’s surfaceinclude electron–positron annihilation,e−+e+→γ+γwhereEγ=0.511 MeV, and the production of deuterium by11H+n→21H∗→21H+γ,whereEγ=2.223 MeV.Solar ProminencesSolar prominencesare also related to the Sun’s magneticﬁeld.Quiescent prominencesare curtains of ionized gas that reach well into the corona and can remain stable for weeksor months. The material in the prominence has collected along the magneticﬁeld lines ofan active region, with the result that the gas is cooler (with a typical temperature of 8000 K)and more dense than the surrounding coronal gas. This causes the gas to“rain”back downinto the chromosphere. When viewed in Hαat the limb of the Sun, quiescent prominencesappear as bright structures against the thin corona. However, when viewed in the continuumagainst the solar disk, a quiescent prominence appears as a darkﬁlament, absorbing thelight emitted from below. An example of a quiescent prominence is shown in Fig. 36(a).Aneruptive(oractive)prominence(Fig. 36b) may exist for only a few hours andmay abruptly develop from a quiescent prominence. It appears as though a relatively stablemagneticﬁeld conﬁguration can suddenly become unstable, causing the prominence to liftaway from the Sun. Although the mechanism is related to that of a solarﬂare, the outcomeis somewhat different; rather than most of the energy going into electromagnetic radiation,the energy of an eruptive prominence is converted into mass motions as gas is ejectedfrom the Sun.The Sun


<<<PAGE 370>>>

(b)(a)
FIGURE 36(a) A quiescent hedgerow prominence. (Courtesy of Big Bear Solar Observatory,California Institute of Technology.) (b) An eruptive prominence observed by the SOHO ExtremeUltraviolet Imaging Telescope (EIT) on July 24, 1999. [SOHO (ESA & NASA)]Coronal Mass EjectionsEven more spectacular is acoronal mass ejection(CME). CMEs have been observedsince the early 1970s using spacecraft such as NASA’s seventh Orbiting Solar Observatory(OSO 7) and Skylab. Most recently, CMEs have been observed routinely by SOHO’s LargeAngle Spectrometric COronograph (LASCO); see Fig. 37. LASCO uses an occultingdisk to create an artiﬁcial solar eclipse, allowing it to observe the white-light corona fromThe Sun


<<<PAGE 371>>>

FIGURE 37A coronal mass ejection observed by the SOHO LASCO instrument on June 2,1998. Note the intricacy of the magneticﬁeld lines within the CME. The white circle on the occultingdisk represents the size of the Sun out to the photosphere. [SOHO (ESA & NASA)]a few solar radii out to 30 R⊙. With the detection of thousands of CMEs it appears thatthere is about one CME per day when averaged over the 11-year sunspot cycle. When theSun is more active (i.e., near sunspot maximum) the frequency may be about 3.5 events perday, and during sunspot minimum the number of events may decrease to roughly one everyﬁve days. During a CME event, between 5×1012kg and 5×1013kg of material may beejected from the Sun at speeds ranging from 400 km s−1to over 1000 km s−1. CMEs appearto be associated with eruptive prominences approximately 70% of the time, and withﬂaresonly about 40% of the time. One can think of a CME as a magnetic bubble lifting off ofthe Sun’s surface after a magnetic reconnection event, carrying a signiﬁcant fraction of themass of the solar corona with it.The Time-Dependent Shape of the CoronaYet another feature of the solar cycle involves the shape of the corona itself. During a periodof little solar activity, when there are few sunspots and few, if any,ﬂares or prominences,thequiet coronais generally more extended at the equator than at the poles, consistentwith a nearly dipole magneticﬁeld. Near sunspot maximum, theactive coronais morecomplex in shape, as is the structure of the magneticﬁeld. Examples of the shape of thecorona during sunspot minimum and maximum are seen in Figs. 20(a) and 20(b),respectively. Evidently, the changing shape of the corona, like other solar activity, is due tothe dynamic structure of the Sun’s magneticﬁeld.The Sun


<<<PAGE 372>>>

The Magnetic Dynamo TheoryAmagnetic dynamomodel describing many of the components of the solar cycle wasﬁrstproposed by Horace Babcock in 1961. Despite its general success in describing the majorfeatures of the solar cycle, the model is not yet able to provide adequate explanations ofmany of the important details of solar activity. Any complete picture of the solar cycle willrequire a full treatment of the MHD equations in the solar environment, including differingrotation rates with latitude and depth in the Sun, convection, solar oscillations, heating ofthe upper atmosphere, and mass loss. Of course, not all of these processes are likely to playequally important roles in the study of the solar cycle, but it is important to understand thedegree to which each of them contributes to the particular phenomenon under investigation.As depicted in Fig. 38, because the magneticﬁeld lines are“frozen into”the gas, thedifferential rotation of the Sun drags the lines along, converting apoloidalﬁeld (essentially
NSNSSNN
SS
N(c)(d)N
SN
S(a)(b)
FIGURE 38The magnetic dynamo model of the solar cycle. (a) The solar magneticﬁeld isinitially a poloidalﬁeld. (b) Differential rotation drags the“frozen-in”magneticﬁeld lines aroundthe Sun, converting the poloidalﬁeld into a toroidalﬁeld. (c) Turbulent convection twists theﬁeldlines into magnetic ropes, causing them to rise to the surface as sunspots, the polarity of the leadspots corresponding to the original polarity of the poloidalﬁeld. (d) As the cycle progresses, succes-sive sunspot groups migrate toward the equator where magneticﬁeld reconnection reestablishes thepoloidalﬁeld, but with the original polarity reversed.The Sun


<<<PAGE 373>>>

a simple magnetic dipole) to one that has a signiﬁcanttoroidalcomponent (ﬁeld lines thatare wrapped around the Sun). The turbulent convection zone then has the effect of twistingthe lines, creating regions of intense magneticﬁelds, called magneticropes. The buoyancyproduced by magnetic pressure (Eq. 10) causes the ropes to rise to the surface, appearingas sunspot groups. The polarity of the sunspots is due to the direction of the magneticﬁeldalong the ropes; consequently, every lead spot in one hemisphere will have the same polaritywhile the lead spots in the other hemisphere will have the opposite polarity.Initially, the little twisting that does develop occurs at higher latitudes; during sunspotminimum. As the differential rotation continues to drag theﬁeld lines along and convectiveturbulence ties them in knots, more sunspots develop at intermediate latitudes, producinga sunspot maximum. It would seem that ultimately the greatest amount of twisting and thelargest number of sunspots should develop near the equator. However, sunspots from thetwo hemispheres tend to cancel out near the equator since the polarities of their leadingspots are opposed. As a result, the number of sunspots appearing near the equator is small.Finally, the cancelation of magneticﬁelds near the equator causes the poloidalﬁeld tobe reestablished, but with its original polarity reversed. This process takes approximately11 years. The entire procedure repeats continuously, with the polarity of the magneticﬁeldreturning to its original orientation every other cycle. Hence, the entire solar cycle is actually22 years long when magneticﬁeld polarities are considered.As we have already seen, details related to speciﬁc phenomena, such as the cause ofthe decreasedﬂux coming from sunspots or the exact process ofﬂare generation, are notyet well understood. The same situation also holds for the more fundamental magneticdynamo itself. Although the preceding discussion describes the behavior of the solar cyclein an approximate way, even such basic results as the timescales involved have not yetbeen accurately modeled. A successful magnetic dynamo model must not only produce thegeneral location and numbers of sunspots andﬂares, but it must also do so with the observed22-year periodicity. Moreover, the dynamo model must replicate the much slower variationthat appears to be responsible for the Maunder minimum.Evidence of Magnetic Activity in Other StarsFortunately, some evidence does exist that the basic ideas behind the solar cycle are correct.Observations of other cool main-sequence stars indicate that they possess activity cyclesmuch like the solar cycle. It was pointed out in the last section that late main-sequence starsexhibit observational characteristics consistent with the existence of hot coronae. It was alsomentioned that angular momentum is apparently lost via stellar winds. Both phenomenaagree with the theoretical onset of surface convection in low-mass stars, a major componentof the dynamo theory.Other forms of magnetic activity have also been seen in some stars. Observations indicatethe existence ofﬂare stars, main-sequence stars of class M that demonstrate occasional,rapidﬂuctuations in brightness. Ifﬂares the size of those on the Sun were to occur on themuch dimmer M stars, theﬂares would contribute signiﬁcantly to the total luminosity ofthose stars, producing the short-term changes that are observed. Much largerﬂares mayalso be generated by other stars as well: On April 24, 2004, the star GJ 3685A released aﬂare that was roughly one million times more energetic than a large solarﬂare. The eventwas detected serendipitously by NASA’s Galaxy Evolution Explorer.The Sun


<<<PAGE 374>>>

10.09.89.69.49.29.09.89.6
1900 1920 1940 1960 1980BD + 26º730SAO 76659B
FIGURE 39The light curve of BD+26◦730, a BY Dra star. SAO 76659 is a nearby referencestar. (Figure from Hartmann et al.,Ap. J.,249, 662, 1981.)Starspotsare also observed to exist on stars other than the Sun. Starspots are revealed bytheir effect on the luminosity of a star, which can be measured at a level of 1%. Two classesof stars, RS Canum Venaticorum and BY Draconis stars,1show signiﬁcant long-termvariations that are attributed to starspots covering appreciable fractions of their surfaces.For example, Fig. 39 shows a variation of over 0.6 magnitude in the B band for the BYDraconis star, BD+26◦730. Starspots can even be used to measure stellar rotation.Magneticﬁelds have also been detected directly on several cool main-sequence stars bymeasuring Zeeman-broadened spectral lines. Analysis of the data indicatesﬁeld strengthsof several tenths of a tesla over signiﬁcant fractions of the stellar surfaces. The existence ofthe strongﬁelds correlates with their observed luminosity variations.From our discussion in this chapter, it should be clear that astrophysics has had a greatdeal of success in explaining many of the features of our Sun. The stellar structure equationsdescribe the major aspects of the solar interior, and much of the Sun’s complex atmosphereis also understood. But many other important issues remain to be resolved, such as thesurface abundance of lithium, the intricate details of the solar cycle, and the interactionbetween the Sun and Earth’s climate. Much exciting and challenging work remains to bedone before we can feel conﬁdent that we fully understand the star that is closest to us.1Classes of stars that show light variations,variable stars, are usually named after theﬁrst star discovered thatexhibits the speciﬁc characteristics. RS CVn and BY Dra are main-sequence stars of spectral classes F–G andK–M, respectively. The letters RS and BY indicate that these are variable stars; Canum Venaticorum and Draconisare the constellations in which the stars are located.4
4The Sun


<<<PAGE 375>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBahcall, John N.,“Solving the Mystery of the Missing Neutrinos,”Nobele-Museum,http://www.nobel.se/physics/articles/bahcall/, 2004.Golub, Leon, and Pasachoff, Jay M.,Nearest Star: The Surprising Science of Our Sun,Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001.Lang, Kenneth R.,The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the Sun, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Semeniuk, Ivan,“Astronomy and the New Neutrino,”Sky and Telescope, September, 2004.The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO),http://sohowww.nascom.nasa.gov/.Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE),http://vestige.lmsal.com/TRACE/.Yohkoh Solar Observatory,http://www.lmsal.com/SXT/.Zirker, Jack B.,Journey from the Center of the Sun, Princeton University Press, Princeton,2002.TechnicalAschwanden, Markus J., Poland, Arthur I., and Rabin, Douglas, M.,“The New SolarCorona,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,39, 175, 2001.Aschwanden, Markus J.,Physics of the Solar Corona: An Introduction, Springer, Berlin,2004.Bahcall, John N.,Neutrino Astrophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.Bahcall, John N., and Ulrich, Roger K.,“Solar Models, Neutrino Experiments, and Helio-seismology,”Reviews of Modern Physics,60, 297, 1988.Bahcall, John N., Pinsonneault, M. H., and Basu, Sarbani,“Solar Models: Current Epoch andTime Dependences, Neutrinos, and Helioseismological Properties,”The AstrophysicalJournal,555, 990, 2001.Bhattacharjee, A.,“Impulsive Magnetic Reconnection in the Earth’s Magnetotail and theSolar Corona,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,27, 421, 1989.Bai, T., and Sturrock, P. A.,“Classiﬁcation of Solar Flares,”Annual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics,42, 365, 2004.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics, Volume I: Basic Stellar Obser-vations and Data, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.Böhm-Vitense, Erika,Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics, Volume II: Stellar Atmospheres,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.Cleveland, Bruce T., et al.,“Measurement of the Solar Electron Neutrino Flux with theHomestake Chlorine Detector,”The Astrophysical Journal,496, 505, 1998.The Sun


<<<PAGE 376>>>

Cox, A. N., Livingston, W. C., and Matthews, M. S. (eds.),Solar Interior and Atmosphere,University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 1991.Foukal, Peter V .,Solar Astrophysics, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1990.Grifﬁths, David J.,Introduction to Electrodynamics, Third Edition, Prentice-Hall, UpperSaddle River, NJ, 1999.Kivelson, Margaret G., and Russell, Christopher T. (eds.),Introduction to Space Physics,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.Lang, Kenneth R.,The Sun from Space, Springer, Berlin, 2000.Parker, E. N.,“Dynamics of Interplanetary Gas and Magnetic Fields,”The AstrophysicalJournal,128, 664, 1958.Thompson, Michael J., Christensen-Dalsgaard, Jørgen, Miesch, Mark S., and Toomre, Juri,“The Internal Rotation of the Sun,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,41,599, 2003.The Sun


<<<PAGE 377>>>



<<<PAGE 378>>>

PROBLEM SET1Using Fig. 1, verify that the change in the Sun’s effective temperature over the past 4.57 bil-lion years is consistent with the variations in its radius and luminosity.
2 (a)At what rate is the Sun’s mass decreasing due to nuclear reactions? Express your answerin solar masses per year.(b)Compare your answer to part (a) with the mass loss rate due to the solar wind.(c)Assuming that the solar wind mass loss rate remains constant, would either mass loss processsigniﬁcantly affect the total mass of the Sun over its entire main-sequence lifetime?3Using the Saha equation, calculate the ratio of the number of H−ions to neutral hydrogen atomsin the Sun’s photosphere. Take the temperature of the gas to be the effective temperature, andassume that the electron pressure is 1.5Nm−2. Note that the Pauli exclusion principle requiresthat only one state can exist for the ion because its two electrons must have opposite spins.4The Paschen series of hydrogen (n=3) can contribute to the visible continuum for the Sunsince the series limit occurs at 820.8 nm. However, it is the contribution from the H−ion thatdominates the formation of the continuum. Using the results of Problem 3 above, along with theBoltzmann equation, estimate the ratio of the number of H−ions to hydrogen atoms in then=3 state.The Sun
LRTe
0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.31.4Radius (R/R  ) and luminosity (L/L  )
Effective temperature (K)012345678Age (109 yr)Present age58005780576057405720570056805660564056205600FIGURE 1The evolution of the Sun on the main sequence. As a result of changes in its internalcomposition, the Sun has become larger and brighter. The solid line indicates its luminosity, the dashedline its radius, and the dash-dot line its effective temperature. The luminosity and radius curves arerelative to present-day values. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.)
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 1s, 

<<<PAGE 379>>>

6Estimate the thermally Doppler-broadened line widths for the hydrogen Lyα, C III, O VI, andMg X lines given below; use the temperatures provided. Take the masses of H, C, O, andMg to be 1 u, 12 u, 16 u, and 24 u, respectively.7 (a)Using the below equation, show that in the Sun’s photosphere,ln(Ba/Bb)≈11.5+hckT/parenleftbigg1λb−1λa/parenrightbiggwhereBa/Bbis the ratio of the amount of blackbody radiation emitted atλa=10 nm tothe amount emitted atλb=100 nm, centered in a wavelength band 0.1 nm wide.(b)What is the value of this expression for the case where the temperature is taken to be theeffective temperature of the Sun?(c)Writing the ratio in the formBa/Bb=10x, determine the value ofx.8The gas pressure at the base of the photosphere is approximately 2×104Nm−2and the massdensity is 3.2×10−4kg m−3. Estimate the sound speed at the base of the photosphere, andcompare your answer with the values at the top of the photosphere and averaged throughoutthe Sun.9Suppose that you are attempting to make observations through an optically thick gas thathas a constant density and temperature. Assume that the density and temperature of the gasare 2.2×10−4kg m−3and 5777 K, respectively, typical of the values found in the Sun’sphotosphere. If the opacity of the gas at one wavelength (λ1) isκλ1=0.026 m2kg−1and theopacity at another wavelength (λ2)i sκλ2=0.030 m2kg−1, calculate the distance into the gaswhere the optical depth equals 2/3 for each wavelength. At which wavelength can you seefarther into the gas? How much farther? This effect allows astronomers to probe the Sun’satmosphere at different depths (see Fig. 13).(b)Using Hαredshift data for solar granulation, estimate the full width at half-maximum whenconvective turbulent motions are included with thermal motions.(c)What is the ratio ofv2turbto 2kT/m?(d)Determine the relative change in the full width at half-maximum due to Doppler broadeningwhen turbulence is included. Does turbulence make a signiﬁcant contribution to(/Delta1λ)1/2in the solar photosphere?Lyman-alpha (Lyα)e m i s s i o nl i n eo fh y d r o g e n(n=2→n=1)isproducedthechromosphereat20,000K,theCIII97.7-nmlineoriginatesatalevelwherethetemperatureis90,000K,the103.2-nmlineofOVIoccursat300,000K,andMgXcreatesa62.5-nm line at 1.4×106K.The121.6-nm(ϵDeltaαλ)1/2=2λc/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg2kTm+v2turb/parenrightbiggln 2,5 (a)Using the below equation and neglecting turbulence, estimate the full width at half-maximumαabsorption line due to random thermal motions in the Sun’s photosphere.Assume that the temperature is the Sun’s effective temperature.of the hydrogen HThe Sun: Problem Set
Bλ(T )=2hc2/λ5ehc/λkT−1.at thetopof


<<<PAGE 380>>>

IncreasingheightIncreasingheightDeep in photosphere
Deep in photosphereContinuum
0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Relative intensity–0.5–0.4–0.3–0.2–0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5D/H9261 (nm)FIGURE 13The relationship between absorption line strength and depth in the photosphere fora typical spectral line. The wings of the line are formed deeper in the photosphere than is the centerof the line.10 (a)Using the data given in Example 2  of The Sun, estimate the pressure scale height at(b)Assuming that the ratio of the mixing length to the pressure scale height is 2.2, use themeasured Doppler velocity of solar granulation to estimate the amount of time required fora convective bubble to travel one mixing length. Compare this value to the characteristiclifetime of a granule.11Show that Eq. (6) follows directly from Eq. (5).12Calculate the magnetic pressure in the center of the umbra of a large sunspot. Assume that themagneticﬁeld strength is 0.2 T. Compare your answer with a typical value of 2×104Nm−2for the gas pressure at the base of the photosphere.13Assume that a large solarﬂare erupts in a region where the magneticﬁeld strength is 0.03 Tand that it releases 1025J in one hour.(a)What was the magnetic energy density in that region before the eruption began?(b)What minimum volume would be required to supply the magnetic energy necessary to fueltheﬂare?(c)Assuming for simplicity that the volume involved in supplying the energy for theﬂareeruption was a cube, compare the length of one side of the cube with the typical size of alargeﬂare.(d)How long would it take an Alfvén wave to travel the length of theﬂare?the base of the photosphere.ddr(2nkT)=−GM⊙nmpr2.(5)n(r)=n0e−λ(1−r0/r)(6)
(e)What can you conclude about the assumption that magnetic energy is the source of solarﬂares, given the physical dimensions and timescales involved?The Sun: Problem Set
.2“”
.


<<<PAGE 381>>>

with the annual mass loss from the solar wind. Express your answer as a percentage of CMEmass loss to solar wind mass loss.15Assume that the velocity of a CME directed toward Earth is 400 km s−1and that the mass ofthe CME is 1013kg.(a)Estimate the kinetic energy contained in the CME, and compare your answer to the energyreleased in a largeﬂare. Express your answer as a percentage of the energy of theﬂare.(b)Estimate the transit time for the CME to reach Earth.(c)Brieﬂy explain how astronomers are able to“predict”the occurrence of aurorae in advanceof magnetic storms on Earth.16 (a)Calculate the frequency shift produced by the normal Zeeman effect in the center of asunspot that has a magneticﬁeld strength of 0.3 T.(b)By what fraction would the wavelength of one component of the 630.25-nm Fe I spectralline change as a consequence of a magneticﬁeld of 0.3 T?17From the data given in Fig.16, estimate the rotation period of the solar interior at the baseof the tachocline.
18Argue from Eq. (9) and the work integral that magnetic pressure is given by Eq. (10).
480460440420400380360W/2/H9266 (nHz)60º45º30º15º0º
0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00r/RTachoclineRadiationzoneConvectionzoneFIGURE 16The rotation period of the Sun varies with latitude and depth./Omega1, the angular fre-quency, has units of radians per second. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of NSF’s National SolarObservatory.)(9)(10)14Assuming that an average of one coronal mass ejection occurs per day and that a typical CMEejects 1013kg of material, estimate the annual mass loss from CMEs and compare your answerThe Sun: Problem Set
um=B22µ0.Pm=B22µ0.

<<<PAGE 382>>>

From Chapter 10 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 The Interiors of Stars
by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.

<<<PAGE 383>>>

The Interiors of Stars1Hydrostatic Equilibrium2Pressure Equation of State3Stellar Energy Sources4Energy Transport and Thermodynamics5Stellar Model Building6The Main Sequence1HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM
Determining the Internal Structures of StarsTo deduce the detailed internal structure of stars requires the generation of computer modelsthat are consistent with all known physical laws and that ultimately agree with observablesurface features. Although much of the theoretical foundation of stellar structure was un-derstood by the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, it wasn’t until the 1960s that sufﬁcientlyfast computing machines became available to carry out all of the necessary calculations.Arguably one of the greatest successes of theoretical astrophysics has been the detailedcomputer modeling of stellar structure and evolution. However, despite all of the successesof such calculations, numerous questions remain unanswered. The solution to many of theseproblems requires a more detailed theoretical understanding of the physical processes inoperation in the interiors of stars, combined with even greater computational power.The theoretical study of stellar structure, coupled with observational data, clearly showsthat stars are dynamic objects, usually changing at an imperceptibly slow rate by humanstandards, although they can sometimes change in very rapid and dramatic ways, suchas during a supernova explosion. That such changes must occur can be seen by simplyconsidering the observed energy output of a star. In the Sun, 3.839×1026J of energy isAnalysis of stellar spectra, collected by ground-based and space - based telescopes, ena-bles astronomers to determine a variety of quantities related to the outer layers of stars, such as effective temperature, luminosity, and composition. However, with the exceptions of the ongoing detection of neutrinos from the Sun (which will be discussed later in this chapter and the one-time detection from Supernova 1987A, no direct way exists to observe the central regions of stars.


<<<PAGE 384>>>

emitted every second. This rate of energy output would be sufﬁcient to melt a 0◦C block ofice measuring 1 AU×1 mile×1 mile in only 0.3 s, assuming that the absorption of theenergy was 100% efﬁcient. Because stars do not have inﬁnite supplies of energy, they musteventually use up their reserves and die.Stellar evolution is the result of a constant ﬁghtagainst the relentless pull of gravity.The Derivation of the Hydrostatic Equilibrium EquationThe gravitational force is always attractive, implying that an opposing force must exist if astar is to avoid collapse. This force is provided by pressure. To calculate how the pressuremust vary with depth, consider a cylinder of massdmwhose base is located a distancerfrom the center of a spherical star (see Fig. 1). The areas of the top and bottom ofthe cylinder are eachAand the cylinder’s height isdr. Furthermore, assume that the onlyforces acting on the cylinder are gravity and the pressure force, which is always normal tothe surface and may vary with distance from the center of the star. Using Newton’s secondlawF=ma, we have the net force on the cylinder:dmd2rdt2=Fg+FP,t+FP,b,whereFg<0 is the gravitational force directed inward andFP,tandFP,bare the pressureforces on the top and bottom of the cylinder, respectively. Note that since the pressureforces on the side of the cylinder will cancel, they have been explicitly excluded from theexpression. Because the pressure force is always normal to the surface, the force exerted onthe top of the cylinder must necessarily be directed toward the center of the star (FP,t<0),
drdmFP,bFP,tATowardsurface
FIGURE 1In a static star the gravitational force on a mass element is exactly canceled by theoutward force due to a pressure gradient in the star. A cylinder of massdmis located at a distancerfrom the center of the star. The height of the cylinder isdr, and the areas of the top and bottom arebothA. The density of the gas is assumed to beρat that position.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 385>>>

whereas the force on the bottom is directed outward (FP,b>0). WritingFP,tin terms ofFP,band a correction termdFPthat accounts for the change in force due to a change inrresults inFP,t=−⎩parenleftbigFP,b+dFP⎩parenrightbig.Substitution into the previous expression givesdmd2rdt2=Fg−dFP.(1)dmlocated at adistancerfromthecenterofasphericallysymmetricmassisFg=−GMrdmr2,(2)whereMris the mass inside the sphere of radiusr, often referred to as theinterior mass.The contribution to the gravitational force by spherically symmetric mass shells locatedoutsideriszeroPressure is deﬁned as the amount of force per unit area exerted on a surface, orP≡FA.Allowing for a difference in pressuresdPbetween the top of the cylinder and the bottomdue to the different forces exerted on each surface, the differential force may be expressedasdFP=AdP.(3)Substituting Eqs. (2) and (3) into Eq. (1) givesdmd2rdt2=−GMrdmr2−AdP.(4)If the density of the gas in the cylinder isρ, its mass is justdm=ρAdr,whereAdris the cylinder’s volume. Using this expression in Eq. (4) yieldsρAdrd2rdt2=−GMrρAdrr2−AdP.Finally, dividing through by the volume of the cylinder, we haveρd2rdt2=−GMrρr2−dPdr.(5)This is the equation for the radial motion of the cylinder, assuming spherical symmetry.The gravitational force on a small massThe Interiors of Stars
.


<<<PAGE 386>>>

If we assume further that the star is static, then the acceleration must be zero. In this caseEq. (5) reduces todPdr=−GMrρr2=−ρg,(6)whereg≡GMr/r2is the local acceleration of gravity at radiusr. Equation ( 6), thecondition ofhydrostatic equilibrium, represents one of the fundamental equations ofstellar structure for spherically symmetric objects under the assumption that accelerationsare negligible. Equation ( 6) clearly indicates that in order for a star to be static, apressuregradientdP/drmust exist to counteract the force of gravity. It is not the pressure thatsupports a star, but the change in pressure with radius. Furthermore, the pressure mustdecreasewith increasing radius; the pressure is necessarily larger in the interior than it isnear the surface.Example 1.1.To obtain a very crude estimate of the pressure at the center of theSun, assume thatMr=1M⊙,r=1R⊙, andρ=ρ⊙=1410 kg m−3is theaveragesolardensityAssumealsothatthesurfacepressureisexactlyzero.Then,convertingthedifferentialequationtoadifferenceequation,thelefthandsideofEq.(6)becomesdPdr∼Ps−PcRs−0∼−PcR⊙,wherePcis the central pressure, andPsandRsare the surface pressure and radius, respec-tively. Substituting into the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium and solving for the centralpressure, we ﬁndPc∼GM⊙ρ⊙R⊙∼2.7×1014Nm−2.To obtain a more accurate value, we need tointegratethe hydrostatic equilibrium equa-tion from the surface to the center, taking into consideration the change in the interior massMrat each point, together with the variation of density with radiusρr≡ρ(r), giving⎩integraldisplayPcPsdP=Pc=−⎩integraldisplayRcRsGMrρr2dr.Actually carrying out the integration requires functional forms ofMrandρ. Unfortunately,such explicit expressions are not available, implying that further relationships between suchquantities must be developed.From a more rigorous calculation, a standard solar model gives a central pressure ofnearly 2.34×1016Nm−2. This value is much larger than the one obtained from our crudeestimate because of the increased density near the center of the Sun. As a reference, oneatmosphere of pressure is 1 atm=1.013×105Nm−2; therefore, the more realistic modelpredicts a central pressure of 2.3×1011atm!.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 387>>>

rdMr
dr
FIGURE 2A spherically symmetric shell of massdMrhaving a thicknessdrand located adistancerfrom the center of the star. The local density of the shell isρ.The Equation of Mass ConservationAsecond relationship involving mass, radius, and density also exists.Again, for a sphericallysymmetric star, consider ashellof massdMrand thicknessdr, located a distancerfromthe center, as in Fig. 2. Assuming that the shell is sufﬁciently thin (i.e.,dr≪r), thevolume of the shell is approximatelydV=4πr2dr. If the local density of the gas isρ, theshell’s mass is given bydMr=ρ(4πr2dr).Rewriting, we arrive at themass conservation equation,dMrdr=4πr2ρ,(7)which dictates how the interior mass of a star must change with distance from the center.Equation (7) is the second of the fundamental equations of stellar structure.2PRESSURE EQUATION OF STATEUp to this point no information has been provided about the origin of the pressure termrequired by Eq. ( 6). To describe this macroscopic manifestation of particle interactions, itis necessary to derive a pressureequation of stateof the material. Such an equation of staterelates the dependence of pressure on other fundamental parameters of the material. Onewell-known example of a pressure equation of state is theideal gas law, often expressed asPV=NkT,The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 388>>>

whereVis the volume of the gas,Nis the number of particles,Tis the temperature, andkis Boltzmann’s constant.Although this expression was ﬁrst determined experimentally, it is informative to deriveit from fundamental physical principles. The approach used here will also provide a generalmethod for considering environments where the assumptions of the ideal gas law do notapply, a situation frequently encountered in astrophysical problems.The Derivation of the Pressure IntegralConsider a cylinder of gas of lengthℓDelta1xand cross-sectional areaA, as in Fig. 3. Thegas contained in the cylinder is assumed to be composed of point particles, each of massm, that interact through perfectly elastic collisions only—in other words, as an ideal gas.To determine the pressure exerted on one of the ends of the container, examine the result ofan impact on the right wall by an individual particle. Since, for a perfectly elastic collision,the angle of reﬂection from the wall must be equal to the angle of incidence, the change inmomentum of the particle is necessarily entirely in thex-direction, normal to the surface.From Newton’s second law1(f=ma=dp/dt) and third law, theimpulsefℓDelta1tdeliveredto the wall is just the negative of the change in momentum of the particle, orfℓDelta1t=−ℓDelta1p=2pxˆi,wherepxis the component of the particle’s initial momentum in thex-direction. Now theaverage force exerted by the particle over a period of time can be determined by evaluatingthe time interval between collisions with the right wall. Since the particle must traversethe length of the container twice before returning for a second reﬂection, the time intervalbetween collisions with the same wall by the same particle is given byℓDelta1t=2ℓDelta1xvx,
mpAyzxDx(a)(b)mmpfpi/H9258/H9258FIGURE 3(a) A cylinder of gas of lengthℓDelta1xand cross-sectional areaA. Assume that the gascontained in the cylinder is an ideal gas. (b) The collision of an individual point mass with one of theends of the cylinder. For a perfectly elastic collision, the angle of reﬂection must equal the angle ofincidence.1Note that a lowercasefis used here to indicate that the force is due to asingleparticle.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 389>>>

so that the average force exerted on the wall by a single particle over that time period isgiven byf=2pxℓDelta1t=pxvxℓDelta1x,where it is assumed that the direction of the force vector is normal to the surface.Now, becausepx∝vx, the numerator is proportional tov2x. To evaluate this, recall thatthe magnitude of the velocity vector is given byv2=v2x+v2y+v2z. For a sufﬁciently largecollection of particles in random motion, the likelihood of motion in each of the threedirections is the same, orv2x=v2y=v2z=v2/3. Substituting13pvforpxvx, the averageforce per particle having momentumpisf (p)=13pvℓDelta1x.It is usually the case that the particles have a range of momenta. If the number ofparticles with momenta betweenpandp+dpis given by the expressionNpdp, then thetotal number of particles in the container isN=⎩integraldisplay∞0Npdp.The contribution to the total force,dF(p),b yallparticles in that momentum range is givenbydF(p)=f (p)Npdp=13NpℓDelta1xpv dp.Integrating over all possible values of the momentum, the total force exerted by particlecollisions isF=13⎩integraldisplay∞0NpℓDelta1xpv dp.Dividing both sides of the expression by the surface area of the wallAgives the pressureon the surface asP=F/A. Noting thatℓDelta1V=AℓDelta1 xis just the volume of the cylinder anddeﬁningnpdpto be the number of particlesper unit volumehaving momenta betweenpandp+dp, ornpdp≡NpℓDelta1Vdp,we ﬁnd that the pressure exerted on the wall isP=13⎩integraldisplay∞0nppv dp.(8)This expression, which is sometimes called thepressure integral, makes it possible tocompute the pressure, given somedistribution function,npdp.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 390>>>

The Ideal Gas Law in Terms of the Mean Molecular WeightEquation ( 8) is valid for both massive and massless particles (such as photons) travelingat any speed. For the special case of massive, nonrelativistic particles, we may usep=mvto write the pressure integral asP=13⎩integraldisplay∞0mnvv2dv,(9)wherenvdv=npdpis the number of particles per unit volume having speeds betweenvandv+dv.The functionnvdvis dependent on the physical nature of the system being described.In the case of an ideal gas,nvdvis the Maxwell–Boltzmann velocity distributionnvdv=n⎩parenleftBigm2πkT⎩parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,wheren=⎩integraltext∞0nvdvis the particle number density. Substituting into the pressure integralﬁnally givesPg=nkT(10)Sincen≡N/V, Eq. ( 10) is just thefamiliar ideal gas law.In astrophysical applications it is often convenient to express the ideal gas law in analternative form. Sincenis the particle number density, it is clear that it must be related tothe mass density of the gas. Allowing for a variety of particles of different masses, it is thenpossible to expressnasn=ρm,wheremis the average mass of a gas particle. Substituting, the ideal gas law becomesPg=ρkTm.We now deﬁne a new quantity, themean molecular weight, asµ≡mmH,wheremH=1.673532499×10−27kg is the mass of the hydrogen atom.The mean molec-ular weight is just the average mass of a free particle in the gas, in units of the mass ofhydrogen.The ideal gas law can now be written in terms of the mean molecular weight asPg=ρkTµmH.(11),The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 391>>>

The mean molecular weight depends on the composition of the gas as well as on thestate of ionization of each species. The level of ionization enters because free electronsmust be included in the average mass per particlem. This implies that a detailed analysis oftheSahaequationisnecessarytocalculatetherelativenumbersofionizationstates.When the gas is either completely neutral or completely ionized, the calculation simpliﬁessigniﬁcantly, however.For a completely neutral gas,mn=⎩summationdisplayjNjmj⎩summationdisplayjNj,(12)wheremjandNjare, respectively, the mass and the total number of atoms of typejthatare present in the gas, and the sums are assumed to be carried out over all types of atoms.Dividing bymHyieldsµn=⎩summationdisplayjNjAj⎩summationdisplayjNj,whereAj≡mj/mH. Similarly, for a completely ionized gas,µi≃⎩summationdisplayjNjAj⎩summationdisplayjNj(1+zj),where 1+zjaccounts for the nucleus plus the number of free electrons that result fromcompletely ionizing an atom of typej. (Do not confusezjwithZ, the mass fraction ofmetals.)By inverting the expression form,itispossibletowritealternativeequationsforµintermsofmassfractions.Recallingthatm=µmH, Eq. (12) for a neutral gas gives1µnmH=⎩summationdisplayjNj⎩summationdisplayjNjmj=total number of particlestotal mass of gasThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 392>>>

=⎩summationdisplayjnumber of particles fromjmass of particles fromj·mass of particles fromjtotal mass of gas=⎩summationdisplayjNjNjAjmHXj=⎩summationdisplayj1AjmHXj,whereXjis the mass fraction of atoms of typej. Solving for 1/µn, we have1µn=⎩summationdisplayj1AjXj.(13)Thus, for a neutral gas,1µn≃X+14Y+⎩angbracketleftbigg1A⎩angbracketrightbiggnZ.(14)⟨1/A⟩nis a weighted average of all elements in the gas heavier than helium. For solarabundances,⟨1/A⟩n∼1/15.5.The mean molecular weight of a completely ionized gas may be determined in a similarway. It is necessary only to include thetotalnumber of particles contained in the sample,both nuclei and electrons. For instance, each hydrogen atom contributes one free electron,together with its nucleus, to the total number of particles. Similarly, one helium atomcontributes two free electrons plus its nucleus. Therefore, for a completely ionized gas,Eq. ( 13) becomes1µi=⎩summationdisplayj1+zjAjXj.(15)Including hydrogen and helium explicitly, we have1µi≃2X+34Y+⎩angbracketleftbigg1+zA⎩angbracketrightbiggiZ.(16)For elements much heavier than helium, 1+zj≃zj, wherezj≫1 represents the numberof protons (or electrons) in an atom of typej. It also holds thatAj≃2zj, the relation beingbased on the facts that sufﬁciently massive atoms have approximately the same number ofprotons and neutrons in their nuclei and that protons and neutrons have verysimilar masses.Thus⎩angbracketleftbigg1+zA⎩angbracketrightbiggi≃12.If we assume thatX=0.70,Y=0.28, andZ=0.02, a composition typical of youngerstars, then with these expressions for the mean molecular weight,µn=1.30 andµi=0.62.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 393>>>

The Average Kinetic Energy Per ParticleFurther investigation of the ideal gas law shows that it is also possible to combine Eq. ( 10)with the pressure integral (Eq. 9) to ﬁnd the average kinetic energy per particle. Equating,we see thatnkT=13⎩integraldisplay∞0mnvv2dv.This expression can be rewritten to give1n⎩integraldisplay∞0nvv2dv=3kTm.However, the left-hand side of this expression is just the integral average ofv2weightedby the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function. Thusv2=3kTm,or12mv2=32kT.(17)It is worth noting that the factor of 3 arose from averaging particle velocities over the threecoordinate directions (ordegrees of freedom)Thus theaveragekineticenergyofaparticleis12kTper degree of freedom.Fermi–Dirac and Bose–Einstein StatisticsAs has already been mentioned, there are stellar environments where the assumptions ofthe ideal gas law do not hold even approximately. For instance, in the pressure integral itwas assumed that the upper limit of integration for velocity was inﬁnity. Of course, thiscannot be the case since, from Einstein’s theory of special relativity, the maximum possiblevalue of velocity isc, the speed of light. Furthermore, the effects of quantum mechanicswere also neglected in the derivation of the ideal gas law. When the Heisenberg uncertaintyprinciple and the Pauli exclusion principle are considered, a distribution function differentfrom the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution results. TheFermi–Diracdistribution functionconsiders these important principles and leads to a very different pressure equation ofstate when applied to extremely dense matter such as that found in white dwarf stars andneutron stars.Fermi–Diracstatisticsare calledfermions.Another statistical distribution function is obtained if it is assumed that the presenceof some particles in a particular state enhances the likelihood of others being in the samestate, an effect somewhat opposite to that of the Pauli exclusion principle.Bose–Einsteinstatisticshas a variety of applications, including understanding the behavior of photons.Particles that obey Bose–Einstein statistics are known asbosons.Just as special relativity and quantum mechanics must give classical results in the appro-priate limits, Fermi–Dirac and Bose–Einstein statistics also approach the classical regime at.
Particles such as electrons, protons, and neutrons that obeyThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 394>>>

sufﬁciently low densities and velocities. In these limits both distribution functions becomeindistinguishable from the classical Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function.The Contribution Due to Radiation Pressureusing an identity for the distribution function,npdp=nνdν, the general pressure integral,Eq. ( 8), now describes the effect of radiation, givingPrad=13⎩integraldisplay∞0hνnνdν.At this point, the problem again reduces to ﬁnding an appropriate expression fornνdν.Since photons are bosons, the Bose–Einstein distribution function would apply. However,the problem may also be solved by realizing thatnνdνrepresents the number density ofphotons having frequencies lying in the range betweenνandν+dν. Multiplying by theenergy of each photon in that range would then give theenergy densityover the frequencyinterval, orPrad=13⎩integraldisplay∞0uνdν,(18)whereuνdν=hνnνdν. But the energy density distribution function is found from thePlanckfunctionforblackbodyradiationSubstitutingintoEq.(18)andperformingtheintegrationleadtoPrad=13aT4,(19)whereaistheradiationconstantIn many astrophysical situations the pressure due to photons can actually exceed by asigniﬁcant amount the pressure produced by the gas. In fact it is possible that the magnitudeof the force due to radiation pressure can become sufﬁciently great that it surpasses thegravitational force, resulting in an overall expansion of the system.Combining both the ideal gas and radiation pressure terms, the total pressure becomesPt=ρkTµmH+13aT4.(20)Example 2.1.Using the results of Example 1.1, we can estimate the central tem-perature of the Sun. Neglecting the radiation pressure term, the central temperature is foundcontinuedThe Interiors of Stars
..Because photons possess momentum pγ = hv /c, they are capable of delivering an  impulse to other particles during absorption or reﬂection. Consequently, electro-magnetic radiation results in another form of pressure. It is instructive to rederive the  expression for radiation pressure by making use of the pressure integral. Substituting the speed of light for the velocity v, using the expression for photon momentum, and


<<<PAGE 395>>>

from the ideal gas law equation of state to beTc=PcµmHρk.Usingρ⊙, a value ofµi=0.62 appropriate for complete ionization, and the estimatedvalue for the central pressure, we ﬁnd thatTc∼1.44×107Kwhich is in reasonable agreement with more detailed calculations. One standard solar modelgives a central temperature of 1.57×107K. At this temperature, the pressure due toradiation is only 1.53×1013Nm−2, 0.065% of the gas pressure.3STELLAR ENERGY SOURCESAs we have already seen, the rate of energy output of stars (their luminosities) is very large.However, the question of the source of that energy has not yet been addressed. Clearly, onemeasure of the lifetime of a star must be related to how long it can sustain its power output.Gravitation and the Kelvin–Helmholtz TimescaleOne likely source of stellar energy is gravitational potential energy.tionalpotentialenergyofasystemoftwoparticlesisgivenbyU=−GMmr.As the distance betweenMandmdiminishes, the gravitational potential energy becomesmore negative, implying that energy must have been converted to other forms, such askinetic energy. If a star can manage to convert its gravitational potential energy into heatand then radiate that heat into space, the star may be able to shine for a signiﬁcant periodCalculating the gravitational potential energy of a star requires consideration of theinteraction between every possible pair of particles. This is not as difﬁcult as it might ﬁrstseem. The gravitational force on a point massdmilocated outside of a spherically symmetricmassMrisdFg,i=GMrdmir2Since, as we will see in the next chapter, the Sun has already converted a signiﬁcant amount of its core hydrogeninto helium via nuclear reactions, the actual value ofµiis closer to 0.84.2
Thegravita
2The Interiors of Stars
,
of time. However, we must also remember that by the virial theorem the total energy of a system of particles in equilibrium is one-half of the system’s potential energy. Therefore, only one-half of the change in gravitational potential energy of a star is actually available to be radiated away; the remaining potential energy supplies the thermal energy that heats the star.


<<<PAGE 396>>>

and is directed toward the center of the sphere. This is just the same force that would existif all of the mass of the sphere were located at its center, a distancerfrom the point mass.This immediately implies that the gravitational potential energy of the point mass isdUg,i=−GMrdmir.If, rather than considering an individual point mass, we assume that point masses are dis-tributed uniformly within a shell of thicknessdrand massdm(wheredmis the sum of allthe point massesdmi), thendm=4πr2ρd r ,whereρis the mass density of the shell and 4πr2dris its volume. ThusdUg=−GMr4πr2ρrdr.Integrating over all mass shells from the center of the star to the surface, its total gravitationalpotential energy becomesUg=−4πG⎩integraldisplayR0Mrρr dr,(21)whereRis the radius of the star.An exact calculation ofUgrequires knowledge of howρ, and consequentlyMr, dependonr. Nevertheless, an approximate value can be obtained by assuming thatρis constantand equal to its average value, orρ∼ρ=M43πR3,Mbeing the total mass of the star. Now we may also approximateMrasMr∼43πr3ρ.If we substitute into Eq. (21), the total gravitational potential energy becomesUg∼−16π215Gρ2R5∼−35GM2R.(22)Lastly, applying the virial theorem, the total mechanical energy of the star isE∼−310GM2R.(23)Example 3.1.If the Sun were originally much larger than it is today, how much en-ergy would have been liberated in its gravitational collapse?Assuming that its original radiuscontinuedThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 397>>>

wasRi, whereRi≫1R⊙, then the energy radiated away during collapse would beℓDelta1Eg=−⎩parenleftbigEf−Ei⎩parenrightbig≃−Ef≃310GM2⊙R⊙≃1.1×1041J.Assuming also that the luminosity of the Sun has been roughly constant throughout itslifetime, it could emit energy at that rate for approximatelytKH=ℓDelta1EgL⊙(24)∼107yr.tKHis known as theKelvin–Helmholtz timescale. Based on radioactive dating techniques,however, the estimated age of rocks on the Moon’s surface is over 4×109yr. It seemsunlikely that the age of the Sun is less than the age of the Moon! Therefore, gravitationalpotential energy alone cannot account for the Sun’s luminosity throughout its entire lifetime.As we shall see in later chapters, however, gravitational energy can play an important roleduring some phases of the evolution of stars.Another possible energy source involves chemical processes. However, since chemicalreactions are based on the interactions of orbital electrons in atoms, the amount of energyavailable to be released per atom is not likely to be more than 1–10 electron volts, typicalThe Nuclear TimescaleThe nuclei of atoms may also be considered as sources of energy. Whereas electron orbitsinvolve energies in the electron volt (eV) range, nuclear processes generally involve energiesmillions of times larger (MeV). Just as chemical reactions can result in the transformationof atoms into molecules or one kind of molecule into another, nuclear reactions change onetype of nucleus into another.The nucleus of a particularelementis speciﬁed by the number of protons,Z, it contains(not to be confused with the mass fraction of metals), with each proton carrying a charge of+e. Obviously, in a neutral atom the number of protons must exactly equal the number oforbital electrons. Anisotopeof a given element is identiﬁed by the number of neutrons,N,in the nucleus, with neutrons being electrically neutral, as the name implies. (All isotopesof a given element have the same number of protons.) Collectively, protons and neutronsare referred to asnucleons, the number of nucleons in a particular isotope beingA=Z+N. Since protons and neutrons have very similar masses and greatly exceed the massof electrons,Ais a good indication of the mass of the isotope and is often referred to as theThe Interiors of Stars
of the atomic energy levels in hydrogen and helium. Given the number of atoms present in a star, the amount of chemical energy available is also far too low to account for the Sun’s luminosity over a reasonable period of time.


<<<PAGE 398>>>

mass number. The masses of the proton, neutron, and electron are, respectively,mp=1.67262158×10−27kg=1.00727646688 umn=1.67492716×10−27kg=1.00866491578 ume=9.10938188×10−31kg=0.0005485799110 u.It is often convenient to express the masses of nuclei in terms ofatomic mass units;1u=1.66053873×10−27kg, exactly one-twelfth the mass of the isotope carbon-12. Themasses of nuclear particles are also frequently expressed in terms of their rest mass energies,in units of MeV . Using Einstein’sE=mc2, we ﬁnd 1 u=931.494013 MeV/c2. Whenmasses are expressed simply in terms of rest mass energies, as is often the case, the factorc2is implicitly assumed.The simplest isotope of hydrogen is composed of one proton and one electron and has amass ofmH=1.00782503214 u. This mass is actually very slightlylessthan the combinedmasses of the proton and electron taken separately. In fact, if the atom is in its ground state,the exact mass difference is 13.6 eV, which is just its ionization potential. Since mass isequivalent to a corresponding amount of energy, and the total mass–energy of the systemmust be conserved, any loss in energy when the electron and proton combine to form anatom must come at the expense of a loss in total mass.Similarly, energy is also released with an accompanying loss in mass when nucleonsare combined to form atomic nuclei. A helium nucleus, composed of two protons andtwo neutrons, can be formed by a series of nuclear reactions originally involving fourhydrogen nuclei (i.e., 4H→He+low mass remnants). Such reactions are known asfusionreactions, since lighter particles are “fused” together to form a heavier particle. (Conversely,aﬁssionreaction occurs when a massive nucleus is split into smaller fragments.) Thetotal mass of the four hydrogen atoms is 4.03130013 u, whereas the mass of one heliumatom ismHe=4.002603 u. Neglecting the contribution of low-mass remnants such asneutrinos, the combined mass of the hydrogen atomsexceedsthe mass of the helium atombyℓDelta1m=0.028697 u, or 0.7%. Therefore, the total amount of energy released in formingthe helium nucleus isEb=ℓDelta1mc2=26.731 MeV. This is known as thebinding energyofthe helium nucleus. If the nucleus were to be broken apart into its constituent protons andneutrons, the amount of energy required to accomplish the task would be 26.731 MeV.Example 3.2.Is this source of nuclear energy sufﬁcient to power the Sun during itslifetime? For simplicity, assume also that the Sun was originally 100% hydrogen and thatonly the inner 10% of the Sun’s mass becomes hot enough to convert hydrogen into helium.Since 0.7% of the mass of hydrogen would be converted to energy in forming a heliumnucleus, the amount of nuclear energy available in the Sun would beEnuclear=0.1×0.007×M⊙c2=1.3×1044J.continuedThe quantityAjis approximately equal to the mass number.3
3The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 399>>>

This gives anuclear timescaleof approximatelytnuclear=EnuclearL⊙(25)∼1010yr,more than enough time to account for the age of Moon rocks.Quantum Mechanical TunnelingApparently, sufﬁcient energy is available in the nuclei of atoms to provide a source for stellarluminosities, but can nuclear reactions actually occur in the interiors of stars? For a reactionto occur, the nuclei of atoms must collide, forming new nuclei in the process. However,all nuclei are positively charged, meaning that a Coulomb potential energy barrier mustbe overcome before contact can occur. Figure 4 shows the characteristic shape of thepotential energy curve that an atomic nucleus would experience when approaching anothernucleus. The curve is composed of two parts: The portion outside of the nucleus is thepotential energy that exists between two positively charged nuclei, and the portion insidethe nucleus forms apotential wellgoverned by thestrong nuclear forcethat binds thenucleus together. The strong nuclear force is a very short-range force that acts between allnucleons within the atom. It is an attractive force that dominates the Coulomb repulsionbetween protons. Clearly, if such a force did not exist, a nucleus would immediately ﬂyapart.
02468 1 0 1 2r (fm)Deuterium binding energy –2.22 MeVStrong nuclear potential well (approx –30 MeV)–3–2–1012U(r) (MeV)Coulomb repulsion (1/r)p-p interaction
FIGURE 4The potential energy curve characteristic of nuclear reactions. The Coulomb repul-sion between positive nuclei results in a barrier that is inversely proportional to the separation betweennuclei and is proportional to the product of their charges. The nuclear potential well inside the nucleusis due to the attractive strong nuclear force.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 400>>>

If we assume that the energy required to overcome the Coulomb barrier is provided bythe thermal energy of the gas, and that all nuclei are moving nonrelativistically, then thetemperatureTclassicalrequired to overcome the barrier can be estimated. Since all of theparticles in the gas are in random motion, it is appropriate to refer to the relative velocityvbetween two nuclei and theirreduced mass,µm(note that we arenotreferringheretothemeanmolecularweight,µ). Equating the initial kinetic energy ofthereducedmasstothepotentialenergyofthebarriergivesthepositionoftheclassical“turn-aroundpoint.”Now,usingEq.(17)yields12µmv2=32kTclassical=14πϵ0Z1Z2e2r,whereTclassicaldenotes the temperature required for an average particle to overcome thebarrier,Z1andZ2are the numbers of protons in each nucleus, andris their distance ofseparation. Assuming that the radius of a typical nucleus is on the order of 1 fm=10−15m,the temperature needed to overcome the Coulomb potential energy barrier is approximatelyTclassical=Z1Z2e26πϵ0kr(26)∼1010Kfor a collision between two protons (Z1=Z2=1). However, the central temperature of theSun is only 1.57×107K, much lower than required here. Even taking into considerationthe fact that the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution indicates that a signiﬁcant number ofparticles have speeds well in excess of the average speed of particles in the gas, classicalphysics is unable to explain how a sufﬁcient number of particles can overcome the Coulombbarrier to produce the Sun’s observed luminosity.uantummechanicstellsusthatitisneverpossibleto know both the position and the momentum of a particle to unlimited accuracy. TheHeisenberg uncertainty principle states that the uncertainties in position and momentumare related byℓDelta1xℓDelta1px≥/planckover2pi12.The uncertainty in the position of one proton colliding with another may be so large that eventhough the kinetic energy of the collision is insufﬁcient to overcome the classical Coulombbarrier, one proton might nevertheless ﬁnd itself within the central potential well deﬁned bythe strong force of the other.This quantum mechanical tunneling has noclassicalcounterpart. As a crude estimate of the effect of tunneling on the temperature necessary to sus-tain nuclear reactions, assume that a proton must be within approximately one de Brogliewavelength of its target in order to tunnel through the Coulomb barrier. Recalling that theQThe Interiors of Stars
Of course, the greater the ratio of the potential energy barrier height to the particle’s kinetic energy or the wider the barrier, the less likely tunneling becomes.


<<<PAGE 401>>>

wavelength of a massive particle is given byλ=h/prewriting the kineticenergyintermsofmomentum,12µmv2=p22µm,and setting the distance of closest approach equal to one wavelength (where the potentialenergy barrier height is equal to the original kinetic energy) give14πϵ0Z1Z2e2λ=p22µm=(h/λ)22µm.Solving forλand substitutingr=λinto Eq. ( 26), we ﬁnd the quantum mechanicalestimate of the temperature required for a reaction to occur:Tquantum=Z21Z22e4µm12π2ϵ20h2k.(27)Again assuming the collision of two protons,µm=mp/2 andZ1=Z2=1. Substituting,we ﬁnd thatTquantum∼107K. In this case, if we assume the effects of quantum mechan-ics, the temperature required for nuclear reactions is consistent with the estimated centraltemperature of the Sun.Nuclear Reaction Rates and the Gamow PeakNow that the possibility of a nuclear energy source has been established, we need a moredetailed description of nuclearreaction ratesin order to apply them to the development ofstellar models. For instance, not all particles in a gas of temperatureTwill have sufﬁcientkinetic energy and the necessary wavelength to tunnel through the Coulomb barrier suc-cessfully. Consequently, the reaction rate per energy interval must be described in termsof the number density of particles having energies within a speciﬁc range, combined withthe probability that those particles can actually tunnel through the Coulomb barrier of thetarget nucleus. The total nuclear reaction rate is then integrated over all possible energies.that particles are initially sufﬁciently far apart that the potential energy may be neglected,the nonrelativistic kinetic energy relation describes the total energy of the particles, orK=E=µmv2/2. Solving for the velocity and substituting, we can write the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution in terms of the number of particles with kinetic energies betweenEandE+dEasnEdE=2nπ1/21(kT )3/2E1/2e−E/kTdE(28)In astrophysical processes, nuclei are usually nonrelativistic, except in the extreme environment of neutron stars.Because of the much smaller masses of electrons, it cannot be assumed that they are also nonrelativistic, however.,
4
4The Interiors of Stars
First consider the number density of nuclei within a speciﬁed energy interval.  As we have seen, the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution relates the number density of particles with velocities between v and v + d v to the temperature of the gas. Assuming


<<<PAGE 402>>>

/H9268(E)ds = v(E)dtFIGURE 5The number of reactions per unit time between particles of typeiand a targetxofcross sectionσ(E)may be thought of in terms of the number of particles in a cylinder of cross-sectionalareaσ(E)and lengthds=v(E) dtthat will reach the target in a time intervaldt.Equation ( 28) gives the number of particles per unit volume that have energies in therangedE, but it does not describe the probability that particles will actually interact. Toaccount for this factor, the idea of across sectionis re-introduced. Deﬁne the cross sectionσ(E)to be the number of reactions per target nucleus per unit time, divided by the ﬂux ofincident particles, orσ(E)≡number of reactions/nucleus/timenumber of incident particles/area/time.Althoughσ(E)is strictly a measure of probability,it can bethoughtofasroughlythecross-sectionalareaofthetargetparticle;anyincomingparticlethatstrikeswithinthatarea,centeredonthetarget,willresultinanuclearreaction.To ﬁnd the reaction rate in units of reactions volume−1time−1, consider the number ofparticles that will hit a target of cross-sectional areaσ(E), assuming that all of the incidentparticles are moving in one direction. Letxdenote a target particle andidenote an incidentparticle. If the number of incident particles per unit volume having energies betweenEandE+dEisniEdE, then the number of reactions,dNE, is the number of particles that canstrikexin a time intervaldtwith a velocityv(E)=√2E/µm.The number of incident particles is just the number contained within a cylinder of volumeσ(E)v(E) dt(see Fig. 5), ordNE=σ(E)v(E)niEdEdt.Now, the number of incident particles per unit volume with the appropriate velocity (orkinetic energy) is some fraction of the total number of particles in the sample,niEdE=ninnEdE,whereni=⎩integraltext∞0niEdE,n=⎩integraltext∞0nEdE, andnEdEis given by Eq. ( 28). Therefore, thenumber of reactions per target nucleus per time intervaldthaving energies betweenEandE+dEisreactions per nucleustime interval=dNEdt=σ(E)v(E)ninnEdE.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 403>>>

Finally, if there arenxtargets per unit volume, the total number of reactions per unit volumeper unit time, integrated over all possible energies, isrix=⎩integraldisplay∞0nxniσ(E)v(E)nEndE.(29)To evaluate Eq. ( 29) we must know the functional form ofσ(E). Unfortunately,σ(E)changes rapidly with energy, and its functional form is complicated. It is also important tocompareσ(E)with experimental data. However, stellar thermal energies are quite lowcompared to energies found in laboratory experimentation, and signiﬁcant extrapolation isusually required to obtain comparison data for stellar nuclear reaction rates.The process of determiningσ(E)can be improved somewhat if the terms most stronglydependent on energy are factored out ﬁrst. We have already suggested that the cross sectioncan be roughly thought of as being a physical area. Moreover, the size of a nucleus, measuredin terms of its ability to “touch” target nuclei, is approximately one de Broglie wavelengthin radius (r∼λ). Combining these ideas, the cross section of the nucleusσ(E)should beproportional toσ(E)∝πλ2∝π⎩parenleftbigghp⎩parenrightbigg2∝1E.To obtain the last expression, we have again used the nonrelativistic relation,K=E=µmv2/2=p2/2µm.We have also mentioned previously that the ability to tunnel through the Coulomb barrieris related to the ratio of the barrier height to the initial kinetic energy of the incomingnucleus, a factor that must be considered in the cross section. If the barrier heightUciszero, the probability of successfully penetrating it necessarily equals one (100%). As thebarrier height increases relative to the initial kinetic energy of the incoming nucleus, theprobability of penetration must decrease, asymptotically approaching zero as the potentialenergy barrier height goes to inﬁnity. In fact, the tunneling probability is exponential innature. Sinceσ(E)must be related to the tunneling probability, we haveσ(E)∝e−2π2Uc/E.(30)The factor of 2π2arises from the strict quantum mechanical treatment of the problem.Againassuming thatr∼λ=h/p, taking the ratio of the barrier potential heightUcto particlekinetic energyEgivesUcE=Z1Z2e2/4πϵ0rµmv2/2=Z1Z2e22πϵ0hv.After some manipulation, we ﬁnd thatσ(E)∝e−bE−1/2,(31)whereb≡πµ1/2mZ1Z2e221/2ϵ0h.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 404>>>

1.41.21.00.80.60.40.20.0123456789 1 0Energy (keV)e–E/kTe–bE–1/2(¥103)e–bE–1/2e–E/kT(¥106)
E0Gamow peak
FIGURE 6The likelihood that a nuclear reaction will occur is a function of the kinetic energy ofthe collision. The Gamow peak arises from the contribution of thee−E/kTMaxwell–Boltzmann high-energy tail and thee−bE−1/2Coulomb barrier penetration term. This particular example represents thecollision of two protons at the central temperature of the Sun. (Note thate−bE−1/2ande−bE−1/2e−E/kThave been multiplied by 103and 106, respectively, to more readily illustrate the functional dependenceon energy.)Clearly,bdepends on the masses and electric charges of the two nuclei involved in theinteraction.Combining the previous results and deﬁningS(E)to be some (we hope) slowly varyingfunction of energy, we may now express the cross section asσ(E)=S(E)Ee−bE−1/2.(32)Substituting Eqs. ( 28) and ( 32) into Eq. ( 29) and simplifying, the reaction rateintegral becomesrix=⎩parenleftbigg2kT⎩parenrightbigg3/2ninx(µmπ)1/2⎩integraldisplay∞0S(E) e−bE−1/2e−E/kTdE.(33)In Eq. ( 33), the terme−E/kTrepresents the high-energy wing of the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, and the terme−bE−1/2comes from the penetration probability. Ascan be seen in Fig. 6, the product of these two factors produces a strongly peaked curve,known as theGamow peakafter George Gamow (1904–1968), the physicist who ﬁrstThe angular momentum of the interacting particles also plays a role in nuclear reaction rates, but it is generallya minor component for reactions of astrophysical signiﬁcance.5
5The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 405>>>

S(E)
EFIGURE 7A hypothetical example of the effect of resonance onS(E).investigated Coulomb barrier penetration. The top of the curve occurs at the energyE0=⎩parenleftbiggbkT2⎩parenrightbigg2/3.(34)As a consequence of the Gamow peak, the greatest contribution to the reaction rate integralcomes in a fairly narrow energy band that depends on the temperature of the gas, togetherwith the charges and masses of the constituents of the reaction.Assuming thatS(E)is indeed slowly varying across the Gamow peak, it may be ap-proximated by its value atE0[S(E)≃S(E0)=constant] and removed from inside ofthe integral. Also, it is generally much easier to extrapolate laboratory results if they areexpressed in terms ofS(E).ResonanceIn some cases, however,S(E)can vary quite rapidly, peaking at speciﬁc energies, as il-lustrated schematically in Fig. 7. These energies correspond to energy levels within thenucleus, analogous to the orbital energy levels of electrons. It is aresonancebetween theenergy of the incoming particle and differences in energy levels within the nucleus thataccounts for these strong peaks. A detailed discussion of these resonance peaks is beyondthe scope of this book.Electron ScreeningYet another factor inﬂuencing reaction rates iselectron screening. On average, the elec-trons liberated when atoms are ionized at the high temperatures of stellar interiors produce aSee Clayton (1983) or Arnett (1996) for excellent and detailed discussions of resonance peaks.6
6The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 406>>>

“sea” of negative charge that partially hides the target nucleus, reducing itseffectivepositivecharge. The result of this reduced positive charge is a lower Coulomb barrier to the incom-ing nucleus and an enhanced reaction rate. By including electron screening, the effectiveCoulomb potential becomesUeff=14πϵ0Z1Z2e2r+Us(r),whereUs(r) <0 is the electron screening contribution. Electron screening can be signiﬁ-cant, sometimes enhancing the helium-producing reactions by 10% to 50%.Representing Nuclear Reaction Rates Using Power LawsIt is often illuminating to write the complicated reaction rate equations in the form of apower law centered at a particular temperature. Neglecting the screening factor, in the caseof a two-particle interaction, the reaction rate would becomerix≃r0XiXxρα′Tβ,wherer0is a constant,XiandXxare the mass fractions of the two particles, andα′andβare determined from the power law expansion of the reaction rate equations. Usuallyα′=2for a two-body collision, andβcan range from near unity to 40 or more.By combining the reaction rate equation with the amount of energy released per reaction,we can calculate the amount of energy released per second in each kilogram of stellarmaterial. IfE0is the amount of energy released per reaction, the amount of energy liberatedper kilogram of material per second becomesϵix=⎩parenleftbiggE0ρ⎩parenrightbiggrix,or, in the form of a power law,ϵix=ϵ′0XiXxραTβ,(35)whereα=α′−1.ϵixhas units of W kg−1and the sum ofϵixfor all reactions is the totalnuclear energy generation rate. This form of the nuclear energy generation rate will be usedlater to show the dependence of energy production on temperature and density for severalreaction sequences typically operating in stellar interiors.The Luminosity Gradient EquationTo determine the luminosity of a star, we must now consider all of the energy generated bystellar material. The contribution to the total luminosity due to an inﬁnitesimal massdmissimplydL=ϵd m ,whereϵis thetotalenergy released per kilogram per second by all nuclear reactions andby gravity, orϵ=ϵnuclear+ϵgravity. It is worth noting thatϵgravitycould be negative if theThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 407>>>

star is expanding, a point to be discussed later. For a spherically symmetric star, the massof a thin shell of thicknessdris justdm=dMr=ρd V=4πr2ρd r(recall Fig. 2).Substituting and dividing by the shell thickness, we havedLrdr=4πr2ρϵ,(36)whereLris theinterior luminositydue to all of the energy generated within the star’sinterior out to the radiusr. Equation ( 36) is another of the fundamental stellar structureequations.Stellar Nucleosynthesis and Conservation LawsThe remaining problem in understanding nuclear reactions is the exact sequence of stepsby which one element is converted into another, a process known asnucleosynthesis. Ourestimate of the nuclear timescale for the Sun was based on the assumption that four hydrogennuclei are converted into helium. However, it is highly unlikely that this could occur viaa four-body collision (i.e., all nuclei hitting simultaneously). For the process to occur, theﬁnal product must be created by a chain of reactions, each involving much more probabletwo-body interactions. In fact, we derived the reaction rate equation under the assumptionthat only two nuclei would collide at any one time.The process by which a chain of nuclear reactions leads to the ﬁnal product cannothappen in a completely arbitrary way, however; a series of particleconservation lawsmustbe obeyed. In particular, during every reaction it is necessary to conserve electric charge,the number of nucleons, and the number of leptons. The termleptonmeans a “light thing”and includes electrons, positrons, neutrinos, and antineutrinos.Although antimatter is extremely rare in comparison with matter, it plays an importantrole in subatomic physics, including nuclear reactions. Antimatter particles are identical totheir matter counterparts but have opposite attributes, such as electric charge. Antimatteralso has the characteristic (often used in science ﬁction) that a collision with its matter coun-terpart results in complete annihilation of both particles, accompanied by the production ofenergetic photons. For instance,e−+e+→2γ,wheree−,e+, andγdenote an electron, positron, and photon, respectively. Note that twophotons are required to conserve both momentum and energy simultaneously.ννThese particles were originally proposed by Wolfgang Pauli in 1930, in order that energy and momentum mightbe conserved in certain reaction processes. In 1934, they were given the nameneutrinos(“little neutral ones”) byItalian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954).7The Interiors of Stars
Neutrinos and antineutrinos (symbolized by  a n d  , respectively) are an  interesting class of particles in their own right7 N e u t r i n o s  a r e  e l e c t r i c a l-ly neutral and have a very small but non-zero mass (m < 2.2 eV/c2). One of the  interesting characteristics of a neutrino is its extremely small cross sec-tion for interactions with other matter, making it very difﬁcult to detect. Typicallyν.


<<<PAGE 408>>>

σν∼10−48m2, implying that at densities common to stellar interiors, a neutrino’s meanfree path is on the order of 1018m∼10 pc, or nearly 109R⊙! After being produced in thedeep interior, neutrinos almost always successfully escape from the star. One exception tothis transparency of stellar material to neutrinos occurs with important consequences duringa supernova explosionSince electrons and positrons have charges equal in magnitude to that of a proton, theseleptons will contribute to the charge conservation requirement while their totalleptonnumbersmust also be conserved. Note that in counting the number of leptons involved ina nuclear reaction, we treat matter and antimatter differently. Speciﬁcally, the total numberof matter leptonsminusthe total number of antimatter leptons must remain constant.To assist in counting the number of nucleons and the total electric charge, nuclei will berepresented in this text by the symbolAZX,where X is the chemical symbol of the element (H for hydrogen, He for helium, etc.),Zisthe number of protons (the total positive charge, in units ofe), andAis the mass number(the total number of nucleons, protons plus neutrons).The Proton–Proton ChainsApplying the conservation laws, one chain of reactions that can convert hydrogen intohelium is the ﬁrstproton–proton chain(PPI). It involves a reaction sequence that ultimatelyresults in411H→42He+2e++2νe+2γthrough the intermediate production of deuterium (21H) and helium-3 (32He). The entirePP Ireaction chain is11H+11H→21H+e++νe21H+11H→32He+γ(38)32He+32He→42He+211H.(39)Each step of the PP I chain has its own reaction rate, since different Coulomb barriers andcross sections are involved. The slowest step in the sequence is the initial one, because itinvolves thedecayof a proton into a neutron viap+→n+e++νe. Such a decay involvestheweak force, another of the four known forces.1Since an element is uniquely determined by the number of protons (Z) in the nucleus, specifying both X andZis redundant. As a result, some texts use the less cumbersome notationAX. However, this notation makes it moredifﬁcult to keep track of the electric charge in a nuclear reaction.Approximately 0.4% of the time, the ﬁrst reaction step is accomplished by the so-called pep reaction:11H+e−+11H→21H+νe.1Each of the four forces has now been mentioned: the gravitational force, which involves all particles with mass–energy; the electromagnetic force, associated with photons and electric charge; the strong force that binds nucleitogether; and the weak force of radioactive beta (electron/positron) decay.(37).
8
9
0890The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 409>>>

The production of helium-3 nuclei in the PP I chain also provides for the possibility oftheir interaction directly with helium-4 nuclei, resulting in a second branch of the proton–proton chain. In an environment characteristic of the center of the Sun, 69% of the time ahelium-3 interacts with another helium-3 in the PP I chain, whereas 31% of the time thePP IIchain occurs:32He+42He→74Be+γ(40)74Be+e−→73Li+νe(41)73Li+11H→242He.(42)Yet another branch, thePP IIIchain, is possible because the capture of an electron bythe beryllium-7 nucleus in the PP II chain competes with the capture of a proton (a protonis captured only 0.3% of the time in the center of the Sun):74Be+11H→85B+γ(43)85B→84Be+e++νe(44)84Be→242He.(45)The three branches of the proton–proton (pp) chain, along with their branching ratios, aresummarized in Fig. 8.
69%31%(PP I)
(PP II)(PP III)99.7%0.3%11H + 11H21H + e+ + /H9263e
32He + 32He42He + 2 11H
74Be + e–73Li + /H9263e74Be + 11H73Li + 11H2  42He32He + 42He74Be + /H9253
85B + /H925385B84Be + e+ + /H9263e84Be 2 42He21H + 11H32He + /H9253
FIGURE 8The three branches of the pp chain, along with the branching ratios appropriate forconditions in the core of the Sun.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 410>>>

Beginning with Eq. ( 33), the nuclear energy generation rate for the combined pp chainis calculated to beϵpp=0.241ρX2fppψppCppT−2/36e−33.80T−1/36W kg−1,(46)whereT6is a dimensionless expression of temperature in units of 106K (orT6≡T/106K).fpp=fpp(X, Y, ρ, T )≃1 is the pp chain screening factor,ψpp=ψpp(X, Y, T )≃1i sacorrection factor that accounts for the simultaneous occurrence of PP I, PP II, and PP III,andCpp≃1 involves higher-order correction terms.1When written as a power law (e.g., Eq. 35) nearT=1.5×107K, the energygeneration rate has the formϵpp≃ϵ′0,ppρX2fppψppCppT46,(47)whereϵ′0,pp=1.08×10−12Wm3kg−2. The power law form of the energy generation ratedemonstrates a relatively modest temperature dependence ofT4nearT6=15.The CNO CycleA second, independent cycle also exists for the production of helium-4 from hydrogen. Thiscycle was proposed by Hans Bethe (1906–2005) in 1938, just six years after the discoveryof the neutron. In theCNO cycle, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen are used as catalysts, beingconsumed and then regenerated during the process. Just as with the pp chain, the CNO cyclehas competing branches. The ﬁrst branch culminates with the production of carbon-12 andhelium-4:126C+11H→137N+γ(48)137N→136C+e++νe(49)136C+11H→147N+γ(50)147N+11H→158O+γ(51)158O→157N+e++νe(52)157N+11H→126C+42He.(53)The second branch occurs only about 0.04% of the time and arises when the last reaction(Eq. 53) produces oxygen-16 and a photon, rather than carbon-12 and helium-4:157N+11H→168O+γ(54)168O+11H→179F+γ(55)179F→178O+e++νe(56)178O+11H→147N+42He.(57)1Expressions for the various correction terms are given in the stellar structure codeStatStar,described in Appendix: , A Binary1
1Star Code.The Interiors of Stars
StatStar


<<<PAGE 411>>>

The energy generation rate for the CNO cycle is given byϵCNO=8.67×1020ρXXCNOCCNOT−2/36e−152.28T−1/36W kg−1,(58)whereXCNOis the total mass fraction of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, andCCNOis a higher-order correction term. When written as a power law centered aboutT=1.5×107K (seeEq. 35), this energy equation becomesϵCNO≃ϵ′0,CNOρXXCNOT19.96,(59)whereϵ′0,CNO=8.24×10−31Wm3kg−2. As shown by the power law dependence, theCNO cycle is much more strongly temperature-dependent than is the pp chain. This propertyimplies that low-mass stars, which have smaller central temperatures, are dominated by thepp chains during their “hydrogen burning” evolution, whereas more massive stars, withtheir higher central temperatures, convert hydrogen to helium by the CNO cycle. Thetransition in stellar mass between stars dominated by the pp chain and those dominatedby the CNO cycle occurs for stars slightly more massive than our Sun. This difference innuclear reaction processes plays an important role in the structure of stellar interiors, as willbe seen in the next section.When hydrogen is converted into helium by either the pp chain or the CNO cycle, themean molecular weightµof the gas increases. If neither the temperature nor the densityof the gas changes, the ideal gas law predicts that the central pressure will necessarilydecrease. As a result, the star would no longer be in hydrostatic equilibrium and wouldbegin to collapse. This collapse has the effect of actually raising both the temperature andthe density to compensate for the increase inµWhenthetemperatureanddensitybecomesufﬁciently high, helium nuclei can overcome theirCoulomb repulsion and begin to “burn.”The Triple Alpha Process of Helium BurningThe reaction sequence by which helium is converted into carbon is known as thetriplealpha process. The process takes its name from the historical result that the mysteriousalpha particles detected in some types of radioactive decay were shown by Rutherford tobe helium-4 (42He) nuclei. The triple alpha process is42He+42He/harpoonleftright84Be(60)84Be+42He→126C+γ.(61)In the triple alpha process, the ﬁrst step produces an unstable beryllium nucleus that willrapidly decay back into two separate helium nuclei if not immediately struck by anotheralpha particle. As a result, this reaction may be thought of as a three-body interaction, andtherefore, the reaction rate depends on(ρY)3. The nuclear energy generation rate is givenbyϵ3α=50.9ρ2Y3T−38f3αe−44.027T−18W kg−1,(62).The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 412>>>

whereT8≡T/108K andf3αis the screening factor for the triple alpha process. Writtenas a power law centered onT=108K (see Eq. 35), it demonstrates a very dramatictemperature dependence:ϵ3α≃ϵ′0,3αρ2Y3f3αT41.08.(63)With such a strong dependence, even a small increase in temperature will produce a largeincrease in the amount of energy generated per second. For instance, an increase of only10% in temperature raises the energy output rate by more than 50 times!Carbon and Oxygen BurningIn the high-temperature environment of helium burning, other competing processes are alsoat work. After sufﬁcient carbon has been generated by the triple alpha process, it becomespossible for carbon nuclei to capture alpha particles, producing oxygen. Some of the oxygenin turn can capture alpha particles to produce neon.126C+42He→168O+γ(64)168O+42He→2010Ne+γ(65)At helium-burning temperatures, the continued capture of alpha particles leading to progres-sively more massive nuclei quickly becomes prohibitive due to the ever higher Coulombbarrier.If a star is sufﬁciently massive, still higher central temperatures can be obtained andmany other nuclear products become possible. Examples of available reactions includecarbon burning reactions near 6×108K,126C+126C→⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩168O+242He ***2010Ne+42He2311Na+p+2312Mg+n***2412Mg+γ(66)and oxygen burning reactions near 109K,168O+168O→⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩2412Mg+242He ***2814Si+42He3115P+p+3116S+n3216S+γ(67)The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 413>>>

Reactions marked by *** are ones for which energy is absorbed rather than released andare referred to as beingendothermic; energy-releasing reactions areexothermic. In en-dothermic reactions the product nucleus actually possesses more energy per nucleon thandid the nuclei from which it formed. Such reactions occur at the expense of the energyreleased by exothermic reactions or by gravitational collapse (the virial theorem). In gen-eral, endothermic reactions are much less likely to occur than exothermic reactions underconditions that normally prevail in stellar interiors.The Binding Energy Per NucleonA useful quantity in understanding the energy release in nuclear reactions is the bindingenergy per nucleon,Eb/A, whereEb=ℓDelta1mc2=⎩bracketleftbigZmp+(A−Z)mn−mnucleus⎩bracketrightbigc2.Figure 9 showsEb/Aversus the mass number. It is apparent that for relatively smallvalues ofA(less than 56), several nuclei have abnormally high values ofEb/Arelative toothers of similar mass. Among these unusually stable nuclei are42He and168O, which, alongwith11H, are the most abundant nuclei in the universe. This unusual stability arises froman inherent shell structure of the nucleus, analogous to the shell structure of atomic energylevels that accounts for the chemical nature of elements. These unusually stable nuclei arecalledmagic nuclei.It is believed that shortly after the Big Bang the early universe was composed primarilyof hydrogen and helium, with no heavy elements. Today, Earth and its inhabitants containan abundance of heavier metals. The study of stellar nucleosynthesis strongly suggests that
11H21H32He63Li42He126C168O12Mg2420Ca4026Fe5636Kr8647Ag10753I12770Yb17482Pb20892U235
0246810Eb/A (MeV/nucleon)0 50 100 150 200 250AFIGURE 9The binding energy per nucleon,Eb/A, as a function of mass number,A. Notice thatseveral nuclei, most notably42He (see also126C and168O), lie well above the general trend of the othernuclei, indicating unusual stability. At the peak of the curve is5626Fe, the most stable of all nuclei.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 414>>>

these heavier nuclei were generated in the interiors of stars. It can be said that we are all“star dust,” the product of heavy element generation within previous generations of stars.Another important feature of Fig. 9 is the broad peak aroundA=56. At the top ofthe peak is an isotope of iron,5626Fe, the most stable of all nuclei. As successively moremassive nuclei are created in stellar interiors, the iron peak is approached from the left.These fusion reactions result in the liberation of energy.1Consequently, the ultimate resultof successive chains of nuclear reactions within stars is the production of iron, assumingsufﬁcient energy is available to overcome the Coulomb barrier. If a star is massive enoughto create the central temperatures and densities necessary to produce iron, the results arespectacularConsidering what we have learned in this section about stellar nucleosynthesis, it shouldcome as no surprise that the most abundant nuclear species in the cosmos are, in order,11H,42He,168O,126C,2010Ne,147N,2412Mg,2814Si, and5626FeThe abundances aretheresultofthedominantnuclearreactionprocessesthatoccurinstars,togetherwiththenuclearconﬁgurationsthatresultinthemoststablenuclei.4ENERGY TRANSPORT AND THERMODYNAMICSOne stellar structure equation remains to be developed. We have already related the funda-mental quantitiesP,M, andLto the independent variablerthrough differential equationsthat describe hydrostatic equilibrium, mass conservation, and energy generation, respec-tively; see Eqs. ( 6), ( 7), and ( 36). However, we have not yet found a differentialequation relating the basic parameter of temperature,T,t or. Moreover, we have not explic-itly developed equations that describe the processes by which heat generated via nuclearreactions or gravitational contraction is carried from the deep interior to the surface of thestar.Three Energy Transport MechanismsThree different energy transport mechanisms operate in stellar interiors.Radiationallowsthe energy produced by nuclear reactions and gravitation to be carried to the surface viaphotons, the photons being absorbed and re-emitted in nearly random directions as they
1Energy is also released when the peak is approached from the right via ﬁssion reactions that produce nucleiof smaller mass, again resulting in more stable nuclei. This type of reaction process is important in the ﬁssionreactors of nuclear power plants.2.
2The Interiors of Stars
.
encounter matter. This suggests that the opacity of the material must play an important role, as one would expect. Convection can be a very efﬁcient transport mechanism in many regions of a star, with hot, buoyant mass elements carrying excess energy out-ward while cool elements fall inward. Finally, conduction t r a n s p o r t s  h e a t  v i a  c o l l i-sions  between particles. Although conduction can play an important role in some stellar  environments, it is generally insigniﬁcant in most stars throughout the majority of their lifetimes and will not be discussed further here.


<<<PAGE 415>>>

The Radiative Temperature GradientFirst consider radiation transport.he radiation pressure gradientis given bydPraddr=−κρcFrad,whereFradis the outward radiative ﬂux. However, from Eq. ( 19), the radiation pressuregradient may also be expressed asdPraddr=43aT3dTdr.Equating the two expressions, we havedTdr=−34acκρT3Frad.Frad=Lr4πr2,the temperature gradient for radiative transport becomesdTdr=−34acκρT3Lr4πr2.(68)As either the ﬂux or the opacity increases, the temperature gradient must become steeper(more negative) if radiation is to transport all of the required luminosity outward. The samesituation holds as the density increases or the temperature decreases.The Pressure Scale HeightIf the temperature gradient becomes too steep, convection can begin to play an important rolein the transport of energy. Physically, convection involves mass motions: hot parcels of mat-ter move upward as cooler, denser parcels sink. Unfortunately, convection is a much morecomplex phenomenon than radiation at the macroscopic level. In fact, no truly satisfactoryprescription yet exists to describe it adequately in stellar environments.Fluid mechanics,the ﬁeld of physics describing the motion of gases and liquids, relies on a complicated set ofthree-dimensional equations known as theNavier–Stokes equations. However, at present,due in large part to the current limitations in computing power,13most stellar structurecodes are one-dimensional (i.e., depend onronly). It becomes necessary, therefore, to ap-proximate an explicitly three-dimensional process by a one-dimensional phenomenological1This limitation is being overcome to some extent with the development of ever faster computers with morememory, and through the implementation of more sophisticated numerical techniques.T,
3The Interiors of Stars
Finally, if we use the expression for the radiative ﬂux written in terms of the local radia-tive luminosity of the star at radius r,,


<<<PAGE 416>>>

theory. To complicate the situation even more, when convection is present in a star, it is gen-erally quite turbulent, requiring a detailed understanding of the amount of viscosity (ﬂuidfriction) and heat dissipation involved. Also, a characteristic length scale for convection,typically referred to in terms of thepressure scale height, is often comparable to the sizeof the star. Lastly, the timescale for convection, taken to be the amount of time requiredfor a convective element to travel a characteristic distance, is in some cases approximatelyequal to the timescale for changes in the structure of the star, implying that convection isstrongly coupled to the star’s dynamic behavior. The impact of these complications on thebehavior of the star is not yet fundamentally understood.The situation is not completely hopeless, however. Despite the difﬁculties encounteredin attempting to treat stellar convection exactly, approximate (and even reasonable) resultscan usually be obtained. To estimate the size of a convective region in a star, consider thepressure scale height,HP, deﬁned as1HP≡−1PdPdr.(69)If we assume for the moment thatHPis a constant, we can solve for the variation of pressurewith radius, givingP=P0e−r/HP.Obviously, ifr=HP, thenP=P0e−1, so thatHPis the distance over which the gaspressure decreases by a factor ofe. To ﬁnd a convenient general expression forHP, recallthat from the equation for hydrostatic equilibrium (Eq. 6),dP/dr=−ρg, whereg=GMr/r2is the local acceleration of gravity. Substituting into Eq. ( 69), the pressure scaleheight is simplyHP=Pρg.(70)Example 4.1.To estimate a typical value for the pressure scale height in the Sun,assume thatP=Pc/2, wherePcis the central pressure,ρ⊙is the average solar density,andg=G(M⊙/2)(R⊙/2)2=550 m s−2.Then we haveHP≃1.8×108m∼R⊙/4.Detailed calculations show thatHP∼R⊙/10 is more typical.Internal Energy and the First Law of ThermodynamicsUnderstanding convective heat transport in stars, even in an approximate way, begins withsome knowledge of thermodynamics. In the study of heat transport, conservation of energyThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 417>>>

is expressed bythe ﬁrst law of thermodynamics,dU=dQ−dW,(71)where the change in the internal energy of a mass elementdUis given by the amount ofheataddedto that element,dQ, minus the work donebythat element on its surroundings,dW. Throughout our discussion we will assume that these energy changes are measuredper unit mass.The internal energy of a systemUis astate function, meaning that its value dependsonly on the present conditions of the gas, not on the history of any changes leading toits current state. Consequently,dUis independent of the actual process involved in thechange. On the other hand, neither heat nor work is a state function. The amount of heatadded to a system or the amount of work done by a system depends on the ways in whichthe processes are carried out.dQanddWare referred to asinexact differentials, reﬂectingtheir path dependence.Consider an ideal monatomic gas, a gas composed of single particles with no ionization.The total internal energy per unit mass is given byU=(average energy/particle)×(number of particles/mass)=K×1mwherem=µmHis the average mass of a single particle in the gas. For an ideal gas,K=3kT/2 and the internal energy is given byU=32⎩parenleftbiggkµmH⎩parenrightbiggT=32nRT,(72)wherenis the number of moles14per unit mass,R=8.314472 J mole−1K−1is the universalgas constant,1andnR=kµmH.ClearlyU=U(µ, T )is a function of the composition of the gas and its temperature. Inthis case of an ideal monatomic gas, the internal energy is just the kinetic energy per unitmass.Speciﬁc HeatsThe change in heat of the mass elementdQis generally expressed in terms of thespeciﬁcheatCof the gas. The speciﬁc heat is deﬁned as the amount of heat required to raise the141 mole=NAparticles, whereNA=6.02214199×1023is Avogadro’s number, deﬁned as the number of126Catoms required to produce exactly 12 grams of a pure sample.1R=NAk.5
5The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 418>>>

temperature of a unit mass of a material by a unit temperature interval, orCP≡∂Q∂T⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglePandCV≡∂Q∂T⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleV,whereCPandCVare the speciﬁc heats at constant pressure and volume, respectively.Consider next the amount of work per unit mass,dW, done by the gas on its surroundings.Suppose that a cylinder of cross-sectional areaAis ﬁlled with a gas of massmand pressureP. The gas then exerts a forceF=PAon an end of the cylinder. If the end of the cylinderis a piston that moves through a distancedr, the workper unit massperformed by the gasmay be expressed asdW=⎩parenleftbiggFm⎩parenrightbiggdr=⎩parenleftbiggPAm⎩parenrightbiggdr=Pd V ,Vbeing deﬁned as thespeciﬁc volume, the volumeper unit mass,o rV≡1/ρ. The ﬁrstlaw of thermodynamics may now be expressed in the useful formdU=dQ−Pd V .(73)At constant volume,dV=0, which givesdU=dU|V=dQ|V, ordU=∂Q∂T⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleVdT=CVdT.(74)[It is important to note that becausedUis independent of any speciﬁc process, the secondequality of Eq. ( 74) is always valid, regardless of the type of thermodynamic processinvolved.] But from Eq. (72),dU=(3nR/2)dTfor a monatomic gas. ThusCV=32nR.(75)To ﬁndCPfor a monatomic gas, note thatdU=∂Q∂T⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglePdT−P∂V∂T⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglePdT.(76)In addition, from Eq. (11), the ideal gas law can be written asPV=nRT.(77)Considering all possible differential changes in quantities in Eq. (77), we ﬁnd thatPd V+Vd P=RT dn+nR dT(78)(recall thatRis a constant). For constantPandn, Eq. ( 78) implies thatPd V / d T=nR.Substituting this result into Eq. ( 76) along withdU=CVdTand the deﬁnition ofCP,we arrive atCP=CV+nR.(79)Equation (79) is valid for all situations for which the ideal gas law applies.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 419>>>

Deﬁne the parameterγto be the ratio of speciﬁc heats, orγ≡CPCV.(80)For a monatomic gas, we see thatγ=5/3. If ionization occurs, some of the heat that wouldnormally go into increasing the average kinetic energy of the particles must go into ionizingthe atoms instead. Therefore the temperature of the gas, which is a measure of its internalenergy, will not rise as rapidly, implying larger values for the speciﬁc heats in a partialionization zone. As bothCPandCVincrease,γapproaches unity.1The Adiabatic Gas LawSince the change in internal energy is independent of the process involved, consider thespecial case of anadiabatic process(dQ=0) for which no heat ﬂows into or out of themass element. Then the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics (Eq. 73) becomesdU=−Pd V .However, from Eq. (78) with constantn,Pd V+Vd P=nR dT.Also, sincedU=CVdT, we havedT=dUCV=−Pd VCV.Combining these results yieldsPd V+Vd P=−⎩parenleftbiggnRCV⎩parenrightbiggPd V ,which may be rewritten by using Eqs. (79) and (80), to giveγdVV=−dPP.(81)Solving this differential equation leads to the adiabatic gas law,PVγ=K,(82)whereKis a constant. Using the ideal gas law, a second adiabatic relation may be obtained:P=K′Tγ /(γ−1),(83)whereK′is another constant. Because of its special role in Eqs. ( 82) and ( 83),γis often referred to as the “adiabatic gamma,” specifying a particularly simple equation ofstate.1The variation ofγalso plays an important role in the dynamic stability of stars.6
6The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 420>>>

The Adiabatic Sound SpeedUsing the results obtained thus far, we can now calculate a sound speed through the material.The sound speed is related to the compressibility of the gas and to its inertia (representedby density) and is given byvs=⎩radicalbigB/ρ,whereB≡−V (∂P/∂V )adis the bulk modulus of the gas. The bulk modulus describeshow much the volume of the gas will change with changing pressure. From Eq. ( 81),the adiabatic sound speed becomesvs=⎩radicalbigγ P/ρ.(84)Example 4.2.Assuming a monatomic gas, a typical adiabatic sound speed for the Sunisvs≃⎩parenleftBigg53Pρ⊙⎩parenrightBigg1/2≃4×105ms−1,whereP∼Pc/2 was assumed. The amount of time needed for a sound wave to traversethe radius of the Sun would then bet≃R⊙/vs≃29 minutes.The Adiabatic Temperature GradientReturning now to the speciﬁc problem of describing convection, we ﬁrst consider thesituation where a hot convective bubble of gas rises and expandsadiabatically, meaningthat the bubble does not exchange heat with its surroundings. After it has traveled somedistance, it ﬁnallythermalizes, giving up any excess heat as it loses its identity and dissolvesinto the surrounding gas. Differentiating the ideal gas law (Eq. 11) yields an expressioninvolving the bubble’stemperature gradient(how the bubble’s temperature changes withposition):dPdr=−Pµdµdr+Pρdρdr+PTdTdr.(85)Using the adiabatic relationship between pressure and density (Eq. 82), and recallingthatV≡1/ρis the speciﬁc volume, we haveP=Kργ.(86)Formally, the bulk modulus, and therefore the sound speed, must be deﬁned in terms of a process by whichpressure varies with volume. Since sound waves typically propagate through a medium too quickly for a signiﬁcantamount of heat to enter or leave a mass element in the gas, we usually assume that the process is adiabatic.17
17The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 421>>>

Differentiating and rewriting, we obtaindPdr=γPρdρdr.(87)If we assume for simplicity thatµis a constant, Eqs. ( 85) and ( 87) may be combinedto givethe adiabatic temperature gradient(designated by the subscript ad)dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead=⎩parenleftbigg1−1γ⎩parenrightbiggTPdPdr.(88)Using Eq. (6) and the ideal gas law, we ﬁnally obtaindTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead=−⎩parenleftbigg1−1γ⎩parenrightbiggµmHkGMrr2.(89)It is sometimes helpful to express Eq. ( 89) in another, equivalent form. Recalling thatg=GMr/r2,k/µmH=nR,γ=CP/CV, andCP−CV=nR, and thatn,CP, andCVare per unit mass, we havedTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead=−gCP.(90)This result describes how the temperature of the gasinsidethe bubble changes as the bubblerises and expands adiabatically.If the star’sactual temperature gradient(designated by the subscript act) issteeperthanthe adiabatic temperature gradient given in Eq. (89), or⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact>⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead,the temperature gradient is said to besuperadiabatic(recall thatdT /dr <0). It will beshown that in the deep interior of a star, if|dT /dr|actis justslightlylarger than|dT /dr|ad,this may be sufﬁcient to carry nearly all of the luminosity by convection. Consequently,it is often the case that either radiation or convection dominates the energy transport inthe deep interiors of stars, while the other energy transport mechanism contributes verylittle to the total energy outﬂow. The particular mechanism in operation is determinedby the temperature gradient. However, near the surface of the star the situation is muchmore complicated: Both radiation and convection can carry signiﬁcant amounts of energysimultaneously.A Criterion for Stellar ConvectionJust what condition must be met if convection is to dominate over radiation in the deepinterior? When will a hot bubble of gas continue to rise rather than sink back down afterbeing displaced upward? Figure 10 shows a convective bubble traveling a distancedrthrough the surrounding medium. According to Archimedes’s principle, if the initial densityThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 422>>>

Pf(s)Tf(s)/H9267f(s)Pf(b)Tf(b)/H9267f(b)Pi(s)Ti(s)/H9267i(s)Pi(b)Ti(b)/H9267i(b)dr
SurroundinggasBubbleFIGURE 10A convective bubble traveling outward a distancedr. The initial conditions ofthe bubble are given byP(b)i,T(b)i, andρ(b)i, for the pressure, temperature, and density, respectively,while the initial conditions for the surrounding gas at the same level are designated byP(s)i,T(s)i, andρ(s)i, respectively. Final conditions for either the bubble or the surrounding gas are indicated by anfsubscript.of the bubble is less than that of its surroundings (ρ(b)i<ρ(s)i), it will begin to rise. Now,the buoyant forceper unit volumeexerted on a bubble that is totally submersed in a ﬂuidof densityρ(s)iis given byfB=ρ(s)ig.If we subtract the downward gravitational force per unit volume on the bubble, given byfg=ρ(b)ig,the net force per unit volume on the bubble becomesfnet=−gδ ρ,(91)whereδρ≡ρ(b)i−ρ(s)i<0 initially. If, after traveling an inﬁnitesimal distancedr, thebubble now has a greater density than the surrounding material (ρ(b)f>ρ(s)f), it will sinkagain and convection will be prohibited. On the other hand, ifρ(b)f<ρ(s)f, the bubble willcontinue to rise and convection will result.To express this condition in terms of temperature gradients, assume that the gas is initiallyvery nearly in thermal equilibrium, withT(b)i≃T(s)iandρ(b)i≃ρ(s)i. Also assume that thebubble expands adiabatically and that the bubble and surrounding gas pressures are equal atall times,P(b)f=P(s)f. Now, since it is assumed that the bubble has moved an inﬁnitesimaldistance, it is possible to express the ﬁnal quantities in terms of the initial quantities andThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 423>>>

their gradients by using a Taylor expansion. To ﬁrst order,ρ(b)f≃ρ(b)i+dρdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)drandρ(s)f≃ρ(s)i+dρdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)dr.If the densities inside and outside the bubble remain nearly equal (as is usually the case ex-cept near the surfaces of some stars), substituting these results into the convection condition,ρ(b)f<ρ(s)f, givesdρdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)<dρdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s).(92)We now want to express this solely in terms of quantities for the surroundings. UsingEq. ( 87) for the adiabatically rising bubble to rewrite the left-hand side of ( 92) andusing Eq. ( 85) to rewrite the right-hand side (again assumingdµ/dr=0), we ﬁnd1γρ(b)iP(b)idPdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)<ρ(s)iP(s)i⎩bracketleftBiggdPdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)−P(s)iT(s)idTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)⎩bracketrightBigg.Recalling thatP(b)=P(s)at all times, it is necessary thatdPdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)=dPdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)=dPdr,where the superscripts on the pressure gradient have been shown to be redundant. Substi-tuting, and canceling equivalent initial conditions,1γdPdr<dPdr−P(s)iT(s)idTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s).Dropping subscripts for initial conditions and superscripts designating the surroundingmaterial, we arrive at the requirement⎩parenleftbigg1γ−1⎩parenrightbiggdPdr<−PTdTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact,(93)where the temperature gradient is theactualtemperature gradient of the surrounding gas.Multiplying by the negative quantity−T /Prequires that the direction of the inequality bereversed, giving⎩parenleftbigg1−1γ⎩parenrightbiggTPdPdr>dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact.But from Eq. ( 88), we see that the left-hand side of the inequality is just the adiabatictemperature gradient. ThusdTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead>dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleactThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 424>>>

is the condition for the gas bubble to keep rising. Finally, sincedT /dr <0 (the temperaturedecreases as the stellar radius increases), taking the absolute value of the equation againrequires that the direction of the inequality be reversed, or⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact>⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead.(94)If the actual temperature gradient is superadiabatic, convection will result, assuming thatµdoes not vary.Equation ( 93) may be used to ﬁnd another useful, and equivalent, condition for con-vection. SincedT /dr <0 and 1/γ−1<0 (recall thatγ>1),TP⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg−1dPdr<−1γ−1−1,which may be simpliﬁed to giveTPdPdT<γγ−1,or, for convection to occur,dlnPdlnT<γγ−1.(95)For an ideal monatomic gas,γ=5/3 and convection will occur in some region of a starwhendlnP/dlnT<2.5. In that case the temperature gradient (dT /dr) is given approx-imately by Eq. ( 89). WhendlnP/dlnT>2.5, the region is stable against convectionanddT /dris given by Eq. (68).By comparing Eq. ( 68) for the radiative temperature gradient with either Eq. ( 89)or Eq. ( 90), together with the condition for convection written in terms of the tempera-ture gradient, Eq. ( 94), it is possible to develop some understanding of which conditionsare likely to lead to convection over radiation. In general, convection will occur when(1) the stellar opacity is large, implying that an unachievably steep temperature gradient(|dT /dr|act) would be necessary for radiative transport, (2) a region exists where ioniza-tion is occurring, causing a large speciﬁc heat and a low adiabatic temperature gradient(|dT /dr|ad), and (3) the temperature dependence of the nuclear energy generation rate islarge, causing a steep radiative ﬂux gradient and a large temperature gradient. In the at-mospheres of many stars, the ﬁrst two conditions can occur simultaneously, whereas thethird condition would occur only deep in stellar interiors. In particular, the third conditioncan occur when the highly temperature-dependent CNO cycle or triple alpha processes areoccurring.The Mixing-Length Theory of Superadiabatic ConvectionIt has already been suggested that the temperature gradient must be only slightly superadi-abatic in the deep interior in order for convection to carry most of the energy. We will nowjustify that assertion.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 425>>>

We begin by returning to the fundamental criterion for convection,ρ(b)f<ρ(s)f. Sincethe pressure of the bubble and that of its surroundings are always equal, the ideal gas lawimplies thatT(b)f>T(s)f, assuming thermal equilibrium initially. Therefore, the temperatureof the surrounding gas must decrease more rapidly with radius, so⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)−⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)>0is required for convection. Since the temperature gradients are negative, we havedTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)−dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)>0.Assuming that the bubble moves essentially adiabatically, and designating the temperaturegradient of the surroundings as the actual average temperature gradient of the star, letdTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(b)=dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleadanddTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle(s)=dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact.After the bubble travels a distancedr, its temperature will exceed the temperature of thesurrounding gas byδT=⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead−dTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact⎩parenrightbiggdr=δ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbiggdr.(96)We useδhere to indicate the difference between the value of a quantity associated withthe bubble and the same quantity associated with the surroundings, both determined at aspeciﬁed radiusr, just as was done for Eq. (91).Now assume that a hot, rising bubble travels some distanceℓ=αHPbefore dissipating, at which point it thermalizes with its surroundings, giving up its excessheat at constant pressure (sinceP(b)=P(s)at all times). The distanceℓis called themixinglength,HPis the pressure scale height (see Eq. 70), andα≡ℓ/HP,the ratio of mixing length to pressure scale heightis an adjustable parameter, orfree pa-rameter, generally assumed to be of order unity. (From comparisons of numerical stellarmodels with observations, values of 0.5<α<3 are typical.)After the bubble travels one mixing length, the excess heat ﬂowper unit volumefromthe bubble into its surroundings is justδq=(CPδT )ρ,In some texts,δ⎩parenleftbigdTdr⎩parenrightbig≡ℓDelta1∇T.18
18The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 426>>>

whereδTis calculated from Eq. ( 96) by substitutingℓfordr. Multiplying by the averagevelocityvcof the convective bubble, we obtain the convective ﬂux (the amount of energyper unit area per unit time carried by a bubble):Fc=δqvc=(CPδT )ρvc.(97)Note thatρvis amass ﬂux, or the amount of mass per second that crosses a unit area orientedperpendicular to the direction of the ﬂow. Mass ﬂux is a quantity that is often encounteredin ﬂuid mechanics.The average velocityvmay be found from the net forceper unit volume,fnet, acting onthe bubble. Using the ideal gas law and assuming constantµ, we can writeδP=Pρδρ+PTδT.Since the pressure is always equal between the bubble and its surroundings,δP≡P(b)−P(s)=0. Thusδρ=−ρTδT.From Eq. (91),fnet=ρgTδT.However, we assumed that the initial temperature difference between the bubble and itssurroundings is essentially zero, orδTi≈0. Consequently the buoyant force must also bequite close to zero initially. Sincefnetincreases linearly withδT, we may take an averageover the distanceℓbetween the initial and ﬁnal positions, or⟨fnet⟩=12ρgTδTf.Neglecting viscous forces, the work done per unit volume by the buoyant force over thedistanceℓgoes into the kinetic energy of the bubble, or12ρv2f=⟨fnet⟩ℓ.Choosing anaveragekinetic energy over one mixing length leads to some average value ofv2, namelyβv2, whereβhas a value in the range 0<β<1. Now the average convectivebubble velocity becomesvc=⎩parenleftbigg2β⟨fnet⟩ℓρ⎩parenrightbigg1/2.Substituting the net force per unit volume, using Eq. ( 96) withdr=ℓ, and rearranging,The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 427>>>

we havevc=⎩parenleftbiggβgT⎩parenrightbigg1/2⎩bracketleftbiggδ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg⎩bracketrightbigg1/2ℓ=β1/2⎩parenleftbiggTg⎩parenrightbigg1/2⎩parenleftbiggkµmH⎩parenrightbigg⎩bracketleftbiggδ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg⎩bracketrightbigg1/2α,(98)where we obtained the last equation by replacing the mixing length withαHPand usingEq. (70) together with the ideal gas law.After some manipulation, Eqs. ( 97) and ( 98) ﬁnally yield an expression for theconvective ﬂux:Fc=ρCP⎩parenleftbiggkµmH⎩parenrightbigg2⎩parenleftbiggTg⎩parenrightbigg3/2β1/2⎩bracketleftbiggδ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg⎩bracketrightbigg3/2α2.(99)Fortunately,Fcis not very sensitive toβ, but it does depend strongly onαandδ(dT /dr).The derivation leading to the prescription for the convective ﬂux given by Eq. ( 99)is known as themixing-length theory. Although basically a phenomenological theorycontaining arbitrary constants, the mixing-length theory is generally quite successful inpredicting the results of observations.To evaluateFc, we still need to know the difference between the temperature gradientsof the bubble and its surroundings. Suppose, for simplicity, thatallof the ﬂux is carried byconvection, so thatFc=Lr4πr2,whereLris the interior luminosity. This will allow us to estimate the difference in tempera-ture gradients needed for this special case. Solving Eq. ( 99) for the temperature gradientdifference givesδ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg=⎩bracketleftbiggLr4πr21ρCPα2⎩parenleftBigµmHk⎩parenrightBig2⎩parenleftBiggT⎩parenrightBig3/2β−1/2⎩bracketrightbigg2/3.(100)Dividing Eq. ( 100) by Eq. ( 90) for the adiabatic temperature gradient gives an estimateof how superadiabatic the actual temperature gradient must be to carry all of the ﬂux byconvection alone:δ(dT /dr)|dT /dr|ad=⎩parenleftbiggLr4πr2⎩parenrightbigg2/3C1/3Pρ−2/3α−4/3⎩parenleftBigµmHk⎩parenrightBig4/31Tβ−1/3.Example 4.3.Using values typical of the base of the Sun’s convection zone, assum-ing a monatomic gas throughout, and assumingα=1 andβ=1/2, we can estimate acharacteristic adiabatic temperature gradient, the degree to which the actual gradient issuperadiabatic, and the convective bubble velocity.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 428>>>

Assume thatMr=0.976 M⊙,Lr=1L⊙,r=0.714 R⊙,g=GMr/r2=525 m s−2,CP=5nR/2,P=5.59×1012Nm−2,ρ=187 kg m−3,µ=0.606, andT=2.18×106K. Then, from Eq. (90),⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsinglead∼0.015 K m−1,and from Eq. (100),δ⎩parenleftbiggdTdr⎩parenrightbigg∼6.7×10−9Km−1.The relative amount by which the actual temperature gradient is superadiabatic is thenδ(dT /dr)|dT /dr|ad∼4.4×10−7.For parameters appropriate for the deep interior, convection is certainly adequately approx-imated by the adiabatic temperature gradient.The convective velocity needed to carry all of the convective ﬂux is found fromEq. (98),vc∼50 m s−1∼10−4vs,wherevsis the local solar sound speed (see Eq. 84).Near the surface of a star, where the presence of ionization results in a larger value forCPand whereρandTget much smaller, the ratio of the superadiabatic excess to the adiabaticgradient can become signiﬁcantly larger, with the convective velocity possibly approachingthe sound speed. In this situation, a detailed study of the relative amounts of convective andradiative ﬂux must be considered. This will not be discussed further here.Although the mixing length theory is adequate for many problems, it is incomplete. Forinstance,αandβarefree parametersthat must be chosen for a particular problem; theymay even vary throughout the star. There are also stellar conditions for which the time-independent mixing length theory is inherently unsatisfactory. As one example, considerstellar pulsations; during a star’s pulsation cycle the outer layers of the star are oscillatingwith periods comparable to the timescale for convection, given bytc=ℓ/vc. In such cases,rapid changes in the physical conditions in the star directly couple to the driving of theconvective bubbles, which in turn alters the structure of the star. Although much effort (andsome progress) has been made in developing a full, time-dependent convection theory forstellar interiors, at present no theory exists that completely describes this complex behavior.Much work remains to be done in understanding the important details of stellar convection.5STELLAR MODEL BUILDINGWe have now derived all of the fundamental differential equations of stellar structure. Theseequations, together with a set of relations describing the physical properties of the stellarmaterial, may be solved to obtain a theoretical stellar model.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 429>>>

A Summary of the Equations of Stellar StructureFor convenience, the basictime-independent(static) stellar structure equations are summa-rized:dPdr=−GMrρr2(6)dMrdr=4πr2ρ(7)dLrdr=4πr2ρϵ(36)dTdr=−34acκρT3Lr4πr2(radiation)(68)=−⎩parenleftbigg1−1γ⎩parenrightbiggµmHkGMrr2(adiabatic convection) (89)The last equation assumes that the convective temperature gradient is purely adiabatic andis applied whendlnPdlnT<γγ−1.(95)If the star is static, as assumed above, thenϵ=ϵnuclear. However, if the structure of thestellar model is changing over time, we must include the energy contribution due to gravity,ϵ=ϵnuclear+ϵgravity. The introduction of the gravitational energy term adds an explicit timedependence to the equations that is not present in the purely static case. This can be seen byrealizing that the virial theorem requires that one-half of the gravitational potential energythat is lost must be converted into heat. Therateof energy production (per unit mass) bygravity is thendQ/dt. Thereforeϵgravity=−dQ/dt, the minus sign indicating that heat isliberatedfromthe material.EntropyAs a note of interest, it is often useful to express the gravitational energy generation rate interms of the change in theentropyper unit mass (the speciﬁc entropy), deﬁned bydS≡dQT.(101)Then the energy generation rate is seen to be due to the change in entropy of the material,orϵgravity=−TdSdt.(102)AlthoughdQis an inexact differential, it can be shown that the entropy is a state function.19
19The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 430>>>

If the star is collapsing,ϵgravitywill be positive; if it is expanding,ϵgravitywill be negative.Thus, as the star contracts, its entropy decreases. This is not a violation of the second lawof thermodynamics, which states that the entropy of aclosedsystem must always remainthe same (reversible process) or increase (irreversible process). Since a star is not a closedsystem, its entropy may decrease locally while the entropy of the remainder of the universeincreases by a greater amount. The entropy is carried out of the star by photons and neutrinos.When changes in the structure of the star are sufﬁciently rapid that accelerations can nolonger be neglected, Eq. ( 6) must be replaced by the exact expression, Eq. ( 5). Sucha situation can occur during a supernova explosion or during stellar pulsations.The Constitutive RelationsThe basic stellar structure equations [( 6), ( 7), ( 36), ( 68), and ( 89)] requireinformation concerning the physical properties of the matter from which the star is made.The required conditions are the equations of state of the material and are collectively referredto asconstitutive relations. Speciﬁcally, we need relationships for the pressure, the opacity,and the energy generation rate, in terms of fundamental characteristics of the material: thedensity, temperature, and composition. In general,P=P (ρ, T,composition)(103)κ=κ(ρ, T,composition)(104)ϵ=ϵ(ρ, T,composition)(105)The pressure equation of state can be quite complex in the deep interiors of certain classesof stars, where the density and temperature can become extremely high. However, in mostsituations, the ideal gas law, combined with the expression for radiation pressure, is a goodﬁrst approximation, particularly when the variation in the mean molecular weight withcomposition and ionization is properly calculated. The pressure equation of state developedearlier (Eq. 20) includes both the ideal gas law and radiation pressure.The opacity of the stellar material cannot be expressed exactly by a single formula.Instead, it is calculated explicitly for various compositions at speciﬁc densities and temper-atures and presented in tabular form. Stellar structure codes either interpolate in a density–temperature grid to obtain the opacity for the speciﬁed conditions, or, alternatively, use a“ﬁtting function”, based on the tabulated values. A similar situation also occurs for accurateTo calculate the nuclear energy generation rate, we can use formulas such as thosepresented in Section 3 for the pp chain (Eq. 46) and the CNO cycle (Eq. 58).In more sophisticated calculations,reaction networksare employed that yield individualreaction rates for each step of a process and equilibrium abundances for each isotope in themixture.The Interiors of Stars
calculations of the pressure equation of state. No accurate ﬁtting function can be con-structed to account for bound–bound opacities


<<<PAGE 431>>>

Boundary ConditionsThe actual solution of the stellar structure equations, including the constitutive relations,requires appropriateboundary conditionsthat specify physical constraints to the math-ematical equations. Boundary conditions play the essential role of deﬁning the limits ofintegration. The central boundary conditions are fairly obvious—namely that the interiormass and luminosity must approach zero at the center of the star, orMr→0Lr→0⎩bracerightbiggasr→0.(106)This simply means that the star is physically realistic and does not contain a hole, a core ofnegative luminosity, or central points of inﬁniteρorϵ!A second set of boundary conditions is required at the surface of the star. The simplestset of assumptions is that the temperature, pressure, and density all approach zero at somesurface value for the star’s radius,R⋆, orT→0P→0ρ→0⎫⎬⎭asr→R⋆.(107)Strictly, the conditions of Eqs. ( 107) will never be obtained in a real star (as is obviouslythe case for the temperature). Therefore, it is often necessary to use more sophisticated sur-face boundary conditions, such as when the star being modeled has an extended atmosphereor is losing mass, as most stars do.The Vogt–Russell TheoremGiven the basic stellar structure equations, constitutive relations, and boundary conditions,we can now specify the type of star to be modeled. As can be seen by examination ofEq. ( 6), the pressure gradient at a given radius is dependent on the interior mass and thedensity. Similarly, the radiative temperature gradient (Eq. 36) depends on the local tem-perature, density, opacity, and interior luminosity, while the luminosity gradient is a functionof the density and energy generation rate. The pressure, opacity, and energy generation ratein turn depend explicitly on the density, temperature, and composition at that location. Ifthe interior mass at the surface of the star (i.e., the entire stellar mass) is speciﬁed, alongwith the composition, surface radius, and luminosity, application of the surface boundaryconditions allows for a determination of the pressure, interior mass, temperature, and inte-rior luminosity at an inﬁnitesimal distancedrbelow the surface of the star.2Continuingthisnumerical integrationof the stellar structure equations to the center of the star mustresult in agreement with the central boundary conditions (Eq. 106). Since the values2It is also necessary to specify the average density over that distance. Sinceρis assumed to be zero at the surface,and since it depends explicitly on the pressure and temperature, which are also assumed to be zero at the surfaceand are initially unknown below the surface, an immediate difﬁculty arises; the right-hand sides of Eqs. ( 6) and00The Interiors of Stars
(68) are zero, so P and T never increase from their surface values! More sophisticated solutions require an itera-tive procedure, continually correcting previous estimates until a self-consistent answer is obtained to within some speciﬁed level of accuracy.


<<<PAGE 432>>>

of the various gradients are directly related to the composition of the star, it is not possi-ble to specify any arbitrary combination of surface radius and luminosity after the massand composition have been selected. This set of constraints is known as theVogt–Russelltheorem:The mass and the composition structure throughout a star uniquely determineits radius, luminosity, and internal structure, as well as its subsequent evolution.The dependence of a star’ s evolution on mass and composition is a consequence of thechange in composition due to nuclear burning.21The statement of the V ogt–Russell “theo-rem” given here is somewhat misleading since there are other parameters that can inﬂuencestellar interiors, such as magnetic ﬁelds and rotation. However, these parameters are as-sumed to have little effect in most stars and will not be discussed further.2Numerical Modeling of the Stellar Structure Equationsis accomplished by approximating the differential equations bydifference equations—byreplacingdP/drbyℓDelta1P/ℓDelta1r, for instance. The star is then imagined to be constructed ofspherically symmetricshells, as in Fig. 11, and the “integration” is carried out fromsome initial radius in ﬁnite steps by specifying some incrementδr.2It is then possibleto increment each of the fundamental physical parameters through successive applicationsof the difference equations. For instance, if the pressure in zoneiis given byPi, then thepressure in the next deepest zone,Pi+1, is found fromPi+1=Pi+ℓDelta1PℓDelta1rδr,whereδris negative.The numerical integration of the stellar structure equations may be carried out from thesurface toward the center, from the center toward the surface, or, as is often done, in bothdirections simultaneously. If the integration is carried out in both directions, the solutionswill meet at someﬁtting pointwhere the variables must vary smoothly from one solutionto the other. This last approach is frequently taken because the most important physicalprocesses in the outer layers of stars generally differ from those in the deep interiors. Thetransfer of radiation through optically thin zones and the ionization of hydrogen and helium21In this sense, Eq. ( 36) does contain an implicit time dependence due to stellar nucleosynthesis.22Even without the complications of magnetic ﬁelds and rotation, the V ogt–Russell “theorem” can be violated incertain special circumstances. However, an actual star (as opposed to a theoretical model) would probably adoptone unique structure as a consequence of its evolutionary history. In this sense, the V ogt–Russell “theorem” shouldbe considered a general rule rather than a rigorous law.2Codes that treat the radius as an independent variable are calledEuleriancodes.Lagrangiancodes treat themass as an independent variable. In the Lagrangian formulation, the differential equations are rewritten usingEq. ( 7); the hydrostatic equilibrium equation can be written in the formdP/dM, for instance.2
3
3The Interiors of Stars
With the exception of a special family of approximate solutions to the stellar struc-ture equations known as polytropes, the system of differential equations, along with their constitutive relations, cannot be solved analytically. Instead, as already mentioned, it is necessary to integrate the system of equations numerically. This


<<<PAGE 433>>>

Pi–1Mi–1Li–1Ti–1ri–1PiMiLiTiriPi+1Mi+1Li+1Ti+1ri+1FIGURE 11Zoning in a numerical stellar model. The star is assumed to be constructed ofspherically symmetric mass shells, with the physical parameters associated with each zone beingspeciﬁed by the stellar structure equations, the constitutive relations, the boundary conditions, andthe star’s mass and composition. In research-quality codes some quantities are speciﬁed in the middleof mass shells (e.g.,PandT), whereas others are associated with the interfaces between shells (e.g.,r,Mr, andLr).occur close to the surface, while nuclear reactions occur near the center. By integratingin both directions, it is possible to decouple these processes somewhat, simplifying theproblem.Simultaneously matching the surface and central boundary conditions for a desired stellarmodel usually requires several iterations before a satisfactory solution is obtained. If thesurface-to-center and center-to-surface integrations do not agree at the ﬁtting point, thestarting conditions must be changed. This is accomplished in a series of attempts, callediterations, where the initial conditions of the next integration are estimated from the outcomeof the previous integration. A process of successive iterations is also necessary if the staris integrated from the surface to the center or from the center to the surface; in these casesthe ﬁtting points are simply the center and surface, respectively.A very simple stellar structure code (calledStatStar)integratesthestellarstructure
Polytropic Models and the Lane–Emden EquationAs we mentioned previously, it is not generally possible to solve the system of stellarstructure equations and their associated constitutive relations analytically; we must employnumerical solutions to “build” stellar models. However, under very special and restrictiveThe Interiors of Stars
equations developed in this chapter in their timeindependent form from the outside of the star to the center using the appropriate constitutive relations; it also assumes a con-stant (or homogeneous) composition throughout. Many of the sophisticated numerical techniques present in research codes have been neglected so that the basic elements of stellar model building can be more easily understood, as have the detailed calculations of the pressure equation of state and the opacity. The complex formalism of the mixing-length theory has also been left out in favor of the simplifying assumption of adiabatic convection. Despite these approximations, very reasonable models may be obtained for stars lying on the main sequence of the H–R diagram.


<<<PAGE 434>>>

situations, it is possible to ﬁnd analytic solutions to a subset of the equations. The ﬁrstwork in this area was carried out by J. Homer Lane (1819–1880), who wrote a paper onthe equilibrium of stellar conﬁgurations in theAmerican Journal of Sciencein 1869. Thatwork was later extended signiﬁcantly by Robert Emden (1862–1940). Today, the famousequation that helps us describe analytical stellar models is referred to as theLane–Emdenequation.To understand the motivation of developing the Lane–Emden equation, note that carefulinspection of the stellar structure equations shows that the mechanical equations of stellarstructure (Eqs. 6 and 7) could be solved simultaneously without reference to theenergy equations ( 36, and either 68 or 89) if only a simple relationship existedbetween pressure and density. Of course, as we have seen, such a simple relationship doesnot generally exist; normally, temperature and composition must also enter into the pressureequation of state, often in a complicated way. However, under certain circumstances, suchas for an adiabatic gas (see Eq. 86), the pressure can be written explicitly in terms of thedensity alone. Hypothetical stellar models in which the pressure depends on density in theformP=Kργare known aspolytropes. The development of polytropic models is wellworth the effort since their relative simplicity allows us to gain some insight into stellarstructure without all of the complications inherent in full-blown numerical models.To derive the Lane–Emden equation, we begin with the equation for hydrostatic equi-librium, Eq. ( 6). Rewriting the equation and taking the radial derivative of both sidesgivesddr⎩parenleftbiggr2ρdPdr⎩parenrightbigg=−GdMrdr.We immediately see that Eq. ( 7) can be used to eliminate the mass gradient. Substituting,we getddr⎩parenleftbiggr2ρdPdr⎩parenrightbigg=−G(4πr2ρ)or1r2ddr⎩parenleftbiggr2ρdPdr⎩parenrightbigg=−4πG ρ.(108)As an aside, it is worth pointing out here that Eq. ( 108) is actually a slightly camou-ﬂaged form of a very well-studied differential equation known asPoisson’ s equation.I ti sleft as an exercise to show that Eq. ( 108) can be rewritten in the form1r2ddr⎩parenleftbiggr2dℓPhi1gdr⎩parenrightbigg=4πG ρ,(109)which is the spherically symmetric form of Poisson’s equation for the gravitational potentialenergy per unit mass,ℓPhi1g≡Ug/m.22Poisson’s equation shows up frequently in physics. For example, Gauss’ Law, one of Maxwell’s equations ofelectromagnetic theory, can be reformulated into Poisson’s equation by replacing the electric ﬁeld vector with thenegative of the gradient of the electrostatic potential.44The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 435>>>

To solve Eq. ( 108), we now employ the relationshipP (ρ)=Kργ, whereKandγ>0 are constants. This functional form of the pressure equation is known generally as apolytropic equation of state. Substituting, taking the appropriate derivative, and simplifying,we haveγKr2ddr⎩bracketleftbiggr2ργ−2dρdr⎩bracketrightbigg=−4πG ρ.It is customary to rewrite the expression slightly by lettingγ≡(n+1)/n, wherenishistorically referred to as thepolytropic index. Then⎩parenleftbiggn+1n⎩parenrightbiggKr2ddr⎩bracketleftbiggr2ρ(1−n)/ndρdr⎩bracketrightbigg=−4πG ρ.In order to simplify the last expression somewhat, it is now useful to rewrite the equa-tion in a dimensionless form. Expressing the density in terms of a scaling factor and adimensionless functionD(r), letρ(r)≡ρc[Dn(r)]n,where 0≤Dn≤1.(As you might suspect,ρcwill turn out to be the central density of the polytropic stellarmodel.) Again substituting and simplifying, we arrive at⎩bracketleftBigg(n+1)⎩parenleftBiggKρ(1−n)/nc4πG⎩parenrightBigg⎩bracketrightBigg1r2ddr⎩bracketleftbiggr2dDndr⎩bracketrightbigg=−Dnn.Careful study of our last equation reveals that the collective constant in square bracketshas the units of distance squared. Deﬁningλn≡⎩bracketleftBigg(n+1)⎩parenleftBiggKρ(1−n)/nc4πG⎩parenrightBigg⎩bracketrightBigg1/2and introducing the dimensionless independent variableξviar≡λnξ,we ﬁnally arrive at1ξ2ddξ⎩bracketleftbiggξ2dDndξ⎩bracketrightbigg=−Dnn,(110)which is the famousLane–Emden equation.Solving Eq. ( 110) for the dimensionless functionDn(ξ)in terms ofξfor a speciﬁcpolytropic indexnleads directly to the proﬁle of density with radiusρn(r). The polytropicThe Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 436>>>

equation of statePn(r)=Kρ(n+1)/nnprovides the pressure proﬁle. In addition, if the idealgas law and radiation pressure are assumed for constant composition (Eq. 20), then thetemperature proﬁle,T (r), is also obtained.In order to actually solve this second-order differential equation, it is necessary to im-pose two boundary conditions (which effectively specify the two constants of integration).Assuming that the “surface” of the star is that location where the pressure goes to zero (andcorrespondingly the density of the gas also goes to zero), thenDn(ξ1)=0 speciﬁes the surface atξ=ξ1,whereξ1is the location of the ﬁrst zero of the solution.Next consider the center of the star. Ifr=δrepresents a distance inﬁnitesimally closeto the center of the star, then the mass contained within a volume of radiusδis given byMr=4π3ρδ3whereρis the average density of the gas within the radiusδ. Substituting into the equationfor hydrostatic equilibrium, Eq. (6), we havedPdr=−GMrρr2=−4π3Gρ2δ→0 asδ→0.SinceP=Kρ(n+1)/n, this implies thatdρdr→0 asr→0,which immediately leads to the central boundary conditiondDndξ=0 atξ=0.In addition, in order forρcto represent the central density of the star, it is also necessarythatDn(0)=1 (this condition isn’t strictly a boundary condition, it simplynormalizesthedensity scaling function,Dn).With the boundary conditions speciﬁed, it is now possible to compute the total mass ofa star of a speciﬁc polytropic index. From Eq. (7),M=4π⎩integraldisplayR0r2ρd r ,whereR=λnξ1represents the radius of the star. Rewriting in terms of the dimensionlessquantities yieldsM=4π⎩integraldisplayξ10λ2nξ2ρcDnnd(λnξ),The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 437>>>

orM=4πλ3nρc⎩integraldisplayξ10ξ2Dnndξ.Although this expression could be integrated directly with knowledge ofDn(ξ), it can alsobe rewritten directly by noting, from the Lane–Emden equation and the central boundarycondition, thatξ2Dnn=−ddξ⎩bracketleftbiggξ2dDndξ⎩bracketrightbigggivesM=−4πλ3nρcξ21dDndξ⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleξ1,where(dDn/dξ)|ξ1means that the derivative ofDnis evaluated at the surface.Although the Lane–Emden equation is compact and elegant, it is important to bear inmind its many limitations. Recall that Eq. ( 110) contains no information about eitherenergy transport or energy generation within a star; the equation only describes hydrostaticequilibrium and mass conservation, and then only within the highly idealized class ofpolytropic equations of state. Nevertheless, the Lane–Emden equation is capable of givingus some important insights into the structures of stars.There are only three analytic solutions to the Lane–Emden equation, namelyn=0, 1,and 5. Then=0 solution is given byD0(ξ)=1−ξ26,withξ1=√6.It is left as an exercise for you to derive then=0 solution. The solution forn=1i st h ewell-known “sinc” functionD1(ξ)=sinξξ,withξ1=π,and then=5 solution is given byD5(ξ)=[1+ξ2/3]−1/2,withξ1→∞.In the latter case you are asked to verify that although the radius of the star is inﬁnite, thetotal mass of the star is actually ﬁnite. This is not the case for values ofn>5. Thus, thephysical limits ofnare constrained to the range 0≤n≤5. Graphical representations ofD0,D1, andD5are shown in Fig. 12.γThe Interiors of Stars
This discussion of polytropes was originally motivated by the equation of state of an adiabatic gas. For the case of an ideal, monatomic gas,  = 5/3, which implies that n = 1.5. In addition, certain extremely compressed stars in their ﬁnal stage of evolution known as white dwarfs can also be described


<<<PAGE 438>>>

02468 1 0/H92640.00.20.40.60.81.0Dn(/H9264)D0D1D5
FIGURE 12The analytic solutions to the Lane–Emden equation:D0(ξ),D1(ξ), andD5(ξ).by polytropes of index 1.5 (technically these are non-relativistic, completely degeneratestars). Although the importantn=1.5 case cannot be solved analytically, it can be solvednumerically.Another important polytropic index is then=3 “Eddington standard model” associatedwith a star in radiative equilibrium. To see how this model corresponds to radiative equi-librium, consider a polytrope that is supported by both an ideal gas and radiation pressure(see Eq. 20). If the total pressure at a certain location in the star is represented byP, andthe contribution to that pressure due to an ideal gas is given byPg=ρkTµmH=βP,(111)where 0≤β≤1, then the contribution due to radiation pressure isPr=13aT4=(1−β)P.(112)Since we are looking for a polytropic equation of state that can be expressed independentof temperature, we can combine the last two expressions to eliminateT. Solving forTinEq. (111) and substituting into Eq. (112), we obtain13a⎩parenleftbiggβP µmHρk⎩parenrightbigg4=(1−β)P.This leads immediately to an expression for the total pressure in terms of the density, namelyP=Kρ4/3(113)The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 439>>>

whereK≡⎩bracketleftbigg3(1−β)a⎩bracketrightbigg1/3⎩parenleftbiggkβµmH⎩parenrightbigg4/3.Sinceγ=4/3, this implies thatn=3.Certainly the two most physically signiﬁcant polytropic models correspond ton=1.5andn=3. Although neither model can be solved analytically, the use of computers andnumerical integration algorithms allow us to explore their structure and behavior relativelyeasily. Careful study of these polytropes can yield important insights into the structures ofmore realistic, although signiﬁcantly more complex stellar models.6THE MAIN SEQUENCEThe analysis of stellar spectra tells us that the atmospheres of the vast majority of all stars arecomposed primarily of hydrogen, usually about 70% by mass (X∼0.7), whereas the massfraction of metals varies from near zero to approximately 3% (0<Z<0.03). Assumingthat the initial composition of a star ishomogeneous(meaning that the composition is thesame throughout), the ﬁrst set of nuclear fusion reactions ought to be those that converthydrogen into helium (the pp chains and/or the CNO cycle). Recall that these reactionsoccur at the lowest temperatures because the associated Coulomb barrier is lower thanthat for the burning of more massive nuclei. Consequently, the structure of a homogeneous,hydrogen-rich star ought to be strongly inﬂuenced by hydrogen nuclear burning deep withinits interior.Because of the predominance of hydrogen that initially exists in the core, and sincehydrogen burning is a relatively slow process, the interior composition and structure of thestar will change slowly. As we saw in Example 3.2, a rough estimate of the hydrogen-burning lifetime of the Sun is 10 billion years. Of course, the surface conditions will not becompletely static. By the V ogt–Russell theorem, any change in composition or mass requiresa readjustment of the effective temperature and luminosity;the observational characteristicof the star must change as a consequence of the central nuclear reactions.As long as changesin the core are slow, so are the evolutionary changes in the observed surface features.2Since most stars have similar compositions, the structures of stars ought to vary smoothlywith mass. Recall from Examples 1.1 and 2.1 that as the mass increases, the centralpressure and the central temperature should increase. Therefore, for stars of low mass,the pp chain will dominate since less energy is required to initiate these reactions thanthe reactions of the CNO cycle. For high-mass stars, the CNO cycle will likely dominatebecause of its very strong temperature dependence.25be described by a polytropic index of 32Some short-period surface changes can occur that are essentially decoupled from the long-term variations in thecore. Stellar pulsations require speciﬁc conditions to exist, but their timescales are usually much shorter than thenuclear timescale.25
6
6Stars supported solely by a fully relativistic, completely degenerate gas can also.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 440>>>

At some point, as progressively less massive stars are considered, the central temperaturewill diminish to the point where nuclear reactions are no longer able to stabilize a staragainst gravitational contraction. This has been shown to occur at approximately 0.072 M⊙for solar composition (the lower limit is slightly higher, 0.09 M⊙, for stars with virtually nometal content,Z≃0). At the other extreme, stars with masses greater than approximately90 M⊙become subject to thermal oscillations in their centers that may produce signiﬁcantvariations in the nuclear energy generation rates over timescales as short as 8 hours.The Eddington Luminosity LimitAlong with thermal oscillations, the stability of very massive stars is directly affected bytheir extremely high luminosities. As can be seen by Eq. ( 20), if the temperature issufﬁciently high and the gas density is low enough, it is possible for radiation pressure todominate over the gas pressure in certain regions of the star, a situation that can occur inthe outer layers of very massive stars.Combinedwiththerelationshipbetweenradiantﬂuxandluminosity,the pressure gradient near the surface may be written asdPdr≃−κρcL4πr2.But hydrostatic equilibrium (Eq. 6) demands that the pressure gradient near the star’ssurface must also be given bydPdr=−GMρr2,whereMis the star’s mass. Combining, and solving for the luminosity, we haveLEd=4πGcκM.(114)LEdis the maximum radiative luminosity that a star can have and still remain in hydrostaticequilibrium. If the luminosity exceedsLEd, mass loss must occur, driven by radiationpressure. This luminosity maximum, known as theEddington limit, appears in a numberof areas of astrophysics, including late stages of stellar evolution, novae, and the structureof accretion disks.For our purposes, it is possible to make an estimate of the Eddington luminosity for starson the upper end of the main sequence. The effective temperatures of these massive starsare in the range of 50,000 K, high enough that most of the hydrogen is ionized in theirphotospheres. Therefore, the major contribution to the opacity is from electron scattering.ForX=0.7, Eq. (114) becomesLEd≃1.5×1031MM⊙W orLEdL⊙≃3.8×104MM⊙.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 441>>>

For a 90 M⊙star,LEd≃3.5×106L⊙, roughly three times the expected main-sequencevalue.The fairly close correspondence between the theoretical and Eddington luminositiesimplies that the envelopes of massive main-sequence stars are loosely bound at best. In fact,observations of the few stars with masses estimated to be near 100 M⊙indicate that theyare suffering from large amounts of mass loss and exhibit variability in their luminosities.Variations of Main-Sequence Stellar Parameters with MassFrom theoretical models that are computed in the mass range of hydrogen burning, it ispossible to obtain a numerical relationship betweenMandLthat agrees well with theThe range in main-sequence luminosities is from near 5×10−4L⊙to approximately1×106L⊙, a variation of over nine orders of magnitude, while the masses change byonly three orders of magnitude. Because of the enormous rate of energy output from uppermain-sequence stars, they consume their core hydrogen in a much shorter period of timethandostarsonthelowerendofthemainsequence.Asaresult,main-sequence lifetimesdecrease with increasing luminosity.Estimates of the range of main-sequence lifetimes areleft as an exercise.
–20246Log10 (L/L  )
4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.6Log10 Te (K)120 M60 M25 M15 M9 M5 M3 M2 M1.5 M1 M0.8 M0.6 M0.4 MFIGURE 13The locations of stellar models on a theoretical H–R diagram. The models werecomputed using the stellar structure equations and constitutive relations. (Data from Schaller, et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96, 269, 1992, and Charbonnel, et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,135, 405,1999.The Interiors of Stars
observational mass–luminosity relation. It is also possible to locate each of the models on a theoretical H–Rdiagram (see Fig.  13). It can be seen that stars undergoing hydro-gen burning in their cores lie along the observational main sequence!


<<<PAGE 442>>>

Effective temperatures are much less dependent on stellar mass. From approximately1700 K for 0.072 M⊙stars to near 53,000 K for 90 M⊙stars, the increase in effectivetemperature amounts to a factor of only about 20. However, this variation is still large enoughto dramatically change the stellar spectrum, since the dissociation energies of moleculesand the ionization potentials of most elements lie within this rangeConsequently, by comparison with theoretical models, it is possible to correlatemain-sequence masses with observed spectra.The interior structure of stars along the main sequence also varies with mass, primarilyin the location of convection zones. In the upper portion of the main sequence, whereenergy generation is due to the strongly temperature-dependent CNO cycle, convection isdominant in the core. This occurs because the rate of energy generation changes quicklywith radius, and radiation is not efﬁcient enough to transport all of the energy being releasedin nuclear reactions. Outside of the hydrogen-burning core, radiation is again capable ofhandling the ﬂux, and convection ceases. As the stellar mass decreases, so does the centraltemperature and the energy output of the CNO cycle until, near 1.2M⊙, the pp chain beginsto dominate and the core becomes radiative. Meanwhile, near the surface of the star, asof the surface convection zone lowers until the entire star becomes convective near 0.3M⊙.Through the use of the fundamental physical principles developed thus far in this text,we have been able to build realistic models of main-sequence stars and develop an under-standing of their interiors. However, other stars remain on the observational H–R diagramSUGGESTED READINGGeneralKippenhahn, Rudolf,100 Billion Suns, Basic Books, New York, 1983.TechnicalArnett, David,Supernovae and Nucleosynthesis, Princeton University Press, Princeton,1996.Bahcall, John N.,Neutrino Astrophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.Bahcall, John N., Pinsonneault, M. H., and Basu, Sarbani, “Solar Models: Current Epoch andTime Dependences, Neutrinos, and Helioseismological Properties,”The AstrophysicalJournal,555, 990, 2001..The Interiors of Stars
the effective temperature decreases with decreasing mass, the opacity increases, in part because of the location of the zone of hydrogen ionization. The increase in opacity makes convection more efﬁcient than radiation near the surfaces of stars with masses less than approximately 1.3 M⊙. This has the effect of creating convection zones near the surfaces of these stars.As we continue to move down the main sequence, the bottomthat do not lie along the main sequence. By considering the changes in stellar structure that occur because of changes in composition due to nuclear burning (the Vogt–Russell theorem), it will become possible to explain their existence as well.


<<<PAGE 443>>>

Barnes, C. A., Clayton, D. D., and Schramm, D. N. (eds.),Essays in Nuclear Astrophysics,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.Bowers, Richard L., and Deeming, Terry,Astrophysics I: Stars, Jones and Bartlett, Publish-ers, Boston, 1984.Chabrier, Gilles, and Baraffe, Isabelle, “Theory of Low-Mass Stars and Substellar Objects,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,38, 337, 2000.Chandrasekhar, S.,An Introduction to the Study of Stellar Structure, Dover Publications,Inc., New York, 1967.Clayton, Donald D.,Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis, University ofChicago Press, Chicago, 1983.Cox, J. P., and Giuli, R. T.,Principles of Stellar Structure, Gordon and Breach, New York,1968.Fowler, William A., Caughlan, Georgeanne R., and Zimmerman, Barbara A., “Thermonu-clear Reaction Rates, I,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,5, 525, 1967.Fowler, William A., Caughlan, Georgeanne R., and Zimmerman, Barbara A., “Thermonu-clear Reaction Rates, II,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,13, 69, 1975.Hansen, Carl J., Kawaler, Steven D., and Trimble, VirginiaStellar Interiors: Physical Prin-ciples, Structure, and Evolution, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2004.Harris, Michael J., Fowler, WilliamA., Caughlan, Georgeanne R., and Zimmerman, BarbaraA., “Thermonuclear Reaction Rates, III,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,21, 165, 1983.Iben, Icko, Jr., “Stellar Evolution Within and Off the Main Sequence,”Annual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics,5, 571, 1967.Iglesias, Carlos A, and Rogers, Forrest J., “Updated Opal Opacities,”The AstrophysicalJournal,464, 943, 1996.Kippenhahn, Rudolf, and Weigert, Alfred,Stellar Structure and Evolution, Springer-Verlag,Berlin, 1990.Liebert, James, and Probst, Ronald G., “Very Low Mass Stars,”Annual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics,25, 473, 1987.Padmanabhan, T.,Theoretical Astrophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.Prialnik, Dina,An Introduction to the Theory of Stellar Structure and Evolution, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 2000.Novotny, Eva,Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interiors, Oxford University Press,New York, 1973.Shore, Steven N.,The Tapestry of Modern Astrophysics, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken,2003.The Interiors of Stars


<<<PAGE 444>>>

PROBLEM SET1Show that the equation for hydrostatic equilibrium, Eq. ( 6), can also be written in terms ofthe optical depthτ, asdPdτ=gκ.This form of the equation is often useful in building model stellar atmospheres.2Prove that the gravitational force on a point mass located anywhere inside a hollow, sphericallysymmetric shell is zero. Assume that the mass of the shell isMand has a constant densityρ.Assume also that the radius of the inside surface of the shell isr1and that the radius of theoutside surface isr2. The mass of the point ism.3Assuming that 10 eV could be released by every atom in the Sun through chemical reactions,estimate how long the Sun could shine at its current rate through chemical processes alone.For simplicity, assume that the Sun is composed entirely of hydrogen. Is it possible that theSun’s energy is entirely chemical? Why or why not?4 (a)Taking into consideration the Maxwell–Boltzmann velocity distribution, what temperaturewould be required for two protons to collide if quantum mechanical tunneling is neglected?Assume that nuclei having velocities ten times the root-mean-square (rms) value for theMaxwell–Boltzmann distribution can overcome the Coulomb barrier. Compare your an-swer with the estimated central temperature of the Sun.(b)Using the below equation , calculate the ratio of the number of protons having velocitiesthe rms value to those moving at the rms velocity.(c)Assuming (incorrectly) that the Sun is pure hydrogen, estimate the number of hydrogennuclei in the Sun. Could there be enough protons moving with a speed ten times the rmsvalue to account for the Sun’s luminosity?5Derive the ideal gas law, Eq. ( 10). Begin with the pressure integral (Eq. 9) and theMaxwell–Boltzmann velocity distribution functio,The Interiors of Stars
(6)
Pg=nkT(10)P=13⎩integraldisplay∞0mnvv2dv,(9)ten times
From Chapter 10 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysicsby Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.dPdr=−GMrρr2=−ρg,
nvdv=n/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,
nvdv=n/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,
,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 

<<<PAGE 445>>>

11Beginning with Eq. (62) and writing the energy generation rate in the formϵ(T )=ϵ′′Tα8,show that the temperature dependence for the triple alpha process, given by Eq. ( 63), iscorrect.ϵ′′is a function that is independent of temperature.Hint:First take the natural logarithm of both sides of Eq. ( 62) and then differentiate withrespect to lnT8. Follow the same procedure with your power law form of the equation andcompare the results. You may want to make use of the relationdlnϵdlnT8=dlnϵ1T8dT8=T8dlnϵdT8.6Derive Eq. (28) from the following equation:
7Byinvokingthevirialtheorem(see below),makeacrudeestimateofan“average”temperaturefortheSun.Isyourresultconsistentwithotherestimatesobtainedin The Interiors of Stars8Show that the form of the Coulomb potential barrier penetration probability given byEq. (31) follows directly from Eq. (30).9Prove that the energy corresponding to the Gamow peak is given by Eq. (34).10Calculate the ratio of the energy generation rate for the pp chain to the energy generation rate forthe CNO cycle given conditions characteristic of the center of the present-day (evolved) Sun,namelyT=1.5696×107K,ρ=1.527×105kg m−3,X=0.3397, andXCNO=0.0141.Assume that the pp chain screening factor is unity (fpp=1) and that the pp chain branchingfactor is unity (ψpp=1).Why or why not?nEdE=2nπ1/21(kT )3/2E1/2e−E/kTdE(28)
σ(E)∝e−bE−1/2,(31)E0=⎩parenleftbiggbkT2⎩parenrightbigg2/3.(34)
ϵ3α=50.9ρ2Y3T−38f3αe−44.027T−18W kg−1,(62)ϵ3α≃ϵ′0,3αρ2Y3f3αT41.08.(63)The interior values assumed here are taken from the standard solar model of Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990, 2001.**The Interiors of Stars: Problem Setnvdv=n/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2e−mv2/2kT4πv2dv,
−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.σ(E)∝e−2π2Uc/E.(30)?”“


<<<PAGE 446>>>

(d)Explain your conclusion in part (c) in terms of the physical processes of convection andradiation.12TheQvalue of a reaction is the amount of energy released (or absorbed) during the reaction.Calculate theQvalue for each step of the PP I reaction chain (Eqs. 37– 39). Expressyour answers in MeV . The masses of21H and32He are 2.0141 u and 3.0160 u, respectively.13Calculate the amount of energy released or absorbed in the following reactions (express youranswers in MeV):(a)126C+126C→2412Mg+γ(b)126C+126C→168O+242He(c)199F+11H→168O+42HeThe mass of126C is 12.0000 u, by deﬁnition, and the masses of168O,199F, and2412Mg are 15.99491 u,18.99840 u, and 23.98504 u, respectively. Are these reactions exothermic or endothermic?14Complete the following reaction sequences. Be sure to include any necessary leptons.(a)2714Si→?13Al+e++?(b)?13Al+11H→2412Mg+4??(c)3517Cl+11H→3618Ar+?15Prove that Eq. (83) follows from Eq. (82).16Show that Eq. (109) can be obtained from Eq. (108).
17Starting with the Lane–Emden equation and imposing the necessary boundary conditions,prove that then=0 polytrope has a solution given byD0(ξ)=1−ξ26,withξ1=√6.18Describe the density structure associated with ann=0 polytrope.19Derive an expression for the total mass of ann=5 polytrope, and show that althoughξ1→∞,the mass is ﬁnite.20 (a)On the same graph, plot the density structure of stars of polytropic indicesn=0,n=1,andn=5.Hint:You will want to plotρn/ρcvs.r/λn.(b)What can you conclude about the concentration of density with radius for increasingpolytropic index?(c)From the trend that you observe for the analytic solutions to the Lane–Emden equation,what would you expect regarding the density concentration of an adiabatically convectivestellar model compared to a model in radiative equilibrium?11H+11H→21H+e++νe(37)21H+11H→32He+γ(38)32He+32He→42He+211H.(39)
PVγ=K,(82)P=K′Tγ /(γ−1),(83)1r2ddr⎩parenleftbiggr2ρdPdr⎩parenrightbigg=−4πG ρ.(108)1r2ddr⎩parenleftbiggr2dℓPhi1gdr⎩parenrightbigg=4πG ρ,(109)The Interiors of Stars: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 447>>>

21Estimate the hydrogen-burning lifetimes of stars near the lower and upper ends of the mainsequence. The lower end of the main sequence occurs near 0.072 M⊙, with log10Te=3.23and log10(L/L⊙)=−4.3. On the other hand, an 85 M⊙star near the upper end of the mainsequence has an effective temperature and luminosity of log10Te=4.705 and log10(L/L⊙)=6.006, respectively. Assume that the 0.072 M⊙star is entirely convective so that, throughconvective mixing, all of its hydrogen, rather than just the inner 10%, becomes available forburning.22Using the information given in Problem 21.072 M⊙star and⊙star. What is the ratio of their radii?23 (a)Estimate the Eddington luminosity of a 0.072 M⊙star and compare your answer to themain-sequence luminosity given in Problem 21. Assumeκ=0.001 m2kg−1. Is radia-tion pressure likely to be signiﬁcant in the stability of a low-mass main-sequence star?(b)If a 120 M⊙star forms with log10Te=4.727 and log10(L/L⊙)=6.252, estimate itsEddington luminosity. Compare your answer with the actual luminosity of the star.COMPUTER PROBLEMS24 (a)Use a numerical integration algorithm such as a Runge–Kutta method to compute thedensity proﬁle for then=1.5 andn=3 polytropes. Be sure to correctly incorporate theboundary conditions in your integrations.(b)Plot your results and compare them with then=0,n=1, andn=5 analytic modelsdetermined in Problem 20.25Verify that the basic equations of stellar structure [Eqs. ( 6), ( 7), ( 36), ( 68)] aresatisﬁed by the 1 M⊙StatStarmodel available for download from the companion website;see Appendix: StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code. This may be done by selecting two adjacentthe derivatives on the left-hand sides of the equations, for exampledPdr≃Pi+1−Piri+1−ri,and comparing your results with results obtained from the right-hand sides using average valuesof quantities for the two zones [e.g.,Mr=(Mi+Mi+1)/2].Perform your calculations for two adjacent shells at temperatures near 5×106K, and thencompare your results for the left- and right-hand sides of each equation by determining relativeerrors. Note that the model assumes complete ionization everywhere and has the uniformcompositionX=0.7,Y=0.292,Z=0.008. Your results on the left- and right-hand sides ofthe stellar structure equations will not agree exactly becauseStatStaruses a Runge–Kuttanumerical algorithm that carries out intermediate steps not shown in the output ﬁle.
Data from Chabrier, et al.,Ap. J.,542, 464, 2000.Data from Schaller, et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser.,96, 269, 1992.(6)(7)***
***above, calculate the radii of a 0a  85 MThe Interiors of Stars: Problem Set
zones and numerically computing
dPdr=−GMrρr2=−ρg,dMrdr=4πr2ρ,


<<<PAGE 448>>>

26The companion website contains an example of a theoretical 1.0M⊙duced by the stellar structure codeStatStar,describedinAppendix: , A Stellar StructureUsingStatStar, builda second main-sequence star with a mass of 0.75 M⊙X=0.7,Y=0.292, andZ=0.008. For these values, themodel’s luminosity and effectivetemperature are 0.189 L⊙and 3788.5 K, respectively. Comparethe central temperatures, pressures, densities, and energy generation rates between the 1.0M⊙and 0.75 M⊙models. Explainthe differences in the central conditions of the two models.27Use the stellar structure codeStatStardescribedinAppendix: , A Stellar Structure StatStarH–R diagram and mass–effectivewebsite, to calculate a homogeneous, main sequence modelY=0.292, andZ=0.008. (Note:It may be moreclass a different mass for this problem so that the results can be(a)After obtaining a satisfactory model, plotPversusr,Mrversusr,Lrversusr, andTversusr.(b)At what temperature hasLrreached approximately 99% of its surface value? 50% of itssurface value? Is the temperature associated with 50% of the total luminosity consistentwith the rough estimate found in Eq. (27)? Why or why not?(c)What are the values ofMr/M⋆for the two temperatures found in part (b)?M⋆is the totalmass of the stellar model.(d)If each student in the class calculated a different mass, compare the changes in the followingquantities with mass:(i)The central temperature.(ii)The central density.(iii)The central energy generation rate.(iv)The extent of the central convection zone with mass fraction and radius.(v)The effective temperature.(vi)The radius of the star.(e)If each student in the class calculated a different mass:Code, together with the theoreticaltemperaturedata provided on the companion-having the compositionX=0.7,illustrativeto assign each student in thecompared.)Tquantum=Z21Z22e4µm12π2ϵ20h2k.(27)
(i)Plot each model on a graph of luminosity versus mass (i.e., plotL⋆/L⊙versusM⋆/M⊙).(ii)Plot log10(L⋆/L⊙)versus log10(M⋆/M⊙)for each stellar model.(iii)Using an approximate power law relation of the formL⋆/L⊙=(M⋆/M⊙)α,ﬁnd an appropriate value forα.αmay differ for different compositions or vary some-what with mass. This is known as the mass–luminosity relation (see below figure).The Interiors of Stars: Problem SetdLrdr=4πr2ρϵ,(36)dTdr=−34acκρT3Lr4πr2.(68)Code.that hasa homogeneous composition ofmain-sequence star pro-StatStar StatStar


<<<PAGE 449>>>

Detached main-sequence systems, B6 to MVisual binariesDetached OB systemsResolved spectroscopic binaries
–1.0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5Log10(M/M )Log10(L/L  )
–3–2–1012345
FIGUREThe mass–luminosity relation. (Data from Popper,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,18,115, 1980.)28Repeat Problem 27 above using the same mass but a different composition; assumeX=0.7,Y=0.290,Z=0.010.(a)For a given mass, which model (Z=0.008 orZ=0.010) has the higher central temper-ature? the greater central density?(b)Referring to the appropriate stellar structure equations and constitutive relations, explainyour results in part (a).(c)Which model has the largest energy generation rate at the center? Why?(d)How do you account for the differences in effective temperature and luminosity betweenyour two models?The Interiors of Stars: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 450>>>

The Interstellar Medium
and Star Formation
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 2  S e c o n d  E d i t i o n ,  B r a d l e y  W .  C a r r o l l ,  D a l e  A .  O s t l i e .  C o p y r i g h t  ©2 0 0 7  ,


<<<PAGE 451>>>

The Interstellar Medium
and Star Formation
1 Interstellar Dust and Gas
2 The Formation of Protostars
3 Pre-Main-Sequence Evolution
1 INTERSTELLAR DUST AND GAS
When we look into the heavens, it appears as though the stars are unchanging, point-like
sources of light that shine steadily. On casual inspection, even our own Sun appears constant.
In fact all stars change. Usually the changes are so gradual and over such long time
intervals when measured in human terms that we do not notice them without very careful
telescopic observation. Occasionally, however, the changes are extremely rapid and dra-
matic, as in the case of a supernova explosion. By invoking the understanding we developed
thus far of the physics of stellar interiors and atmospheres, we can now begin to examine
the processes governing how stars evolve during their lives.
The Interstellar Medium
In some sense the evolution of stars is a cyclic process. A star is born out of gas and dust
that exists between the stars, known as the interstellar medium (ISM). During its lifetime,
depending on the star’s total mass, much of that material may be returned to the ISM through
stellar winds and explosive events. Subsequent generations of stars can then form from this
processed material. As a result, to understand the evolution of a star, it is important to study
the nature of the ISM.
Understanding the interstellar medium is critical for more than its role in stellar evolution,
however. The ISM is of profound importance in describing the structure, dynamics, and
evolution of our Milky Way Galaxy, as well as galaxies throughout the universe. In addition,
it impacts our observations of everything from relatively nearby stars to the most remote
galaxies and quasars.But this is not the case; sunspots come and go, ﬂares erupt, signiﬁcant amounts of matter 
are launched into space via coronal mass ejections, the corona itself changes shape, and 
even the Sun’s luminosity appears to be ﬂuctuating over human timescales, as evidenced 
by the Maunder minimum. Of course, over the 4.57-Gyr lifetime of our Sun, the luminos-
ity, effective temperature, and radius have all changed substantially.


<<<PAGE 452>>>

More fundamentally, the ISM is an enormous and complex environment that providesan important laboratory for testing our understanding of astrophysics at many levels. Thedynamics of the ISM involve turbulent gas motions, shocks, and galactic magnetic ﬁeldsthat lace through interstellar space. Thus, modeling the ISM ultimately requires detailedsolutions to the equations of magnetohydrodynamics. The dust, molecules, atoms, ions,and free electrons that permeate the ISM challenge our understanding of radiative transfer,thermodynamics, and quantum mechanics. Moreover, the production and destruction ofdust grains and complex molecules requires a detailed understanding of chemistry in anenvironment not reproducible in a terrestrial laboratory.As an introduction to astrophysical processes, this text is unable to explore all of thefascinating aspects of the interstellar medium. Consequently, the present section servesonly as a brief introduction to general aspects of the ISM.Interstellar ExtinctionOn a dark night some of thedust cloudsthat populate our Milky Way Galaxy can beseen in the band of stars that is the disk of the Galaxy (see Fig. 1). It is not that thesedark regions are devoid of stars, but rather that the stars located behind intervening dustclouds are obscured. This obscuration, referred to asinterstellar extinction, is due to thesummative effects of scattering and absorption of starlight (as depicted in Fig. 2).Given the effect that extinction can have on the apparent magnitude of a star, the distancemodulusequationmustbemodiﬁedappropriately.Inagivenwavelengthbandcenteredonλ, we now havemλ=Mλ+5 log10d−5+Aλ,(1)wheredis the distance in pc andAλ>0 represents the number of magnitudes of interstellarextinction present along the line of sight. IfAλis large enough, a star that would otherwisebe visible to the naked eye or through a telescope could no longer be detected. This is thereason for the dark bands running through the Milky Way.
FIGURE 1Dust clouds obscure the stars located behind them in the disk of the Milky Way.(Courtesy of Palomar/Caltech.)The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 453>>>

Light from star
AB
Red transmissionBluereflectionDust cloud
FIGURE 2An interstellar cloud containing signiﬁcant amounts of dust along with the gas (a dustcloud) can both scatter and absorb light that passes through it. The amount of scattering and absorptiondepends on the number density of dust grains, the wavelength of the light, and the thickness of thecloud. Since shorter wavelengths are affected more signiﬁcantly than longer ones, a star lying behindthe cloud appears reddened to observer A. Observer B sees the scattered shorter wavelengths as ablue reﬂection nebula.ClearlyAλmust be related to the optical depth of the material, measured back along theline of sight.he fractional change in the intensity of the light is given byIλ/Iλ,0=e−τλ,whereIλ,0is the intensity in the absence of interstellar extinction.e can now relate the optical depth to the change in apparent magnitude due toextinction, givingmλ−mλ,0=−2.5 log10/parenleftbige−τλ/parenrightbig=2.5τλlog10e=1.086τλ.But the change in apparent magnitude is justAλ, soAλ=1.086τλ.(2)The change in magnitude due to extinction is approximately equal to the optical depth alongthe line of sight.he optical depth through the cloud is given byτλ=/integraldisplays0nd(s′)σλds′,(3)wherend(s′)is the number density of scattering dust grains andσλis the scattering crossTW
TThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 454>>>

section. Ifσλis constant along the line of sight, thenτλ=σλ/integraldisplays0nd(s′)ds′=σλNd,(4)whereNd, the dust graincolumn density, is the number of scattering dust particles in a thincylinder with a cross section of 1 m2stretching from the observer to the star. Thus we seethat the amount of extinction depends on the amount of interstellar dust that the light passesthrough, as one would expect.The Mie TheoryIf we assume for simplicity, as was ﬁrst done by Gustav Mie (1868–1957) in 1908, thatdust particles are spherical and each has a radiusa, then the geometrical cross section that aparticle presents to a passing photon is justσg=πa2. We may now deﬁne the dimensionlessextinction coefﬁcientQλto beQλ≡σλσg,whereQλdepends on the composition of the dust grains.Mie was able to show that when the wavelength of the light is on the order of the size ofthe dust grains, thenQλ∼a/λ, implying thatσλ∝a3λ(λ/greaterorsimilara).(5)In the limit thatλbecomes very large relative toa,Qλgoes to zero. On the other hand,ifλbecomes very small relative toa, it can be shown thatQλapproaches a constant,independent ofλso thatσλ∝a2(λ≪a).(6)These limiting behaviors can be understood by analogy to waves on the surface of a lake.If the wavelength of the waves is much larger than an object in their way, such as a grainof sand, the waves pass by almost completely unaffected (σλ∼0). On the other hand, ifthe waves are much smaller than the obstructing object—for instance, an island—they aresimply blocked; the only waves that continue on are those that miss the island altogether.Similarly, at sufﬁciently short wavelengths, the only light we detect passing through thedust cloud is the light that travels between the particles.Combining the ideas already discussed, it is clear that the amount of extinction, asmeasured byAλ, must be wavelength-dependent. Since the longer wavelengths of red lightare not scattered as strongly as blue light, the starlight passing through intervening dustclouds becomes reddened as the blue light is removed. Thisinterstellar reddeningcausesstars to appear redder than their effective temperatures would otherwise imply. Fortunately,it is possible to detect this change by carefully analyzing the absorption and emission linesin the star’s spectrum.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 455>>>

Much of the incident blue light is scattered out of its original path and can leave the cloudin virtually any direction. As a result, looking at the cloud in a direction other than along theline of sight to a bright star behind the cloud, an observer will see a bluereﬂection nebula(recallFig.2)suchasthePleiadesThisprocessisanalogoustoRayleighscattering, which produces a blue sky on Earth. The difference between Mie scattering andRayleigh scattering is that the sizes of the scattering molecules associated with Rayleighscattering are much smaller than the wavelength of visible light, leading toσλ∝λ−4.Example 1.1.A certain star, located 0.8 kpc from Earth, is found to be dimmer thanexpected at 550 nm byAV=1.1 magnitudes, whereAVis the amount of extinction asmeasuredthroughthevisual wavelengthﬁlterIfQ550=1.5andthedustgrainsareassumedtobesphericalwithradiiof0.2µm,estimatetheaveragedensity(n)ofmaterialbetweenthestarandEarth.From Eq. ( 2), the optical depth along the line of sight is nearly equal to the amountof extinction in magnitudes, orτ550≃1. Also,σ550=πa2Q550≃2×10−13m2.Now the column density of the dust along the line of sight is given by Eq. (4),Nd=τ550σ550≃5×1012m−2.Finally, sinceNd=/integraltexts0n(s′)ds′=n×0.8 kpc, we haven=Nd0.8 kpc=2×10−7m−3.Number densities of this magnitude are typical of the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy.Molecular Contributions to Interstellar Extinction CurvesPredictions of the Mie theory work well for longer wavelengths, typically from the infraredinto the visible wavelength region. However, at ultraviolet wavelengths signiﬁcant devia-tions become apparent, as can be seen by considering the ratio ofAλ, the extinction in awavelength band centered atλ, to the extinction in some reference wavelength band, suchasAV. This ratio is often plotted versus reciprocal wavelengthλ−1, as in Fig. 3. Alter-natively,color excessesare sometimes plotted instead, such as(Aλ−AV)/(AB−AV)orE(B−V)≡(B−V)intrinsic−(B−V)observed.At longer wavelengths (the left side of the graph) the data agree well with the Mie theory.For wavelengths shorter than the blue wavelength band (B), however, the curves begin todiverge signiﬁcantly, deviating from the expected relation,Aλ/AV∝λ−1. Particularly evi-dent is the “bump” in the ultraviolet at 217.5 nm or 4.6µm−1. At even shorter wavelengths,the extinction curve tends to rise sharply as the wavelength decreases.The existence of the “bump” in Fig. 3 gives us some hint of the composition of thedust. Graphite, a well-ordered form of carbon, interacts strongly with light near 217.5 nm...The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 456>>>

4321A/H9261/AV
2468l//H9261 (/H9262m–1)Herschel 36R = 5.30HD 48099R = 3.52BD+56 524R = 2.75ComputedObserved
VBU
FIGURE 3Interstellar extinction curves along the lines of sight to three stars. The dashed linesrepresent the observational data, and the solid lines are theoretical ﬁts. TheU,B, andVwavelengthbands are indicated for reference. (Figure adapted from Mathis,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,28, 37,1990. Reproduced with permission from theAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume28, ©1990 by Annual Reviews Inc.)Although it is uncertain how carbon can organize into large graphite particles in the inter-stellar medium, the strength of the “bump,” the abundance of carbon, and the existence ofthe 217.5-nm resonance have led most researchers to suggest that graphite may be a majorcomponent of interstellar dust.Another possible source of the 217.5-nm feature may bepolycyclic aromatic hydro-carbons(PAHs; see Fig. 4). These are complex organic planar molecules with multiplebenzene ring-like structures that are probably responsible for a series of molecular bandsthat have been observed in emission in the light from diffuse dust clouds.1The so-calledunidentiﬁed infrared emission bandsexist in the wavelength range between 3.3µm and12µm; they appear to be due to vibrations in the C-C and C-H bonds common in PAHs. Justas transitions between atomic energy levels are quantized, so are the energies associatedwith molecular bonds. In the case of molecular bonds, however, the energy levels tend to begrouped in closely spaced bands, producing characteristic broad features in the spectrum ofthe light. The vibration, rotation, and bending of molecular bonds are all quantized, yieldingcomplex spectra that may be difﬁcult to identify in large molecules.Interstellar dust is composed of other particles as well, as evidenced by the existenceof dark absorption bands at wavelengths of 9.7µm and 18µm in the near-infrared. Thesefeatures are believed to be the result of the stretching of the Si-O molecular bond and the1The fact that molecules as complex as PAHs can exist in space has also been conﬁrmed by their presence incertain types of meteorites found on Earth, known ascarbonaceous meteorites.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 457>>>

HHHHHHHHHHHHH HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHC24 H12C14 H10C42 H18FIGURE 4The structures of several polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: C14H10(anthracene),C24H12(coronene), C42H18(hexabenzocoronene). The hexagonal structures are shorthand for indi-cating the presence of a carbon atom at each corner of the hexagon.bending of Si-O-Si bonds in silicates, respectively. The existence of these absorption bandsinvolving silicon indicates that silicate grains are also present in the dust clouds and thediffuse dust of the ISM.An important characteristic of the light scattered from interstellar dust is that it tends tobe slightly polarized. The amount of polarization is typically a few percent and dependson wavelength. This necessarily implies that the dust grains cannot be perfectly spherical.Furthermore, they must be at least somewhat aligned along a unique direction since theelectric ﬁeld vectors of the radiation are preferentially oriented in a particular direction.The most likely way to establish such an alignment is for the grains to interact with a weakmagnetic ﬁeld. Because less energy is required, the particles tend to rotate with their longaxes perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld.All of these observations give us some clues to the nature of the dust in the ISM. Ap-parently the dust in the ISM is composed of both graphite and silicate grains ranging insize from several microns down to fractions of a nanometer, the characteristic size of thesmaller PAHs. It appears that many of the features of the interstellar extinction curve canbe reproduced by combining the contributions from all of these components.Hydrogen as the Dominant Component of the ISMAlthough dust produces most of the obscuration that is readily noticeable, the dominantcomponent of the ISM is hydrogen gas in its various forms: neutral hydrogen (H I), ionizedhydrogen (H II), and molecular hydrogen (H2). Hydrogen comprises approximately 70%of the mass of matter in the ISM, and helium makes up most of the remaining mass; metals,such as carbon and silicon, account for only a few percent of the total.Most hydrogen indiffuseinterstellar hydrogen clouds is in the form ofHIi nt h egroundstate. As a result, the H I is generally incapable of producing emission lines by down-ward transitions of electrons from one orbit to another. It is also difﬁcult to observeHIi nabsorption, since UV-wavelength photons are required to lift the electrons out of the groundThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 458>>>

state. However, in certain unique circumstances, orbiting observatories have detected ab-sorption lines produced by cold clouds of H I when there are strong UV sources lying behindthem.21-cm Radiation of HydrogenFortunately, it is still generally possible to identify neutral hydrogen in the diffuse ISM. Thisis done by detecting the unique radio-wavelength21-cm line. The 21-cm line is producedby the reversal of the spin of the electron relative to the proton in the atom’s nucleus.oth electrons and protons possess an inherent spin angular momentum,with thez-component of the spin angular momentum vector having one of two possibleorientations, corresponding to the two allowed values of the spin quantum number,ms=±12. Because these particles are also electrically charged, their intrinsic spins endow themwith dipole magnetic ﬁelds, much like those of bar magnets. If the spins of the electronand proton are aligned (e.g., both spin axes are in the same direction), the atom has slightlymore energy than if they are anti-aligned (see Fig. 5). As a result, if the electron’s spin“ﬂips” from being aligned with the proton to being anti-aligned, energy must be lost fromthe atom. If the spin ﬂip is not due to a collision with another atom, then a photon is emitted.Of course, a photon can also be absorbed, exciting a hydrogen atom into aligning its electronand proton spins. The wavelength of the photon associated with the spin ﬂip is 21.1 cm,corresponding to a frequency of 1420 MHz.The emission of a 21-cm photon from an individual hydrogen atom is extremely rare.Once in the excited state, several million years can pass on average before that atom willemit a photon. Competing with this spontaneous emission are collisions between hydrogenatoms that may result in either excitation or de-excitation. In the low-density environmentof the diffuse ISM, collisions occur on timescales of hundreds of years. Although this isfar shorter than the spontaneous emission timescale, statistically some atoms are still ableto make the necessary spontaneous transition. In contrast, the best vacuums produced inProtonElectronAligned
Anti-alignedPhotonTransition
FIGURE 5When the spins of the electron and proton in a hydrogen atom go from being alignedto being anti-aligned, a 21-cm-wavelength photon is emitted.BThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 459>>>

Earth-based laboratories have densities much greater than those found in the ISM, meaningthat collision rates are signiﬁcantly higher in laboratory environments and virtually all of theatoms in the laboratory are de-excited before they can emit 21-cm radiation. The existenceof 21-cm radiation was predicted in the early 1940s and ﬁrst detected in 1951. Since thenit has become an important tool in mapping the location and density of H I, measuringradial velocities using the Doppler effect, and estimating magnetic ﬁelds using the Zeemaneffect. 21-cm radiation is particularly valuable in determining the structure and kinematicproperties of galaxies, including our own.Although H I is quite abundant, the rarity of 21-cm emission (or absorption) from individ-ual atoms means that the center of this line can remain optically thin over large interstellardistances. Assuming that the line proﬁle is a Gaussian, like the shape of the Doppler lineproﬁle the optical depth of the line center is given byτH=5.2×10−15NHTℓDelta1 v,(7)whereNHis the column density of H I (in units of m−2),Tis the temperature of the gas (inkelvins), andℓDelta1vis the full width of the line at half maximum (in km s−1). [Note that sincethe line width is due primarily to the Doppler effectℓDelta1vis expressed in units ofvelocity,ratherthaninwavelengthunits;typicallyℓDelta1v∼10 km s−1.]As long as the 21-cm hydrogen line is optically thin (i.e., on the linear part of the curve ofgrowththeopticaldepthisproportionaltotheneutralhydrogencolumndensity.Studies ofdiffuse H I cloudsindicate temperatures of 30 to 80 K, number densities in therange of 1×108m−3to 8×108m−3, and masses on the order of 1–100 M⊙.ComparingτHwithAValong the same line of sight shows thatNHis generally pro-portional toNd(the column density of dust) whenAV<1. This observation suggests thatdust and gas are distributed together throughout the ISM. However, whenAV>1, thiscorrelation breaks down; the column density of H I no longer increases as rapidly as thecolumn density of dust. Apparently, other physical processes are involved when the dustbecomes optically thick.Optically thick dust clouds shield hydrogen from sources of ultraviolet radiation. Oneconsequence of this shielding is that molecular hydrogen can exist without the threat ofundergoing dissociation by UV photon absorption. Dust can also enhance the H2formationrate beyond what would be expected by random collisions of hydrogen atoms. This en-hancement occurs for two reasons: (1) A dust grain can provide asiteon the surface of thegrain where the hydrogen atoms can meet, rather than requiring chance encounters in theISM, and (2) the dust provides asinkfor the binding energy that must be liberated if a stablemolecule is to form. The liberated energy goes into heating the grain and ejecting the H2molecule from the formation site. If the column density of atomic hydrogen is sufﬁcientlylarge (NHon the order of 1025m−2), it can also shield H2from UV photodissociation.Consequently,molecular cloudsare surrounded by shells of H I.Molecular Tracers of H2Since the structure of H2differs greatly from that of atomic hydrogen, the H2molecule doesnot emit 21-cm radiation. This explains whyNHandAVare poorly correlated in molecular,,),The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 460>>>

clouds whenAV>1; the number density of atomic hydrogen decreases signiﬁcantly as thehydrogen becomes locked up in its molecular form.Unfortunately, H2is very difﬁcult to observe directly because the molecule does nothave any emission or absorption lines in the visible or radio portions of the electromagneticspectrum at the cool temperatures typical of the ISM. In special circumstances whenT>2000 K, it is possible to detect rotational and vibrational bands (known collectively asrovibrational bands) associated with the molecular bond. However, in most instances itbecomes necessary to use other molecules astracersof H2by making the assumptionthat their abundances are proportional to the abundance of H2. Because of its relativelyhigh abundance (approximately 10−4that of H2), the most commonly investigated tracer iscarbon monoxide, CO, although other molecules have also been used, including CH, OH,CS, C3H2, HCO+, and N2H+. It is also possible to useisotopomersof the molecules, suchas13CO or C18O, to further reﬁne studies of molecular clouds. Given that molecules havemoments of inertia that affect their spectra, different isotopes in molecules result in differentspectral wavelengths(Note that when the speciﬁc isotopeisnotindicated,itisassumedthatthemostabundantisotopeisimplied;thusCOimplies12C16O.)During collisions the tracer molecules become excited (or de-excited) and spontaneoustransitions from excited states result in the emission of photons in wavelength regions thatare more easily observed than those associated with H2, such as the 2.6-mm transition ofCO. Since collision rates depend on both the gas temperature (or thermal kinetic energy)and the number densities of the species, molecular tracers can provide information aboutthe environment within a molecular cloud. In fact, an estimate of atomic and molecularcollision rates can be made in a way completely analogous to the approach used to obtainthe nuclear reaction rate equation.The Classiﬁcation of Interstellar CloudsThe results of these studies show that conditions within molecular clouds can vary widely.Consequently, any effort to specify a discrete classiﬁcation scheme is destined to fail becausethe delineation between types is blurred at best. However, even with that caveat, a broadclassiﬁcation scheme is still useful for distinguishing the general characteristics of speciﬁcenvironments.In clouds where the hydrogen gas is primarily atomic and the interstellar extinctionis roughly 1<AV<5, molecular hydrogen may be found in regions of higher columndensity. Such clouds are sometimes referred to asdiffuse molecular clouds, or alternativelyastranslucent molecular clouds. Conditions in diffuse molecular clouds are typical ofdiffuse H I clouds but with somewhat higher masses; they have temperatures of 15 to 50 K,n∼5×108to 5×109m−3,M∼3 to 100 M⊙, and they measure several parsecs across.Both H I clouds and diffuse molecular clouds tend to be irregularly shaped.Giant molecular clouds(GMCs) are enormous complexes of dust and gas wheretemperatures are typicallyT∼15 K, number densities are in the rangen∼1×108to3×108m−3, masses are typically 105M⊙but may reach 106M⊙, and typical sizes are onthe order of 50 pc across. The famous Horsehead Nebula, also known as Barnard 33 (B33),.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 461>>>

FIGURE 6The Horsehead Nebula is part of the Orion giant molecular cloud complex. The“horsehead” appearance is due to dust protruding into an H II (ionized hydrogen) environment.(European Southern Observatory)is shown in Fig. 6. The Horsehead Nebula is a portion of the Orion giant molecular cloudcomplex. Thousands of GMCs are known to exist in our Galaxy, mostly in its spiral arms.Overall, the structure of GMCs tend to be clumpy with local regions of signiﬁcantlygreater density.Dark cloud complexesof roughly 104M⊙haveAV∼5,n∼5×108m−3,diameters on the order of 10 pc, and characteristic temperatures of 10 K. Smaller, individualclumpsmay be even more dense, withAV∼10,n∼109m−3, diameters of a couple ofparsecs, temperatures of 10 K or so, and masses of 30 M⊙. At even smaller scales aredense coreswith masses on the order of 10 M⊙,AV>10,n∼1010m−3, characteristicdiameters of 0.1 pc, and temperatures of 10 K. Finally, in some localized regions of GMCs,observations revealhot coreswith characteristic sizes of 0.05 to 0.1 pc, whereAV∼50to 1000,T∼100 to 300 K,n∼1013to 1015m−3, andM∼10 to 3000 M⊙. Based onobservations from infrared telescopes such as NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope and theEuropean Space Agency’s Infrared Space Observatory, hot cores appear to have massive,young O and B stars embedded within them, suggesting strongly that these are regions ofrecent star formation.Located outside of larger molecular complexes are the almost spherical clouds known asBok globules(see, for example, Fig. 7).2These globules are characterized by large visualextinctions (AV∼10), low temperatures (T∼10 K), relatively large number densities(n>1010m−3), low masses (M∼1 to 1000 M⊙), and small sizes of typically less than1 pc. Infrared surveys of Bok globules have revealed that many, perhaps most, of theseobjects harbor young low-luminosity stars in their centers, implying that Bok globules arealso sites of active star formation. In fact, Bok globules appear to be dense cores that have2Bok globules are named after Bart Bok (1906–1983), who ﬁrst studied these objects in the 1940s.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 462>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 7The Bok globule, Barnard 68 (B68), observed in visible light [(a) composite of BVIbands] and in infrared light [(b) composite of BIK bands]. The visible image was obtained by oneof the 8-m telescopes of the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope at Paranal. Theinfrared image was obtained by ESO’s 3.58-m New Technology Telescope at La Silla. Notice thatsigniﬁcantly reddened stars can be seen through the globule in the infrared. (Interstellar reddening isthe result of scattering photons off of dust grains). (European Southern Observatory)been stripped of their surrounding molecular gas by nearby hot, massive stars. The processby which stars form out of the ISM will be considered in the next section.Interstellar ChemistryAlong with the molecules and dust grains already discussed, the ISM is rich in othermolecules as well. As of June 2005, radio observations have resulted in the positive identiﬁ-cation of 125 molecules (not including isotopomers), ranging in complexity from diatomicmolecules such as H2and CO, and triatomic molecules such as H2O and H+3, to fairly longorganic strings, including HC11N.Given the complex nature of the molecules present in the interstellar medium, it is evidentthat the chemistry of the ISM is also quite complex. The speciﬁc processes in operation ina given molecular cloud depend on the density and temperature of the gas, as well as itscomposition and the presence of dust grains. We notedthat dust grains must bepresent for the formation of molecular hydrogen, H , the dominant constituent in molecular2clouds. It is also likely that dust grains can help facilitate the formation of numerous othermolecules as well, including CH, NH, OH, CH2, CO, CO2, and H2O. In fact, in sufﬁcientlydense clouds, the formation of molecules on the surfaces of grains can actually lead to thedevelopment of icy mantles on the grains. Absorption signatures of solid CO, CO2,H2O,CH4,C H3OH, NH3, and other ices have been measured in combination with the infraredspectra of silicate dust grains.In addition to the chemistry that can occur on grain surfaces, it is also possible formolecules to form in the gas phase. For example, the hydroxyl molecule (OH) can formthrough a series of reactions involving atomic and molecular ions, including the ionic waterearlier The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 463>>>

molecule, H2O+:H++O→O++HO++H2→OH++HOH++H2→H2O++HH2O++e−→OH+H.(8)Eq. (8) competes with another reaction involving molecular hydrogen,H2O++H2→H3O++H,leading to the production of either a hydroxyl molecule (75% of the time) or a water moleculeviaH3O++e−→/braceleftBiggOH+H2H2O+H.(9)The Heating and Cooling of the ISMNot only are molecules and dust grains critical in understanding the chemistry of the ISM,but they also play important roles in the heating and cooling of the material between thestars. You may have noticed that diffuse molecular clouds have higher gas temperaturesthan giant molecular clouds, and the dense cores of GMCs are even cooler yet. On the otherhand, the hot cores of GMCs have signiﬁcantly greater temperatures. What are the physicalcauses of these observational trends?Much of the heating of the interstellar medium comes fromcosmic rays, charged particlesthat travel through space with sometimes astonishing amounts of energy. A single protonmay possess an energy ranging anywhere from 10 to 1014MeV.3The highest energy cosmicrays are extremely rare, but energies in the range 103to 108MeV are common. The sourcesof cosmic rays include stellar ﬂares and supernova explosionsHeating by cosmic rays comes primarily through the ionization of hydrogen atoms andmolecules as a result of collisions with cosmic ray protons;p++H→H++e−+p+p++H2→H+2+e−+p+.When an atom or molecule is ionized, an electron is ejected that carries some of the originalkinetic energy of the proton with it. It is this ejected electron that interacts with the ISM toincrease the average kinetic energy of the ISM’s constituents via collisions with molecules(see, for example, Eqs. 8 and 9). Those molecules then collide with other molecules31014MeV is roughly the kinetic energy of a tennis ball of mass 0.057 kg traveling at 100 km h−1(approximately60 mph)..The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 464>>>

in the gas, distributing thermal kinetic energy throughout the cloud, thereby raising thetemperature of the cloud.Other sources of heating in molecular clouds include the ionization of carbon atomsby ultraviolet starlight resulting in ejected electrons, the photoelectric ejection of electronsfrom dust grains by ultraviolet starlight, the absorption of light energy into the lattice ofdust grains, and the ionization of hydrogen by stellar X-rays. Shocks from supernovae orstrong stellar winds can also produce some heating of molecular clouds in special cases.To balance the heating processes, cooling mechanisms must also be in operation. Theprimary mechanism for cooling is based on the emission of infrared photons. RecallingMie scattering (Eq. 5), when photon wavelengths are on the order of, or longer than,the size of dust grains, they are less likely to be scattered. IR photons can pass more easilythrough the molecular cloud than can shorter-wavelength photons, allowing the IR photonsto transport energy out of the cloud.IR photons are produced in molecular clouds through collisions between ions, atoms,molecules, and dust grains. Typically a collision between ions, atoms, or molecules resultsin one of the species being left in an excited state; the energy of the excited state comesfrom the kinetic energy of the collision. The species in the excited state then decays backto the ground state through the emission of an IR photon. For example,O+H→O∗+H(10)O∗→O+γ.(11)Here O∗represents an excited state of the oxygen atom. The collisional kinetic energy(thermal energy) is thus transformed into an IR photon that escapes the cloud. Collisionalexcitations of C+and CO by H and H2, respectively, are also signiﬁcant contributors tocooling of molecular clouds.Collisions involving dust grains can also result in cooling of molecular clouds. Thisprocess is similar to ionic, atomic, and molecular collisions in that the lattice of a dust graincan be left with excess thermal energy after the collision. The grain then emits infraredenergy that is able to escape from the cloud.The Sources of Dust GrainsIt is apparent that even though dust grains make up only about one percent of the mass of amolecular cloud, they are important constituents in determining its chemistry and physics.The question of the source of these grains then naturally arises. Although observationsindicate that dust grains can be formed in the envelopes of very cool stars, aided by theenhanced density in those environments relative to molecular clouds, grains can also beeasily destroyed by UV and X-ray photons. Dust grains are also formed as a product ofsupernova explosions and stellar winds. However, none of these sources appear to be able toprovide the abundance of massive grains found in molecular clouds. Rather, it appears thatgrains probably grow by a process of coagulation within the molecular clouds themselves.Dust grain formation represents just one of many areas of active research into the nature ofthe ISM.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 465>>>

2THE FORMATION OF PROTOSTARSOur understanding of stellar evolution has developed signiﬁcantly since the 1960s, reachingthe point where much of the life history of a star is well determined. This success has beendue to advances in observational techniques, improvements in our knowledge of the physicalprocesses important in stars, and increases in computational power. In the remainder of thischapterwe will present an overview of the lives of stars,leavingdetaileddiscussionsofsomespecialphasesofevolutionuntillater,speciﬁcallystellarpulsation,supernovae,andcompactobjects(stellarcorpses).The Jeans CriterionDespite many successes, important questions remain concerning how stars change duringtheir lifetimes. One area where the picture is far from complete is in the earliest stage of evo-lution, the formation of pre-nuclear-burning objects known asprotostarsfrom interstellarmolecular clouds.If globules and cores in molecular clouds are the sites of star formation, what conditionsmust exist for collapse to occur? Sir James Jeans (1877–1946) ﬁrst investigated this prob-lem in 1902 by considering the effects of small deviations from hydrostatic equilibrium.Although several simplifying assumptions are made in the analysis, such as neglecting ef-fects due to rotation, turbulence, and galactic magnetic ﬁelds, it provides important insightsinto the development of protostars.The virial theorem2K+U=0,describes the condition of equilibrium for a stable, gravitationally bound system.4We havealready seen that the virial theorem arises naturally in the discussion of orbital motion, andwe have also invoked it in estimating the amount of gravitational energy contained withina starThevirialtheoremmayalsobeusedtoestimatetheconditionsnecessaryforprotostellarcollapse.If twice the total internal kinetic energy of a molecular cloud (2K) exceeds the absolutevalue of the gravitational potential energy (|U|), the force due to the gas pressure willdominate the force of gravity and the cloud will expand. On the other hand, if the internalkinetic energy is too low, the cloud will collapse. The boundary between these two casesdescribes the critical condition for stability when rotation, turbulence, and magnetic ﬁeldsare neglected.Assuming a spherical cloud of constant density, the gravitational potential energy isapproximatelyU∼−35GM2cRc,whereMcandRcare the mass and radius of the cloud, respectively. We may also estimate4We have implicitly assumed that the kinetic and potential energy terms are averaged over time.,
,.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 466>>>

the cloud’s internal kinetic energy, given byK=32NkT,whereNis the total number of particles. ButNis justN=McµmH,whereµis the mean molecular weight. Now, by the virial theorem, the condition for collapse(2K<|U|) becomes3MckTµmH<35GM2cRc.(12)The radius may be replaced by using the initial mass density of the cloud,ρ0, assumed hereto be constant throughout the cloud,Rc=/parenleftbigg3Mc4πρ0/parenrightbigg1/3.(13)After substitution into Eq. ( 12), we may solve for the minimum mass necessary to initiatethe spontaneous collapse of the cloud. This condition is known as theJeans criterion:Mc>MJ,whereMJ≃/parenleftbigg5kTGµmH/parenrightbigg3/2/parenleftbigg34πρ0/parenrightbigg1/2(14)is called theJeans mass. Using Eq. ( 13), the Jeans criterion may also be expressed interms of the minimum radius necessary to collapse a cloud of densityρ0:Rc>RJ,(15)whereRJ≃/parenleftbigg15kT4πGµmHρ0/parenrightbigg1/2(16)is theJeans length.The Jeans mass derivation given above neglected the important fact that there must existan external pressure on the cloud due to the surrounding interstellar medium (such as theencompassing GMC in the case of an embedded dense core). Although we will not deriveThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 467>>>

the expression here, the critical mass required for gravitational collapse in the presence ofan external gas pressure ofP0is given by theBonnor–Ebert mass,MBE=cBEv4TP1/20G3/2,(17)wherevT≡/radicalbigkT /µmH(18)is theisothermal sound speed(γ=cBEisgiven bycBE≃1.18.he Jeans mass (Eq. 14) can be written in the formof Eq. ( 17) withcJ≃5.46 replacingcBE. The smaller constant for the Bonnor–Ebertmass is to be expected since an external compression force due toP0is being exerted onthe cloud.5Example 2.1.For a typical diffuse hydrogen cloud,T=50 K andn=5×108m−3.I fwe assume that the cloud is entirely composed of H I,ρ0=mHnH=8.4×10−19kg m−3.Takingµ=1 and using Eq. ( 14), the minimum mass necessary to cause the cloud tocollapse spontaneously is approximatelyMJ∼1500 M⊙. However, this value signiﬁcantlyexceeds the estimated 1 to 100 M⊙believed to be contained in H I clouds. Hence diffusehydrogen clouds are stable against gravitational collapse.On the other hand, for a dense core of a giant molecular cloud, typical temperatures andnumber densities areT=10 K andnH2=1010m−3. Since dense clouds are predominantlymolecular hydrogen,ρ0=2mHnH2=3×10−17kg m−3andµ≃2. In this case the Jeansmass isMJ∼8M⊙, characteristic of the masses of dense cores being on the order of 10 M⊙.Apparently the dense cores of GMCs are unstable to gravitational collapse, consistent withbeing sites of star formation.If the Bonnor–Ebert mass (Eq. 17) is used as the critical collapse condition, then therequired mass reduces to approximately 2 M⊙.Homologous CollapseIn the case that the criterion for gravitational collapse has been satisﬁed in the absence ofrotation, turbulence, or magnetic ﬁelds, the molecular cloud will collapse. If we make thesimplifying (and possibly unrealistic) assumption that any existing pressure gradients aretoo small to inﬂuence the motion appreciably, then the cloud is essentially in free-fall duringthe ﬁrst part of its evolution. Furthermore, throughout the free-fall phase, the temperature5You may be interested to know that the derivation of Eq. ( 17) involves theisothermal Lane–Emden equationT
.1), and the dimensionless constantThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 468>>>

of the gas remains nearly constant (i.e., the collapse is said to beisothermal). This is trueas long as the cloud remains optically thin and the gravitational potential energy releasedduring the collapse can be efﬁciently radiated away. In this case the spherically symmetrichydrodynamicequationcanbeusedtodescribethecontractionifweassumethat|dP/dr|≪GMrρ/r2. After canceling the density on both sides of the expression, wehaved2rdt2=−GMrr2.(19)Of course, the right-hand side of Eq. ( 19) is just the local acceleration of gravity at adistancerfrom the center of a spherical cloud. As usual, the mass of the sphere interior tothe radiusris denoted byMr.To describe the behavior of the surface of a sphere of radiusrwithin the collapsing cloudas a function of time, Eq. ( 19) must be integrated over time. Since we are interested onlyin the surface that enclosesMr, the mass interior torwill remain a constant during thatcollapse. As a result, we may replaceMrby the product of the initial densityρ0and theinitial spherical volume, 4πr30/3. Then, if we multiply both sides of Eq. ( 19) by thevelocity of the surface of the sphere, we arrive at the expressiondrdtd2rdt2=−/parenleftbigg4π3Gρ0r30/parenrightbigg1r2drdt,which can be integrated once with respect to time to give12/parenleftbiggdrdt/parenrightbigg2=/parenleftbigg4π3Gρ0r30/parenrightbigg1r+C1.The integration constant,C1, can be evaluated by requiring that the velocity of the sphere’ssurface be zero at the beginning of the collapse, ordr/dt=0 whenr=r0. This givesC1=−4π3Gρ0r20.Substituting and solving for the velocity at the surface, we havedrdt=−/bracketleftbigg8π3Gρ0r20/parenleftBigr0r−1/parenrightBig/bracketrightbigg1/2.(20)Note that the negative root was chosen because the cloud is collapsing.To integrate Eq. ( 20) so that we can obtain an expression for the position as a functionof time, we make the substitutionsθ≡rr0andχ≡/parenleftbigg8π3Gρ0/parenrightbigg1/2,The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 469>>>

which leads to the differential equationdθdt=−χ/parenleftbigg1θ−1/parenrightbigg1/2.(21)Making yet another substitution,θ≡cos2ξ,(22)and after some manipulation, Eq. ( 21) becomescos2ξdξdt=χ2.(23)Equation ( 23) may now be integrated directly with respect totto yieldξ2+14sin 2ξ=χ2t+C2.(24)Lastly, the integration constant,C2, must be evaluated. Doing so requires thatr=r0whent=0, which implies thatθ=1, orξ=0 at the beginning of the collapse. Therefore,C2=0.We have ﬁnally arrived at the equation of motion for the gravitational collapse of thecloud, given in parameterized form byξ+12sin 2ξ=χt.(25)Our task now is to extract the behavior of the collapsing cloud from this equation. FromEq. ( 25), it is possible to calculate thefree-fall timescalefor a cloud that has satisﬁedthe Jeans criterion. Lett=tffwhen the radius of the collapsing sphere reaches zero (θ=0,ξ=π/2).6Thentff=π2χ.Substituting the value forχ, we havetff=/parenleftbigg3π321Gρ0/parenrightbigg1/2.(26)You should notice that the free-fall time is actually independent of the initial radius ofthe sphere. Consequently, as long as the original density of the spherical molecular cloudwas uniform, all parts of the cloud will take the same amount of time to collapse, and thedensity will increase at the same rate everywhere. This behavior is known as ahomologouscollapse.6This is obviously an unphysical ﬁnal condition, since it implies inﬁnite density. Ifr0≫rﬁnal, however, thenrﬁnal≃0 is a reasonable approximation for our purposes here.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 470>>>

However, if the cloud is somewhat centrally condensed when the collapse begins, thefree-fall time will be shorter for material near the center than for material farther out. Thus,as the collapse progresses, the density will increase more rapidly near the center than inother regions. In this case the collapse is referred to as aninside-out collapse.Example 2.2.Using data given in Example 2.1 for a dense core of a giant molecularcloud, we may estimate the amount of time required for the collapse. Assuming a densityofρ0=3×10−17kg m−3that is constant throughout the core, Eq. ( 26) givestff=3.8×105yr.To investigate the actual behavior of the collapse in our simpliﬁed model, we mustﬁrst solve Eq. ( 25) forξ, given a value fort, and then use Eq. ( 22) to ﬁndθ=r/r0. However, Eq. ( 25) cannot be solved explicitly, so numerical techniques must beemployed. The numerical solution of the homologous collapse of the molecular cloud isshown in Fig. 8. Notice that the collapse is quite slow initially and accelerates quicklyastffis approached. At the same time, the density increases very rapidly during the ﬁnalstages of collapse.The Fragmentation of Collapsing CloudsSince the masses of fairly large molecular clouds could exceed the Jeans limit, fromEq. ( 14) our simple analysis seems to imply that stars can form with very large masses,possibly up to the initial mass of the cloud. However, observations show that this doesnot happen. Furthermore, it appears that stars frequently (perhaps even preferentially) tendto form in groups, ranging from binary star systems to clusters that contain hundreds ofthousands of members.The process offragmentationthat segments a collapsing cloud is an aspect of starformation that is under signiﬁcant investigation. To see that fragmentation must occur by
0.00.20.40.60.81.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0r/r0
Time (105 yr)
Log10 (/H9267//H92670)
FIGURE 8The homologous collapse of a molecular cloud, as discussed in Exampler/r0is shown as the solid line and log10(ρ/ρ0)is shown as the dashed line. The initial density of thecloud wasρ0=3×10−17kg m−3and the free-fall time is 3.8×105yr. 2.2.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 471>>>

some mechanism(s), refer again to the equation for the Jeans mass (Eq. 14).An importantconsequence of the collapse of a molecular cloud is that the density of the cloud increases bymany orders of magnitude during free-fall (Fig. 8). Consequently, sinceTremains nearlyconstant throughout much of the collapse, it appears that the Jeans mass must decrease.Aftercollapse has begun, any initial inhomogeneities in density will cause individual sectionsof the cloud to satisfy the Jeans mass limit independently and begin to collapse locally,producing smaller features within the original cloud. This cascading collapse could lead tothe formation of large numbers of smaller objects.It is important to point out that one challenge with the overly simpliﬁed scenario describedhere is that the process implies that far too many stars would be produced. It is likely thatonly about 1% of the cloud actually forms stars.What is it that stops the fragmentation process? Since we observe a galaxy ﬁlled withstars that have masses on the order of the mass of the Sun, the cascading fragmentationof the cloud cannot proceed without interruption. The answer to the question lies in ourimplicit assumption that the collapse is isothermal, which in turn implies that the onlyterm that changes in Eq. ( 14) is the density. Clearly this cannot be the case since starshave temperatures much higher than 10 to 100 K. If the energy that is released duringa gravitational collapse is radiated away efﬁciently, the temperature can remain nearlyconstant. At the other extreme, if the energy cannot be transported out of the cloud at all(anadiabaticcollapse), then the temperature must rise. Of course, the real situation mustbe somewhere between these two limits, but by considering each of these special casescarefully, we can begin to understand some of the important features of the problem.If the collapse changes from being essentially isothermal to adiabatic, the associatedtemperature rise would begin to affect the value of the Jeans mass.or an adiabatic process the pressure of the gas is related to its density byγ, the ratio ofspeciﬁcheatsUsingtheidealgaslawanadiabaticrelationbetweendensityandtemperaturecanbeobtained,T=K′′ργ−1,(27)whereK′′is a constant. Substituting this expression into Eq. ( 14), we ﬁnd that for anadiabatic collapse, the dependence of the Jeans mass on density becomesMJ∝ρ(3γ−4)/2.For atomic hydrogenγ=5/3, givingMJ∝ρ1/2; the Jeans massincreaseswith increasingdensity for a perfectly adiabatic collapse of a cloud. This behavior means that the collapseresults in a minimum value for the mass of the fragments produced. The minimum massdepends on the point when the collapse goes from being predominantly isothermal to adi-abatic.Of course, this transition is not instantaneous or even complete. However, it is possible tomake a crude order-of-magnitude estimate of the lower mass limit of the fragments. As wehave already mentioned, according to the virial theorem, energy must be liberated duringthe collapse of the cloud.he energy released is roughlyℓDelta1Eg≃310GM2JRJF.,
TThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 472>>>

for a spherical cloud just satisfying the Jeans criterion at some point during the collapse.Averaged over the free-fall time, the luminosity due to gravity is given byLff≃ℓDelta1Egtff∼G3/2/parenleftbiggMJRJ/parenrightbigg5/2,where we have made use of Eq. ( 26) and have neglected terms of order unity.If the cloud were optically thick and in thermodynamic equilibrium, the energy wouldbe emitted as blackbody radiation. However, during collapse the process of releasing theenergyislessefﬁcientthanforanidealblackbody.emayexpresstheradiatedluminosityasLrad=4πR2eσT4,where an efﬁciency factor, 0<e<1, has been introduced to indicate the deviation fromthermodynamic equilibrium. If the collapse is perfectly isothermal and escaping radiationdoes not interact at all with overlying infalling material,e∼0. If, on the other hand, energyemitted by some parts of the cloud is absorbed and then re-emitted by other parts of thecloud, thermodynamic equilibrium would more nearly apply andewould be closer to unity.Equating the two expressions for the cloud’s luminosity,Lff=Lrad,and rearranging, we haveM5/2J=4πG3/2R9/2JeσT4.Making use of Eq. ( 13) to eliminate the radius, and then using Eq. ( 14) to write thedensity in terms of the Jeans mass, we arrive at an estimate of when adiabatic effects becomeimportant, expressed in terms of the minimum obtainable Jeans mass:MJmin=0.03/parenleftbiggT1/4e1/2µ9/4/parenrightbiggM⊙,(28)whereTis expressed in kelvins. If we takeµ∼1,e∼0.1, andT∼1000 K at the timewhen adiabatic effects may start to become signiﬁcant,MJ∼0.5M⊙; fragmentation ceaseswhen the segments of the original cloud begin to reach the range of solar mass objects. Theestimate is relatively insensitive to other reasonable choices forT,e, andµ. For instance,ife∼1 thenMJ∼0.2M⊙.Additional Physical Processes in Protostellar Star FormationWe have, of course, left out a number of important features in our calculations. For in-stance, we have freely used the Jeans criterion during each point in the collapse of thecloud to discuss the process of fragmentation. This cannot be correct, since our estimateof the Jeans criterion was based on a perturbation of a static cloud; no consideration wasmade of the initial velocity of the cloud’s outer layers. We have also neglected the detailsWThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 473>>>

of radiation transport through the cloud, as well as vaporization of the dust grains, disso-ciation of molecules, and ionization of the atoms. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that asunsophisticated as the preceding analysis was, it did illustrate important aspects of the fun-damental problem and left us with a result that is reasonable. Such preliminary approachesto understanding complex physical systems are powerful tools in our study of nature.7Moresophisticated estimates of the complex process of cessation of fragmentation place the limitan order of magnitude lower than determined above, at about 0.01 M⊙.Perhaps just as important to the problem of the collapse process are the possible effects ofrotation (angular momentum), the deviation from spherical symmetry, turbulent motions inthe gas, and the presence of magnetic ﬁelds. For example, an appreciable amount of angularmomentum present in the original cloud is likely to result in a disk-like structure for at leasta part of the original material, since collapse will proceed at a more rapid rate along theaxis of rotation relative to collapse along the equatorIt is also apparent from careful investigations of molecular clouds that magnetic ﬁeldsmust also play a crucial role and, in fact, are likely to control the onset of collapse. Thatmechanisms other than gravity must be involved becomes clear in simply considering thefree-fall time of the dense core discussed in Example 2.2. From that calculation, thecollapse of the dense core should occur on a timescale on the order of 105yr. While thismay seem long by human standards, it is quite short on stellar evolution timescales. Thiswould imply that almost as soon as a dense core forms, it begins producing stars. This wouldalso imply that dense cores should be very rare; however, many dense cores are observablethroughout our Galaxy.Zeeman measurements of various molecular clouds indicate the presence of magneticﬁelds with strengths typically on the order of magnitude of 1 to 100 nT. If the magneticﬁeld of a cloud is “frozen in,” and the cloud is compressed, the magnetic ﬁeld strength willincrease, leading to an increase in the magnetic pressure and resistance to the compression.In fact, if the cloud is stable to collapse because of magnetic pressure, it will remain so aslong as the magnetic ﬁeld does not decayDuring the derivation of the Jeans criterion, the virial theorem was invoked using abalance between gravitational potential energy and the cloud’s internal (thermal) kineticenergy. Absent from that calculation was the inclusion of energy due to the presence ofmagnetic ﬁelds. When magnetic ﬁelds are included, the critical mass can be expressed asMB=cBπR2BG1/2,(29)wherecB=380 N1/2m−1T−1for a magnetic ﬁeld permeating a spherical, uniform cloud.IfBis expressed in nT andRin units of pc, then Eq. ( 29) can be written in the moreillustrative formMB≃70 M⊙/parenleftbiggB1 nT/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggR1 pc/parenrightbigg2.(30)7This type of approach is sometimes called a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation because of the relatively smallspace required to carry out the estimate. Extensive use of “back-of-the-envelope” calculations is made throughoutthis text to illustrate the effects of key physical processes..
.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 474>>>

If the mass of the cloud is less thanMB, the cloud is said to bemagnetically subcriticalandstable against collapse, but if the mass of the cloud exceedsMB, the cloud ismagneticallysupercriticaland the force due to gravity will overwhelm the ability of the magnetic ﬁeldto resist collapse.Example 2.3.For the dense core considered in Examples 2.1 and 2.2, if thedense core has a magnetic ﬁeld of 100 nT threading through it, and if it has a radius of0.1 pc, the magnetic critical mass would beMB≃70 M⊙, implying that a dense core ofmass 10 M⊙would be stable against collapse. However, ifB=1n T ,t h e nMB≃0.7M⊙and collapse would occur.Ambipolar DiffusionThe last example hints at another possibility for triggering the collapse of a dense core. Ifa core that was originally subcritical were to become supercritical, collapse could ensue.This could happen in one of two ways: a group of subcritical clouds could combine to forma supercritical cloud, or the magnetic ﬁeld could be rearranged so that the ﬁeld strength islessened in a portion of the cloud. It appears that both processes may occur, although thelatter process seems to dominate the pre-collapse evolution of most molecular clouds.Recall that only charged particles such as electrons or ions are tied to magnetic ﬁeldlines; neutrals are not affected directly. Given that dense molecular cores are dominated byneutrals, how can magnetic ﬁelds have any substantial effect on the collapse? The answerlies in the collisions between neutrals and the ions (electrons do not signiﬁcantly affectneutral atoms or molecules through collisions). As neutrals try to drift across magnetic ﬁeldlines, they collide with the “frozen-in” ions, and the motions of the neutrals are inhibited.However, if there is a net deﬁned direction for the motion of neutrals due to gravitationalforces, they will still tend to migrate slowly in that direction. This slow migration processis known asambipolar diffusion.To determine the relative impact of ambipolar diffusion, we need to estimate a character-istic timescale for the diffusion process. This is done by comparing the size of the molecularcloud to the time it takes for a neutral to drift across the cloud. It can be shown that thetimescale for ambipolar diffusion is approximatelytAD≃2Rvdrift≃10 Gyr/parenleftBignH21010m−3/parenrightBig/parenleftbiggB1 nT/parenrightbigg−2/parenleftbiggR1 pc/parenrightbigg2.(31)Once collapse begins, magnetic ﬁelds can be further altered by undergoing reconnectionevents similar to those of solar ﬂares.Example 2.4.Returning to the dense core we used in previous examples, ifB=1 nTandR=0.1 pc, we ﬁnd from Eq. ( 31) that the timescale for ambipolar diffusion is100 Myr. This is several hundred times longer than the free-fall timescale determined inExample 2.2. Clearly the ambipolar diffusion process can control the evolution of adense core for a long time before free-fall collapse begins.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 475>>>

Numerical Simulations of Protostellar EvolutionTo investigate the nature of the gravitational collapse of a cloud in detail, we must solve themagnetohydrodynamic equations numerically. Unfortunately, limits in computing powerand numerical methods still necessitate making numerous and signiﬁcant simplifying as-sumptions. These numerical models do exhibit many of the characteristics that were illus-trated by our crude analytical studies, but other important aspects of the collapse becomeapparent that were not contained in the physics that has already been discussed.8Consider a spherical cloud of approximately 1 M⊙and solar composition that is super-critical. Initially the early stages of the free-fall collapse are nearly isothermal because lightnear the center of the collapse can travel signiﬁcant distances before being absorbed by dust.Owing to an initial slight increase in density toward the center of the cloud, the free-falltimescale is shorter near the center and the density increases more rapidly there (inside-outcollapse). When the density of the material near the center of the collapse region reachesapproximately 10−10kg m−3, the region becomes optically thick and the collapse becomesmore adiabatic. The opacity of the cloud at this point is primarily due to the presence of dust.The increased pressure that occurs when the collapse becomes adiabatic substantiallyslows the rate of collapse near the core.At this point the central region is nearly in hydrostaticequilibrium with a radius of approximately 5 AU. It is this central object that is referred toas a protostar.One observable consequence of the cloud becoming optically thick is that the gravita-tional potential energy being released during the collapse is converted into heat and thenradiated away in the infrared as blackbody radiation. By computing the rate of energy re-lease (the luminosity) and the radius of the cloud where the optical depth isτ=2/3, theeffective temperature may be determined usin(At this pointinits evolution,the optical depth is determined by the dust, and so the photosphere is adust photosphere.)With the identiﬁcation of a photosphere, it becomes possible to plot the location ofthe simulated cloud on the H–R diagram as a function of time. Curves that depict thelife histories of stars on the H–R diagram are known asevolutionary tracks. Figure 9shows theoretical evolutionary tracks of 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, and 10 M⊙clouds computedby one research group through the protostar phase. As the collapse continues to accelerateduring the early stages, the luminosity of the protostar increases along with its effectivetemperature.Above the developing protostellar core, material is still in free-fall. When the infallingmaterial meets the nearly hydrostatic core, a shock wave develops where the speed of thematerial exceeds the local sound speed (the material is supersonic). It is at this shock frontthat the infalling material loses a signiﬁcant fraction of its kinetic energy in the form of heatthat “powers” the cloud and produces much of its luminosity.When the temperature reaches approximately 1000 K, the dust within the developingprotostar begins to vaporize and the opacity drops. This means that the radius whereτ=2/3is substantially reduced, approaching the surface of the hydrostatic core. Since the luminos-ity remains high during this phase, a corresponding increase in the effective temperaturemust occur.8Some of the ﬁrst calculations of protostellar collapse were performed by Richard Larson in 1969. His pioneeringwork neglected the complicated physics associated with rotation, turbulence, and magnetic ﬁelds but did includethermodynamics, radiative transfer, and other important physical processes.g the following equation:L=4πR2σT4e.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 476>>>

DM 1994 0.1 MDM 1994 0.5 MDM 1994 1 MDM 1994 2 M0.5 M1 M0.1 M0.05 M2 M10 M0.7 Myr0.5 Myr0.3 Myr150 kyr60 kyr30 kyr20 kyr10 kyr8 kyr4 kyr1.5 kyr1 kyr–2–10123Log10 Luminosity (L  )
42Log10 Effective temperature (K)FIGURE 9Theoretical evolutionary tracks of the gravitational collapse of 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2,and 10 M⊙clouds through the protostar phase (solid lines). The dashed lines show the times sincecollapse began. The light dotted lines are pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks of 0.1, 0.5, 1, and2M⊙stars from D’Antona and Mazzitelli,Ap. J. Suppl.,90, 457, 1994. Note that the horizontal axisis plotted with effective temperature increasing to the left, as is characteristic of all H–R diagrams.(Figure adapted from Wuchterl and Tscharnuter,Astron. Astrophys.,398, 1081, 2003.)As the overlying material continues to fall onto the hydrostatic core, the temperature ofthe core slowly increases. Eventually the temperature becomes high enough (approximately2000 K) to cause the molecular hydrogen to dissociate into individual atoms. This processabsorbs energy that would otherwise provide a pressure gradient sufﬁcient to maintainhydrostatic equilibrium. As a result, the core becomes dynamically unstable and a secondcollapse occurs. After the core radius has decreased to a value about 30% larger than thepresent size of the Sun, hydrostatic equilibrium is re-established. At this point, the coremass is still much less than its ﬁnal value, implying thataccretionis still ongoing.After the core collapse, a second shock front is established as the envelope continuesto accrete infalling material. When the nearly ﬂat, roughly constant luminosity part of theevolutionary track is reached in Fig. 9, accretion has settled into a quasi-steady mainaccretion phase. At about the same time, temperatures in the deep interior of the protostarhaveincreasedenoughthatdeuterium(21H)beginstoburnproducingupto60%of the luminosity of the 1 M⊙protostar. Note that this reaction is favored over the ﬁrst stepin the PP I chain because it has a fairly large cross section,σ(E), at low temperatures.With only a ﬁnite amount of mass available from the original cloud, and with only alimited amount of deuterium available to burn, the luminosity must eventually decrease.When deuterium burn-out occurs, the evolutionary track bends sharply downward and the,The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 477>>>

effective temperature decreases slightly. The evolution has now reached a quasi-static pre-main-sequence phase that will be discussed in the next section.The theoretical scenario just described leads to the possibility of observational veriﬁca-tion. Since it is expected that the collapse should occur deep within a molecular cloud, theprotostar itself would likely be shielded from direct view by a cocoon of dust. Consequently,any observational evidence of the collapse would be in the form of small infrared sourcesembedded within dense cores or Bok globules. The detection of protostellar collapse is mademore difﬁcult by the relatively small value for the free-fall time, meaning that protostarsare fairly short-lived objects.The search for protostars is under way in infrared and millimeter wavelengths, and anumber of strong candidates have been identiﬁed, including B335, a Bok globule in theconstellation of Aquila, L1527 in Taurus, and numerous objects in the Orion Nebula. B335is probably the best-studied case and is almost a perfect test of the theory of protostellarcollapse since it seems to have very little turbulence or rotation.Some astronomers believe that by studying the details of the infrared spectra of thesesources, they have been able to identify possible spectral signatures of infalling dust andgas around the embedded infrared objects. These tell-tale features involve Doppler-shiftedsub-structures in the proﬁles of spectral lines. For an optically thick line, a central absorptionfeature is often visible (see Fig. 10). The source of the absorption feature is cool materialbetween the observer and the source of the line (the hotter central region). The broad wingsof the line result from Doppler-shifted light coming from infalling gas. The blueshifted wingis from infalling gas on the far side of the cloud (therefore moving toward the observer),and the redshifted wing is from infalling gas on the near side of the cloud. Infall has beenidentiﬁed in starless dense cores as well.
Absorptiondip from cloudInfall movingtoward observerInfall movingaway from observer
/H92610WavelengthIntensity
FIGURE 10A line proﬁle of a spherical, infalling cloud. The wings are Doppler shifted dueto infalling material. The central absorption is produced by intervening material far from the centralcollapse. The redshifted wing arises from material in front of the central region moving away fromthe observer, and the blueshifted wing is due to material in the back of the cloud moving toward theobserver.Another example of line proﬁle signatures indicating mass motions is discussed in the next section; see Fig. 17.9
9The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 478>>>

3PRE-MAIN-SEQUENCE EVOLUTIONAs we discovered in the last section, once the collapse of a molecular cloud has begun, it ischaracterized by the free-fall timescale given by Eq. ( 26). With the formation of a quasi-static protostar, the rate of evolution becomes controlled by the rate at which the star canthermally adjust to the collapse. This is just the Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale;thegravita-potentialenergyliberatedbythecollapseisreleasedovertimeandisthesourceoftheobject’sluminosity.SincetKH≫tff, protostellarevolutionproceedsatamuchslowerratethanfree-fallcollapse.Forinstance,a1M⊙starrequiresalmost40Myrtocontractquasi-staticallytoitsmain-sequencestructure.The Hayashi TrackWith the steadily increasing effective temperature of the protostar, the opacity of the outerlayers becomes dominated by the H−ion, the extra electrons coming from the partial ioniza-tion of some of the heavier elements in the gas that have lower ionization potentials. As withthe envelope of the main-sequence Sun, this large opacity contribution causes the envelopeof a contracting protostar to become convective. In fact, in some cases the convection zoneextends all the way to the center of the star. In 1961, C. Hayashi demonstrated that becauseof the constraints convection puts on the structure of a star, a deep convective envelopelimits its quasi-static evolutionary path to a line that is nearly vertical in the H–R diagram.Consequently, as the protostar collapse slows, its luminosity decreases while its effectivetemperature increases slightly. It is this evolution along theHayashi trackthat appears asthe downward turn at the end of the evolutionary tracks shown in Fig. 9.The Hayashi track actually represents a boundary between “allowed” hydrostatic stel-lar models and those that are “forbidden.” To the right of the Hayashi track, there is nomechanism that can adequately transport the luminosity out of the star at those low effec-tive temperatures; hence no stable stars can exist there. To the left of the Hayashi track,convection and/or radiation is responsible for the necessary energy transport. Note that thisdistinction between allowed and forbidden models is not in conﬂict with the free-fall evo-lution of collapsing gas clouds found to the right of the Hayashi track since those objectsare far from being in hydrostatic equilibrium.Classical Calculations of Pre-Main-Sequence EvolutionIn 1965, before detailed protostellar collapse calculations were performed, Icko Iben, Jr.computed the ﬁnal stages of collapse onto the main sequence for stars of various masses.In each case he started his models on the Hayashi track. All of those models neglected theeffects of rotation, magnetic ﬁelds, and mass loss. Since that time, signiﬁcant improvementshave been made in our understanding of the physical processes involved in stellar structureand evolution, including reﬁned nuclear reaction rates, new opacities, and the inclusionof mass loss or accretion. Some modern evolutionary calculations have also included theeffects of rotation.10Thepre-main-sequence evolutionary tracksfor a sequence of masses1Some calculations have also begun considering the effects of magnetic ﬁelds, but the results presented in thistext do not include those recent preliminary results.0The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation
tional


<<<PAGE 479>>>

60 M25 M15 M9 M5 M3 M2 M1.5 M1 M0.8 MY = 0.300Z = 0.0200123456
4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4 3.8 3.66420–2–4–6–8–10–12Log10 L/L  
Mbol
Log10 Te (K)FIGURE 11Classical pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks computed for stars of variousmasses with the compositionX=0.68,Y=0.30, andZ=0.02. The direction of evolution on eachtrack is generally from low effective temperature to high effective temperature (right to left). Themass of each model is indicated beside its evolutionary track. The square on each track indicates theonset of deuterium burning in these calculations. The long-dash line represents the point on each trackwhere convection in the envelope stops and the envelope becomes purely radiative. The short-dashline marks the onset of convection in the core of the star. Contraction times for each track are givenin Table 1. (Figure adapted from Bernasconi and Maeder,Astron. Astrophys.,307, 829, 1996.)computed with state-of-the-art physics are shown in Fig. 11, and the total time for eachevolutionary track is given in Table 1.Consider the pre-main-sequence evolution ofa1M⊙star, beginning on the Hayashitrack. With the high H−opacity near the surface, the star is completely convective duringapproximately the ﬁrst one million years of the collapse. In these models, deuterium burningalso occurs during this early period of collapse, beginning at the square indicated on theevolutionary tracks in Fig. 11.1However, since21H is not very abundant, the nuclear1Note that since these calculations did not include the formation of the protostar from the direct collapse ofthe cloud as was done for the tracks in Fig. 9, there is a fundamental inconsistency between when deuteriumburning occurs in the two sets of calculations.11The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 480>>>

TABLE 1Pre-main-sequence contraction times for the classical models presented inFig. 11. (Data from Bernasconi and Maeder,Astron. Astrophys.,307, 829, 1996.)Initial Mass (M⊙) Contraction Time (Myr)600.0282250.0708150.11790.28851.1537.24223.41.535.4138.90.868.4reactions have little effect on the overall collapse; they simply slow the rate of collapseslightly.As the central temperature continues to rise, increasing levels of ionization decrease theAt about the time that the luminosity begins to increase again, the temperature near thecenter has become high enough for nuclear reactions to begin in earnest, although not yetat their equilibrium rates. Initially, the ﬁrst two steps of the PP I chain [the conversionof11Ht o32HeandtheCNOreactionsthatturn126C into147Ndominatethenuclearenergyproduction.Withtime,thesereactionsprovideanincreasinglylargerfractionoftheluminosity,whiletheenergyproductionduetogravitationalcollapsemakeslessofacontributiontoL.Due to the onset of the highly temperature-dependent CNO reactions, a steep temperaturegradient is established in the core, and some convection again develops in that region. Atthe local maximum in the luminosity on the H–R diagram near the short dashed line, therate of nuclear energy production has become so great that the central core is forced toexpandsomewhat,causingthegravitationalenergytermtobecomenegative[recall]thatϵ=ϵnuclear+ϵgravityThiseffectisapparentatthesurfaceasthetotalluminositydecreasestowarditsmain-sequencevalue,accompaniedbyadecreaseintheeffectivetemperature.When the126C is ﬁnally exhausted, the core completes its readjustment to nuclear burning,reaching a sufﬁciently high temperature for the remainder of the PP I chain to become im-portant. At the same time, with the establishment of a stable energy source, the gravitationalenergy term becomes insigniﬁcant and the star ﬁnally settles onto the main sequence. It isworth noting that the time required fora1M⊙star to reach the main sequence, accordingto the detailed numerical model just described, is not very different from the crude estimateof the Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale.]
.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation
opacity in that region and a radiative core develops, progressively encompassing more and more of the star’s mass. At the point of minimum luminosity in the tracks following the descent along the Hayashi track, the existence of the radiative core allows energy to escape into the convective envelope more readily, causing the luminosity of the star to increase again. Also, the effective temperature continues to increase, since the star is still shrinking.


<<<PAGE 481>>>

For stars with masses lower than our Sun’s, the evolution is somewhat different. Forstars with massesM/lessorsimilar0.5M⊙(not shown in Fig. 11), the upward branch is missingjust before the main sequence. This happens because the central temperature never getshot enough to burn126C efﬁcientlyprotostarislessthanapproximately0.072M⊙,thecoreAnother important difference exists between solar-mass stars and stars of lower massthat can reach the main sequence: Temperatures remain cool enough and the opacity stayssufﬁciently high in low-mass stars that a radiative core never develops. Consequently, thesestars remain fully convective all the way to the main sequence.The Formation of Brown DwarfsBelow about 0.072 M⊙, some nuclear burning will still occur, but not at a rate necessary toform a main-sequence star. Above about 0.06 M⊙the core temperature of the star is greatenough to burn lithium, and above a mass of approximately 0.013 M⊙deuterium burningoccurs (0.013 M⊙is roughly thirteen times the mass of Jupiter). This last value is alsoinagreementwiththecessationoffragmentationdiscussedThe objects inthe range between about 0.013 M⊙and 0.072 M⊙are known asbrown dwarfsand havespectraltypesofLandTTheﬁrstconﬁrmeddiscoveryofabrowndwarf,Gliese229B,wasannouncedin1995.Sincethattimehundredsofbrowndwarfshavebeendetected thanks to near-infrared all-sky surveys, such as the Two Micron All Sky Survey(2MASS) and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). Given their very low luminosities anddifﬁculty of detection, the number of objects found to date suggest that brown dwarfs areprevalent throughout the Milky Way Galaxy.Massive Star FormationFor massive stars, the central temperature quickly becomes high enough to burn126Ca swell as convert11H into32He. This means that these stars leave the Hayashi track at higherluminosities and evolve nearly horizontally across the H–R diagram. Because of the muchlarger central temperatures, the full CNO cycle becomes the dominant mechanism for hydro-gen burning in these main-sequence stars. Since the CNO cycle is so strongly temperature-dependent, the core remains convective even after the main sequence is reached.Possible Modiﬁcations to the Classical ModelsThe general pre-main-sequence evolutionary track calculations described above containnumerous approximations, as already discussed. It is likely that rotation plays an importantrole, along with turbulence and magnetic ﬁelds. It is also likely that the initial environmentscontain inhomogeneities in cloud densities, strong stellar winds, and ionizing radiation fromnearby, massive stars..
earlier ..If the mass of the collapsingThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formationnever gets hot enough to generate sufﬁcient energy by nuclear reactions to stabilize the star against gravitational collapse. As a result, the stable hydrogen-burning main sequence is never obtained. This explains the lower end of the main sequence.


<<<PAGE 482>>>

These classical models also assume initial structures that are very large, with radii that areeffectively inﬁnitely greater than their ﬁnal values. Given that dense cores have dimensionson the order of 0.1 pc, the initial radii of clouds undergoing protostellar collapse mustbe much smaller than traditionally assumed. In addition, the assumption of pressure-freeprotostellar collapse may also be a poor one; more realistic calculations probably requirean initial contraction that is quasi-static (after all, the dark cores are roughly in hydrostaticequilibrium).To complicate matters further, the more massive stars also interact with infalling materialin such a way that a feedback loop may develop, limiting the amount of mass that they canaccrete via the classical process discussed to this point; recall the discussion of the Eddingtonlimit.In light of these various complications, some astronomers have suggested that signiﬁ-cant modiﬁcations to the classical pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks may be required.Theoretical evolutionary sequences beginning with smaller initial radii lead to abirth linewhere protostars ﬁrst become visible. This birth line places an upper limit on the observedluminosities of protostars.In addition, some observations suggest that stars with masses greater than about 10 M⊙or so may not form at all by the classical pre-main-sequence process described above. Thisapparent effect could be due to limiting feedback mechanisms, such as the high luminosityof ionizing radiation associated with high effective temperatures. Instead of the collapse ofsingle protostellar clouds, the more massive stars may form by mergers of smaller stars indense protostellar environments. On the other hand, some researchers have argued that theneed for mergers can be avoided because rotation implies that most of the infalling masscollapses to anaccretion diskthat forms around the star. The accretion disk then feedsthe growing massive star, minimizing the impact of high amounts of ionizing radiation onthe infalling gas and dust.The Zero-Age Main Sequence (ZAMS)The diagonal line in the H–R diagram where stars of various masses ﬁrst reach the mainsequence and begin equilibrium hydrogen burning is known as thezero-age main sequence(ZAMS). Inspection of the classical results given in Table 1 shows that the amount oftime required for stars to collapse onto the ZAMS is inversely related to mass; a 0.8M⊙star takes over 68 Myr to reach the ZAMS, whereas a 60 M⊙star makes it to the ZAMS inonly 28,000 years!This inverse relationship between star-formation time and stellar mass may also signala problem with classical pre-main-sequence evolutionary models. The reason is that if themost massive stars do indeed form ﬁrst in a cluster of stars, the intense radiation that theyproduce would likely disperse the cloud before their low-mass siblings would ever have achance to develop.Clearly much work remains before we can say that pre-main-sequence stellar evolutionis understood.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 483>>>

The Initial Mass Function (IMF)From observational studies it is apparent that more low-mass than high-mass stars formwhen an interstellar cloud fragments. This implies that the number of stars that form permass interval per unit volume (or per unit area in the Milky Way’s disk) is strongly mass-dependent. This functional dependence is known as theinitial mass function(IMF). Onetheoretical estimate of the IMF is shown in Fig. 12. However, a particular IMF dependson a variety of factors, including the local environment in which a cluster of stars formsfrom a given cloud complex in the ISM.As a consequence of the process of fragmentation, most stars form with relatively lowmass. Given the disparity in the numbers of stars formed in different mass ranges, combinedwith the very different rates of evolution, it is not surprising that massive stars are extremelyrare, while low-mass stars are found in abundance. Observations also suggest that althoughthe IMF is quite uncertain below about 0.1M⊙, rather than falling off sharply as indicatedin Fig. 12, the curve may be fairly ﬂat, resulting in large numbers of low-mass stars andbrown dwarfs.
+2+10–1–2–2–10+1+2Log10 mLog10 /H9264 (Log10 m)
FIGURE 12The initial mass function,ξ, shows the number of stars per unit area of the MilkyWay’s disk per unit interval of logarithmic mass that is produced in different mass intervals. Theindividual points represent observational data and the solid line is a theoretical estimate. Masses arein solar units. (Figure adapted from Rana,Astron. Astrophys.,184, 104, 1987.)The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 484>>>

H II RegionsWhen hot, massive stars reach the ZAMS with O or B spectral types, they do so shroudedin a cloak of gas and dust. The bulk of their radiation is emitted in the ultraviolet portion ofthe electromagnetic spectrum. Those photons that are produced with energies in excess of13.6 eV can ionize the ground-state hydrogen gas (H I) in the ISM that still surrounds thenewly formed star. Of course, if theseH II regionsare in equilibrium, the rate of ionizationmust equal the rate of recombination; photons must be absorbed and ions must be producedat the same rate that free electrons and protons recombine to form neutral hydrogen atoms.When recombination occurs, the electron does not necessarily fall directly to the groundstate but can cascade downward, producing a number of lower-energy photons, many ofwhich will be in the visible portion of the spectrum. The dominant visible wavelengthphoton produced in this way results from the transition betweenn=3 andn=2, the redline of the Balmer series (Hα). Consequently, because of this energy cascade, H II regionsappear to ﬂuoresce in red light.Theseemission nebulaeare considered by some to be among the most beautiful objectsin the night sky. One of the more famous H II regions is the Orion nebula (M42), found inthe sword of the Orion constellation. M42 is part of the Orion A complex (see Fig. 13),which also contains a giant molecular cloud (OMC 1) and a very young cluster of stars (theTrapezium cluster). The ﬁrst protostar candidates were discovered in this region as well.The size of an H II region can be estimated by considering the requirement of equilib-rium. LetNbe the number of photonsper secondproduced by the O or B star with sufﬁcientenergy to ionize hydrogen from the ground state (λ<91.2 nm). Assuming that all of the
FIGURE 13The H II region in OrionAis associated with a young OB association, the Trapeziumcluster, and a giant molecular cloud. The Orion complex is 450 pc away. (Courtesy of the NationalOptical Astronomy Observatories.)1M42 is the entry number in the well-known Messier catalog, a popular collection of observing objects foramateur astronomers.14
212The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 485>>>

energetic photons are ultimately absorbed by the hydrogen in the H II region, the rate ofphoton creation must equal the rate of recombination. If this equilibrium condition did notdevelop, the size of the region would continue to grow as the photons traveled ever fartherbefore encountering un-ionized gas.Next, letαnenHbe the number of recombinationsper unit volume per second, whereαis a quantum-mechanical recombination coefﬁcient that describes the likelihood that anelectron and a proton can form a hydrogen atom, given their number densities (obviously,the more electrons and protons that are present, the greater the chance of recombination;hence the productnenH).1At about 8000 K, a temperature characteristic of H II regions,α=3.1×10−19m3s−1. If we assume that the gas is composed entirely of hydrogen andis electrically neutral, then for every ion produced, one electron must have been liberated,orne=nH. With this equality, the expression for the recombination rate can be multipliedby the volume of the H II region, assumed here to be spherical, and then set equal to thenumber of ionizing photons produced per second. Finally, solving for the radius of the H IIregion givesrS≃/parenleftbigg3N4πα/parenrightbigg1/3n−2/3H.(32)rSis called theStrömgren radius, after Bengt Strömgren (1908–1987), the astrophysicistwho ﬁrst carried out the analysis in the late 1930s.Example 3.1.heeffectivetemperatureandluminosityofanO6starareTe≃45,000KandL≃1.3×105L⊙, respectively.According to Wien’s lawthepeakwavelengthoftheblackbodyspectrumisgivenbyλmax=0.0029 m KTe=64 nm.Since this is signiﬁcantly shorter than the 91.2-nm limit necessary to produce ionizationfrom the hydrogen ground state, it can be assumed that most of the photons created by anO6 star are capable of causing ionization.The energy of one 64-nm photon can be calculatedgivingEγ=hcλ=19 eV.Now, assuming for simplicity that all of the emitted photons have the same (peak) wave-length, the total number of photons produced by the star per second is justN≃L/Eγ≃1.6×1049photons s−1.Lastly, takingnH∼108m−3to be a typical value an H II region, we ﬁndrS≃3.5 pc.Values ofrSrange from less than 0.1 pc to greater than 100 pc.1Note that this expression is somewhat analogous to the generalized nuclear reaction rate equation.3
T,
3The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 486>>>

The Effects of Massive Stars on Gas CloudsAs a massive star forms, the protostar will initially appear as an infrared source embeddedinside the molecular cloud. With the rising temperature, ﬁrst the dust will vaporize, thenthe molecules will dissociate, and ﬁnally, as the star reaches the main sequence, the gasimmediately surrounding it will ionize, resulting in the creation of an H II region inside ofan existing H I region.Now, because of the star’s high luminosity, radiation pressure will begin to drive sig-niﬁcant amounts of mass loss, which then tends to disperse the remainder of the cloud.If several O and B stars form at the same time, it may be that much of the mass that hasnot yet become gravitationally bound to more slowly forming low-mass protostars willbe driven away, halting any further star formation. Moreover, if the cloud was originallymarginally bound (near the limit of criticality), the loss of mass will diminish the potentialenergy term in the virial theorem, with the result that the newly formed cluster of stars andprotostars will become unbound (i.e., the stars will tend to drift apart). Figure 14 showssuch a process under way in the Carina Nebula, located approximately 3000 pc from Earth.Another famous example of the effects of ionizing radiation of nearby massive stars is theproduction of the pillars in M16, the Eagle Nebula (Fig. 15).OB AssociationsGroups of stars that are dominated by O and B main-sequence stars are referred to asOBassociations. Studies of their individual kinematic velocities and masses generally leadto the conclusion that they cannot remain gravitationally bound to one another as perma-nent stellar clusters. One such example is the Trapezium cluster in the Orion A complex,believed to be less than 10 million years old. It is currently densely populated with stars
(a)(b)
FIGURE 14(a) An infrared image of a portion of the Carina Nebula. Eta Carina, a very youngand marginally stable star of more than 100 M⊙is located above the image. The strong winds andintense ultraviolet radiation from Eta Carina and other massive stars in the region are shredding thenebula. Other, lower-mass newborn stars, such as those just above the pillar to the right of center inthe image, are being inhibited from growing larger because of the destruction of the nebula by theirmuch more massive siblings. [NASA/JPL-Caltech/N. Smith (University of Colorado at Boulder)](b) The same region observed in visible light. Much less detail is observable because of the obscurationdue to dust in the cloud. (NOAO)The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 487>>>

FIGURE 15The giant gas pillars of the Eagle Nebula (M16). The left most pillar is more than1 pc long from base to top. Ionizing radiation from massive newborn stars off the top edge of theimage are causing the gas in the cloud to photoevaporate. [Courtesy of NASA, ESA, STScI, J. Hesterand P. Scowen (Arizona State University).](>2×103pc−3), most of which have masses in the range of 0.5 to 2.0M⊙. Doppler shiftmeasurements of the radial velocities of13CO show that the gas in the vicinity is veryturbulent. Apparently, the nearby O and B stars are dispersing the gas, and the cluster isbecoming unbound.T Tauri StarsT Tauri starsare an important class of low-mass pre-main-sequence objects that representa transition between stars that are still shrouded in dust (IR sources) and main-sequencestars. T Tauri stars, named after the ﬁrst star of their class to be identiﬁed (located in theconstellation of Taurus), are characterized by unusual spectral features and by large andfairly rapid irregular variations in luminosity, with timescales on the order of days. Thepositions of T Tauri stars on the H–R diagram are shown in Fig. 16; theoretical pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks are also included. The masses of T Tauri stars rangefrom 0.5 to about 2 M⊙.Many T Tauri stars exhibit strong emission lines from hydrogen (the Balmer series), fromCa II (the H and K lines), and from iron, as well as absorption lines of lithium. Interestingly,forbidden lines of [O I] and [S II] are also present in the spectra of many T Tauri stars. TheThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 488>>>

3.0 M2.25 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 M0.5 M0.35 M–1–0.500.511.52
3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.5Log10 (Lbol/L  )
Log10 TeffFIGURE 16The positions of T Tauri stars on the H–R diagram. The sizes of the circles indicatethe rate of rotation. Stars with strong emission lines are indicated by ﬁlled circles, and weak emissionline stars are represented by open circles. Theoretical pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks are alsoincluded. (Figure adapted from Bertout,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,27, 351, 1989. Reproducedwith permission from theAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 27, ©1989 byAnnual Reviews Inc.)existence of forbidden lines in a spectrum is an indication of extremely low gas densities.(Note that, to distinguish them from “allowed” lines, forbidden lines are usually indicatedby square brackets, e.g., [O I].)Not only can information be gleaned from spectra by determining which lines are presentand with what strengths, but information is also contained in theshapesof those linesas a function of wavelength.1An important example is found in the shapes of some ofthe lines in T Tauri stars. The Hαline often exhibits the characteristic shape shown inFig. 17(a). Superimposed on a rather broad emission peak is an absorption trough at theshort-wavelength edge of the line. This unique line shape is known as aP Cygni proﬁle,after the ﬁrst star observed to have emission lines with blueshifted absorption components.1ecall Fig. 10.4
4RThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 489>>>

IntensityRedshiftBlueshiftContinuumEmission fromapproaching frontportion of shell (B)Emission from edgesof shell perpendicularto line of sight (C)Emission from recedingrear portion of shell (D)Absorption due toapproaching near side of shell (A)/H92610/H9261ABBCCDDStar
ToEarthExpandingshell
(a)(b)FIGURE 17(a) A spectral line exhibiting a P Cygni proﬁle is characterized by a broad emissionpeak with a superimposed blueshifted absorption trough. (b) A P Cygni proﬁle is produced by anexpanding mass shell. The emission peak is due to the outward movement of material perpendicularto the line of sight, whereas the blueshifted absorption feature is caused by the approaching matter inthe shaded region, intercepting photons coming from the central star.The interpretation given for the existence of P Cygni proﬁles in a star’s spectrum is that thestarisexperiencingsigniﬁcantmassloss.RecallfromKirchhoff’slawsthatemission lines are produced by a hot, diffuse gas when there is little intervening materialbetween the source and the observer. In this case the emission source is that portion ofthe expanding shell of the T Tauri star that is moving nearly perpendicular to the line ofsight, as illustrated by the geometry shown in Fig. 17(b). Absorption lines are the resultof light passing through a cooler, diffuse gas; the shaded portion of the expanding shellabsorbs the photons emitted by the hotter star behind it. Since the shaded part of the shell(A) is moving toward the observer, the absorption is blueshifted relative to the emissioncomponent (typically by 80 km s−1for T Tauri stars). The mass loss rates of T Tauri starsaverage about˙M=10−8M⊙yr−1.1In some extreme cases, line proﬁles of T Tauri stars have gone from P Cygni proﬁlestoinverseP Cygni proﬁles (redshifted absorption) on timescales of days, indicating massaccretion rather than mass loss. Mass accretion rates appear to be on the same order as massloss rates. Apparently the environment around a T Tauri star is very unstable.FU Orionis StarsIn some instances, it appears that T Tauri stars have gone through very signiﬁcant increasesin mass accretion rates, reaching values on the order of˙M=10−4M⊙yr−1. At the sametime the luminosities of the stars increase by four magnitudes or more, with the increaseslasting for decades. The ﬁrst star observed to undergo this abrupt increase in accretion1This value is much higher than the Sun’s current rate of mass loss (10−14M⊙yr−1).5
5The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 490>>>

was FU Orionis, for which theFU Orionis starsare named. Apparently, instabilities in acircumstellar accretion disk around an FU Orionis star can result in on the order of 0.01 M⊙being dumped onto the central star over the century or so duration of the outburst. Duringthat time the inner disk can outshine the central star by a factor of 100 to 1000, while strong,high-velocity winds in excess of 300 km s−1occur. It has been suggested that T Tauri starsmay go through several FU Orionis events during their lifetimes.Herbig Ae/Be StarsClosely related to the T-Tauri stars areHerbig Ae/Be stars, named for George Herbig.These pre-main-sequence stars are of spectral types A or B and have strong emission lines(hence the Ae/Be designations). Their masses range from 2 to 10 M⊙and they tend to beenveloped in some remaining dust and gas. He Ae/Be stars are not as thoroughly studied asT-Tauri stars, in large part because of their much shorter lifetimes (recall Table 1) and inpart because fewer intermediate-mass than lower-mass stars form from a cloud (Fig. 12).Herbig–Haro ObjectsAlong with expanding shells, mass loss during pre-main-sequence evolution can also occurfromjetsof gas that are ejected in narrow beams in opposite directions.1Herbig–Haroobjects, ﬁrst discovered in the vicinity of the Orion nebula in the early 1950s by GeorgeHerbig and Guillermo Haro (1913–1988), are apparently associated with the jets producedby young protostars, such as T Tauri stars. As the jets expand supersonically into the in-terstellar medium, collisions excite the gas, resulting in bright objects with emission-linespectra. Figure 18(a) shows a Hubble Space Telescope image of the Herbig–Haro ob-jects HH 1 and HH 2, which were created by material ejected at speeds of several hundredkilometers per second from a star shrouded in a cocoon of dust. The jets associated withanother Herbig–Haro object, HH 47, are shown in Fig. 18(b).Continuous emission is also observed in some protostellar objects and is due to thereﬂection of light from the parent star.Acircumstellar accretion disk is apparent in Fig. 19around HH 30. The surfaces of the disk are illuminated by the central star, which is againhidden from view behind the dust in the disk. Also apparent are jets originating from deepwithin the accretion disk, possibly from the central star itself. These accretion disks seemto be responsible for many of the characteristics associated with the protostellar objects,including emission lines, mass loss, jets, and perhaps even some of the luminosity variations.Unfortunately, details concerning the physical processes involved are not fully understood.An early model of the production of Herbig–Haro objects like HH 1 and HH 2 is shown inFig. 20.Young Stars with Circumstellar DisksObservations have revealed that other young stars also possess circumstellar disks of mate-rial orbiting them. Two well-known examples are Vega andβPictoris. An infrared image ofβPic and its disk is shown in Fig. 21.βPic has also been observed in the ultraviolet linesof Fe II by the Hubble Space Telescope. It appears that clumps of material are falling fromstrophysical jets occur in a variety of phenomena over enormous ranges ofenergy and physical size.6
AThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation
16


<<<PAGE 491>>>

(a)
(b)FIGURE 18(a) The Herbig–Haro objects HH 1 and HH 2 are located just south of the Orionnebula and are moving away from a young protostar hidden inside a dust cloud near the center ofthe image. [Courtesy of J. Hester (Arizona State University), the WF/PC 2 Investigation DeﬁnitionTeam, and NASA.] (b) A jet associated with HH 47. The scale at the lower left is 1000 AU. (Courtesyof J. Morse/STScI, and NASA.)
FIGURE 19The circumstellar disk and jets of the protostellar object, HH 30. The central staris obscured by dust in the plane of the disk. The scale at the lower left is 1000 AU. [Courtesy of C.Burrows (STScI and ESA), the WF/PC 2 Investigation Deﬁnition Team, and NASA.]the disk into the star at the rate of two or three per week. Larger objects may be forming inthe disk as well, possibly protoplanets. It has been suggested that these disks may in factbedebris disksrather than accretion disks, meaning that the observed material is due tocollisions between objects already formed in the disks. An artist’s conception of theβPicsystem is shown in Fig. 22.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 492>>>

Stellar wind100–200 km s–1AccretiondiskHerbig–Haroobjects
Expanding shell15 km s–1~150 km s–1
vFIGURE 20An early model of a T Tauri star with an accretion disk. The disk powers andcollimates jets that expand into the interstellar medium, producing Herbig–Haro objects. (Figureadapted from Snell, Loren, and Plambeck,Ap. J. Lett.,239, L17, 1980.)
FIGURE 21An infrared image ofβPictoris, showing its circumstellar debris disk. (EuropeanSouthern Observatory)The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 493>>>

Dust diskGas inKeplerianorbitCentralstarExpanding (?)gaseous haloSeparate,denser gasstreams fallingdown stellargravitationalpotential
InterstellargasUniform, steadygas inflowFIGURE 22An artist’s conception of theβPictoris system. Clumps of material appear to befalling into the star at the rate of two or three clumps per week. Some matter may also be leaving thesystem as an expanding halo. (Figure adapted from Boggess et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,377, L49, 1991.)ProplydsShortly after the December 1993 refurbishment mission of the Hubble Space Telescope,HST made observations of the Orion Nebula. The images in Fig. 23 were obtained usingthe emission lines of Hα, [N II], and [O III]. Analysis of the data has revealed that 56 ofthe 110 stars brighter thanV=21 mag are surrounded by disks of circumstellar dust andgas. The circumstellar disks, termedproplyds, appear to be protoplanetary disks associatedwith young stars that are less than 1 million years old. Based on observations of the ionizedmaterial in the proplyds, the disks seem to have masses much greater than 2×1025kg (forreference, the mass of Earth is 5.974×1024kg).Circumstellar Disk FormationApparently, disk formation is fairly common during the collapse of protostellar clouds.Undoubtedly this is due to the spin-up of the cloud as required by the conservation ofangular momentum. As the radius of the protostar decreases, so does its moment of inertia.This implies that in the absence of external torques, the protostar’s angular velocity mustincrease. It is left as an exercisetoshowthatbyincludingacentripetalaccelerationterminEq.(19)andrequiringconservationofangularmomentum,thecollapseperpendiculartotheaxisofrotationcanbehaltedbeforethecollapsealongtheaxis,resultingindiskformation.A problem immediately arises when the effect of angular momentum is included in thecollapse. Conservation of angular momentum arguments lead us to expect that all main-The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 494>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 23Images of the Orion Nebula (M42) obtained by the Hubble Space Telescope. Notethat (b) is an enlarged view of the central region of (a). Numerous proplyds are visible in theﬁeld ofview of the camera. (Courtesy of C. Robert O’Dell/Vanderbilt University, NASA, and ESA.)sequence stars ought to be rotating very rapidly, at rates close to breakup. However, ob-servations show that this is not generally the case. Apparently the angular momentum isAlong with the problems associated with rotation and magneticﬁelds, mass loss mayalso play an important role in the evolution of pre-main-sequence stars. Although theseproblems are being investigated, much work remains to be done before we can hope tounderstand all of the details of protostellar collapse and pre-main-sequence evolution.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralKnapp, Gillian,“The Stuff Between the Stars,”Sky and Telescope, May 1995.Nadis, Steve,“Searching for the Molecules of Life in Space,”Sky and Telescope, January2002.Renyolds, Ronald J.,“The Gas Between the Stars,”Scientiﬁc American, January 2002.TechnicalAller, Lawrence H.,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1991.Dickey, John M., and Lockman, Felix J.,“H I in the Galaxy,”Annual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics,28, 215, 1990.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation
transferred away from the collapsing star. One suggestion is that magnetic ﬁelds, anchored to convection zones within the stars and coupled to ionized stellar winds, slow the rotation by applying torques. Evidence in support of this idea exists in the form of apparent solar-like coronal activity in the outer atmospheres of many T Tauri stars.


<<<PAGE 495>>>

Draine, B. T.,“Interstellar Dust Grains,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,41, 241, 2003.Dopita, Michael A., and Sutherland, Ralph S.,Astrophysics of the Diffuse Universe,Springer, Berlin, 2003.Dyson, J. E., and Williams, D. A.,Physics of the Interstellar Medium, Second Edition,Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 1997.Evans, Neal J. II,“Physical Conditions in Regions of Star Formation,”Annual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics,37, 311, 1999.Iben, Icko Jr.,“Stellar Evolution. I. TheApproach to the Main Sequence,”The AstrophysicalJournal,141, 993, 1965.Krügel, Endrik,The Physics of Interstellar Dust, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol,2003.Larson, Richard B.,“Numerical Calculations of the Dynamics of a Collapsing Protostar,”Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,145, 271, 1969.Larson, Richard B.,“The Physics of Star Formation,”Reports of Progress in Physics,66,1651, 2003.Lequeux, James,The Interstellar Medium, Springer, Berlin, 2003.Mannings, Vincent, Boss, Alan P., and Russell, Sara S. (eds.),Protostars and Planets IV,The University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2000.O’Dell, C. R., and Wen, Zheng,“Postrefurbishment Mission Hubble Space Telescope Im-ages of the Core of the Orion Nebula: Proplyds, Herbig-Haro Objects, and Measurementsof a Circumstellar Disk,”The Astrophysical Journal,436, 194, 1994.Osterbrock, Donald E.,Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and Active Galactic Nuclei, Sec-ond Edition, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2006.Reipurth, Bo, and Bally, John,“Herbig-Haro Flows: Probes of Early Stellar Evolution,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,39, 403, 2001.Shu, Frank H., Adams, Fred C., and Lizano, Susana,“Star Formation in Molecular Clouds:Observation and Theory,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,25, 23, 1987.Stahler, Steven W.,“Pre-Main-Sequence Stars,”The Encyclopedia of Astronomy and As-trophysics, Institute of Physics Publishing, 2000.Stahler, Steven W., and Palla, Francesco,The Formation of Stars, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,2004.The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation


<<<PAGE 496>>>

PROBLEM SET1)N A CERTAIN PART OF THE .ORTH !MERICAN .EBULA THE AMOUNT OF INTERSTELLAR EXTINCTION IN THEVISUAL WAVELENGTH BAND IS  MAGNITUDES 4HE THICKNESS OF THE NEBULA IS ESTIMATED TO BEPCANDITISLOCATEDPCFROM%ARTH3UPPOSETHATA"SPECTRALCLASSMAINSEQUENCESTARIS OBSERVED IN THE DIRECTION OF THE NEBULA AND THAT THE ABSOLUTE VISUAL MAGNITUDE OF THE STARIS KNOWN TO BEMV=−. FROM SPECTROSCOPIC DATA .EGLECT ANY OTHER SOURCES OF EXTINCTIONBETWEEN THE OBSERVER AND THE NEBULA(a)&IND THE APPARENT VISUAL MAGNITUDE OF THE STAR IF IT IS LYING JUST IN FRONT OF THE NEBULA(b)&IND THE APPARENT VISUAL MAGNITUDE OF THE STAR IF IT IS LYING JUST BEHIND THE NEBULAThe Interstellar Mediumand Star Formation
(c)7ITHOUTTAKINGTHEEXISTENCEOFTHENEBULAINTOCONSIDERATIONBASEDONITSAPPARENTMAGNITUDEHOWFARAWAYDOESTHESTARINPARTB	APPEARTOBE7HATWOULDBETHEPERCENTAGEERROR IN DETERMINING THE DISTANCE IF INTERSTELLAR EXTINCTION WERE NEGLECTED2%STIMATE THE TEMPERATURE OF A DUST GRAIN THAT IS LOCATED  !5 FROM A NEWLY FORMED &MAINSEQUENCESTARHint:!SSUMETHATTHEDUSTGRAINISINTHERMALEQUILIBRIUMMEANINGTHATTHE AMOUNT OF ENERGY ABSORBED BY THE GRAIN IN A GIVEN TIME INTERVAL MUST EQUAL THE AMOUNTOF ENERGY RADIATED AWAY DURING THE SAME INTERVAL OF TIME!SSUME ALSO THAT THE DUST GRAIN ISSPHERICALLY SYMMETRIC AND EMITS AND ABSORBS RADIATION AS A PERFECT BLACKBODY9OU MAY WANTTO REFER TO!PPENDIX ' FOR THE EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE AND RADIUS OF AN & MAINSEQUENCE STAR34HE"OLTZMANNFACTORe−(E−E)/kTHELPSDETERMINETHERELATIVEPOPULATIONSOFENERGYLEVELS4!N ( ) CLOUD PRODUCES A CM LINE WITH AN OPTICAL DEPTH AT ITS CENTER OFτH=. THE LINEIS OPTICALLY THIN	 4HE TEMPERATURE OF THE GAS IS  + THE LINES FULL WIDTH AT HALFMAXIMUMISKM S−ANDTHEAVERAGEATOMICNUMBERDENSITYOFTHECLOUDISESTIMATEDTOBEM−&ROMTHISINFORMATIONAND%Q 	lNDTHETHICKNESSOFTHECLOUD%XPRESSYOURANSWERINPC55SING AN APPROACH ANALOGOUS TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BELOW EQUATION FOR NUCLEAR REACTION#/AND(MOLECULESINAGIANTMOLECULARCLOUDTHATHASATEMPERATUREOF+ANDDENSITYOFn(=M−!SSUMEINCORRECTLY	THATTHEMOLECULESARESPHERICALINRADII OF APPROXIMATELY  NM THE CHARACTERISTIC SIZE OF AN ATOMτH=.×−NHTℓDelta1 v	RATES MAKEACRUDEESTIMATEOFTHENUMBEROFRANDOMCOLLISIONSPERCUBICMETERPERSECONDBETWEENANUMBERSHAPEWITHrix=⎩integraldisplay∞nxniσ(E)v(E)nEndE.&ROM #HAPTER  OF An Introduction to Modern Astrophysic3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBY s 
,
5SING THE "OLTZMANN FACTOR ESTIMATE THE TEMPERATURE REQUIRED FOR A HYDROGEN ATOMS ELECTRON AND PROTON TO GO FROM BEING ANTIALIGNED TO BEING ALIGNED!RE THE TEMPERATURES IN ( ) clouds sufﬁcient to produce this loWENERGY EXCITED STATE


<<<PAGE 497>>>

6%XPLAIN WHY ASTRONOMERS WOULD USE THE ISOTOPOMERS#/ OR #/ RATHER THAN THE MORECOMMON #/ MOLECULE TO PROBE DEEPLY INTO A GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUD74HE ROTATIONAL KINETIC ENERGY OF A MOLECULE IS GIVEN BYEROT=Iω=LI,WHERELIS THE MOLECULES ANGULAR MOMENTUM ANDIIS ITS MOMENT OF INERTIA 4HE ANGULARMOMENTUM IS RESTRICTED BY QUANTUM MECHANICS TO THE DISCRETE VALUESL=/radicalbigℓ(ℓ+)/planckover2pi1WHEREℓ=,,,...(a)&OR A DIATOMIC MOLECULEI=mr+mr,WHEREmANDmARETHEMASSESOFTHEINDIVIDUALATOMSANDrANDrARETHEIRSEPARATIONSFROM THE CENTER OF MASS OF THE MOLECULE 3HOWTHATIMAY BE WRITTEN ASI=µr,WHEREµIS THE REDUCED MASS ANDrIS THE SEPARATION BETWEEN THE ATOMS IN THE MOLECULE(b)4HESEPARATIONBETWEENTHECARBONANDOXYGENATOMSIN#/ISAPPROXIMATELYNMANDTHEATOMICMASSESOF##AND/AREUUANDURESPECTIVELY#ALCULATE THE MOMENTS OF INERTIA FOR#/ AND#/(c)7HAT IS THE WAVELENGTH OF THE PHOTON THAT IS EMITTED BY#/ DURING A TRANSITION BETWEEN THE ROTATIONAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM STATESℓ= ANDℓ= 4O WHICH PART OF THEELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM DOES THIS CORRESPOND(d)2EPEATPARTC	FOR#/(OWDOASTRONOMERSDISTINGUISHAMONGDIFFERENTISOTOPESINTHEINTERSTELLAR MEDIUM8 (a)%QUATIONS  	 AND  	 ILLUSTRATE A COOLING MECHANISM FOR A MOLECULAR CLOUDACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THE EXCITATION OF OXYGEN ATOMS %XPLAIN WHY THE EXCITATION OFHYDROGEN RATHER THAN OXYGEN IS NOT AN EFFECTIVE COOLING MECHANISM(b)7HY ARE THE TEMPERATURES OF HOT CORES SIGNIlCANTLY GREATER THAN DENSE CORES9)N LIGHT OF THE COOLING MECHANISMS DISCUSSED FOR MOLECULAR CLOUDS EXPLAIN WHY DENSE CORESARE GENERALLY COOLER THAN THE SURROUNDING GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUDS AND WHY '-#S ARE COOLERTHAN DIFFUSE MOLECULAR CLOUDS10#ALCULATE THE *EANS LENGTH FOR THE GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUD IN %XAMPLE  OF  4HE )NTERSTELLAR 113HOW THAT THE *EANS MASS %Q 	 CAN ALSO BE WRITTEN IN THE FORM/+(→/∗+(	/∗→/+γ.	
MJ≃/parenleftbiggkTGµmH/parenrightbigg//parenleftbiggπρ/parenrightbigg/	-EDIUM AND 3TAR &ORMATION
MJ=cJvTP/G/The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation: Problem Set
“”


<<<PAGE 498>>>

WHERE THE ISOTHERMAL SOUND SPEEDvT IS GIVEN BY %Q  	PIS THE PRESSURE ASSOCIATEDWITH THE DENSITYρAND TEMPERATURET ANDcJ≃. IS A DIMENSIONLESS CONSTANT12"Y INVOKING THE REQUIREMENTS OF HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM EXPLAIN WHY THE ASSUMPTION OF ACONSTANT GAS PRESSUREPIN %Q  	 CANNOT BE CORRECT FOR A STATIC CLOUD WITHOUT MAGNETIClELDS7HAT DOES THAT IMPLY ABOUT THE ASSUMPTIONS OF CONSTANT MASS DENSITY IN AN ISOTHERMALMOLECULAR CLOUD HAVING A CONSTANT COMPOSITION THROUGHOUT13 (a)"Y USING THE IDEAL GAS LAW CALCULATE|dP/dr|≈|ℓDelta1P/ℓDelta1r|∼Pc/RJAT THE BEGINNING OFTHE COLLAPSE OF A GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUD WHEREPcIS AN APPROXIMATE VALUE FOR THE CENTRALPRESSURE OF THE CLOUD!SSUME THATP= AT THE EDGE OF THE MOLECULAR CLOUD AND TAKE ITSMASS AND RADIUS TO BE THE *EANS VALUES FOUND IN %XAMPL(b)3HOWTHATGIVENTHEACCURACYOFOURCRUDEESTIMATES|dP/dr|FOUNDINPARTA	ISCOMPARABLETOIEWITHINANORDEROFMAGNITUDEOF	GMrρ/rASREQUIREDFORQUASIHYDROSTATICEQUILIBRIUM(c)3HOW THAT AS LONG AS THE COLLAPSE REMAINS ISOTHERMAL THE CONTRIBUTION OFdP/drINGMrρ/r SUPPORTING THE ASSUMPdP/drCAN BE NEGLECTED ONCE FREEFALL COLLAPSE BEGINS
14!SSUMING THAT THE FREEFALL ACCELERATION OF THE SURFACE OF A COLLAPSING CLOUD REMAINS CONSTANTDURING THE ENTIRE COLLAPSE DERIVE AN EXPRESSION FOR THE FREEFALL TIME 3HOW THAT YOUR ANSWERDIFFERS FROM %Q  	 ONLY BY A TERM OF ORDER UNITY
165SING THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THE TEXT DERIVE %Q 	ρdrdt=−GMrρr−dPdr.drdt=−GMrr.	tFF=/parenleftbiggπGρ/parenrightbigg/	155SINGTHE EQUATION BELOWESTIMATETHEADIABATICSOUNDSPEEDOFTHEGIANTMOLECULARCLOUD%XAMPLESAND OF  4HE )NTERSTELLAR -EDIUM AND 3TAR &ORMATION 5SETHISTOCROSSTHECLOUDtS=RJ/vSFOUND IN %XAMPLElNDTHEAMOUNTOFTIMEREQUIREDFORASOUNDWAVEDISCUSSEDINSPEEDTOANDCOMPARE YOUR ANSWER TO THE ESTIMATE OF THE FREEFALL TIMEYOU
MJMIN=./parenleftbiggT/e/µ//parenrightbigg-⊙	THE BELOW EQUATION CONTINUES TO DECREASE RELATIVE TOPTION MADE IN %Q 	 THATThe Interstellar Medium and Star Formation: Problem Set
vs=⎩radicalbigγ P/ρ.”4HE )NTE RSTELLAR  E   AND 3TAR &ORMATION 9OU SHOULD ALSO THE CLOUD TEMPE%XAMPLE    
,“%XPLAINRRESULT.vT≡/radicalbigkT /µmH(18)MJ=cJv4TP1/20G3/2(33)-EDIUMOF“”ANDIN 0ROBLEMRATURE AND DENSITY GIVEN IN


<<<PAGE 499>>>

17%STIMATE THE GRAVITATIONAL ENERGY PERUNIT VOLUME IN THE GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUD IN %XAMPLE OF  4HE )NTERSTELL R -EDIUM AND 3TAR &ORMATION ANDCOMPARETHATWITHTHEMAGNETICCLOUD IF IT HAD A MAGNETIC lELD OF UNIFORM#OULD MAGNETIC lELDS PLAY A SIGNIlCANT ROLE IN THE COLLAPSE OF A CLOUD18 (a)"EGINNING WITH %Q  	 ADDING A CENTRIPETAL ACCELERATION TERM AND USING CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM SHOW THAT THE COLLAPSE OF A CLOUD WILL STOP IN THE PLANEPERPENDICULAR TO ITS AXIS OF ROTATION WHEN THE RADIUS REACHESrf=ωrGMrWHEREMrISTHEINTERIORMASSANDωANDrARETHEORIGINALANGULARVELOCITYANDRADIUSOFTHESURFACEOFTHECLOUDRESPECTIVELY!SSUMETHATTHEINITIALRADIALVELOCITYOFTHECLOUDISZERO AND THATrf≪r9OU MAY ALSO ASSUME INCORRECTLY	 THAT THE CLOUD ROTATES AS A RIGIDBODYDURINGTHEENTIRECOLLAPSEHint:2ECALLTHATdr/dt=vrdvr/dr3INCENOCENTRIPETALACCELERATIONTERMEXISTSFORCOLLAPSEALONGTHEROTATION AXIS DISK FORMATION IS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE ORIGINAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF THECLOUD	(b)!SSUME THAT THE ORIGINAL CLOUD HAD A MASS OF  -⊙AND AN INITIAL RADIUS OF  PC )FCOLLAPSE IS HALTED AT APPROXIMATELY !5 lND THE INITIAL ANGULAR VELOCITY OF THE CLOUD(c)7HAT WAS THE ORIGINAL ROTATIONAL VELOCITY IN M S−	 OF THE EDGE OF THE CLOUD(d)!SSUMING THAT THE MOMENT OF INERTIA IS APPROXIMATELY THAT OF A UNIFORM SOLID SPHEREISPHERE=MrWHENTHECOLLAPSEBEGINSANDTHATOFAUNIFORMDISKIDISK=MrWHENIT STOPS DETERMINE THE ROTATIONAL VELOCITY AT !5(e)#ALCULATETHETIMEREQUIREDAFTERTHECOLLAPSEHASSTOPPEDFORAPIECEOFMASSTOMAKEONECOMPLETE REVOLUTION AROUND THE CENTRAL PROTOSTAR #OMPARE YOUR ANSWER WITH THE ORBITALPERIOD AT !5 EXPECTED FROM +EPLERS THIRD LAW 7HY WOULD YOU NOT EXPECT THE TWOPERIODS TO BE IDENTICAL19!SSUMING A MASS LOSS RATE OF −-⊙YR−AND A STELLAR WIND VELOCITY OF  KM S−FROM AENERGY DENSITY THAT WOULD BE CONTAINED IN THESTRENGTHB=N4
drdt=−GMrr.	The Interstellar Medium and Star Formation: Problem SetA”“
4 4AURI STAR ESTIMATE THE MASS DENSITY OF THE WIND AT A DISTANCE OF !5 FROM THE STAR #OMPARE YOUR ANSWER WITH THE DENSITY OF THE GIANT MOLECULAR CLOUD IN %XAMPLE  OF h4HE )NTERSTELLAR -EDIUM AND 3TAR &ORMATIONv


<<<PAGE 500>>>

Main Sequence and
Post-Main-Sequence
Stellar Evolution
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 3 ,


<<<PAGE 501>>>

Main Sequence and
Post-Main-Sequence
Stellar Evolution
1 Evolution on the Main Sequence
2 Late Stages of Stellar Evolution
3 Stellar Clusters
1 EVOLUTION ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE
Stellar Evolution Timescales
difference in timescales for the various phases of evolution of individual stars that explains
why approximately 80% to 90% of all stars in the solar neighborhood are observed to be
gravitational energy can play a major role and the Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale will again
become important.
1hemical energy cannot play a signiﬁcant role in the energy budgets
of stars.CThe existence of the main sequence is due to the nuclear reactions that convert hydrogen 
into helium in the cores of stars. In this chapter we will follow the lives of stars as they age, 
beginning on the main sequence. This evolutionary process is an inevitable consequence 
of the relentless force of gravity and the change in chemical composition due to nuclear 
reactions.
To maintain their luminosities, stas must tap sources of energy contained within, either 
nuclear or gravitational.1 Pre-main-sequence evolution is characterized by two basic 
timescales: the free-fall timescale and the thermal Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale. Main-
sequence and post-main-sequence evolution are also governed by a third timescale, 
the timescale of nuclear reactions. The nuclear timescale is on the order of 1010 years for 
the Sun, much longer than the Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale of roughly 107 years. It is the
main-sequence stars; we are more likely to ﬁnd stars on the main sequence simply  
because that stage of evolution requires the most time; later stages of evolution pro-
ceed more rapidly. However, as a star switches from one nuclear source to the next,


<<<PAGE 502>>>

Width of the Main Sequencerelation are due to a number of factors, including observational errors, differing chemicalcompositions of the individual stars in the study, and varying stages of evolution on themain sequence.Low-Mass Main-Sequence Evolutionhave convective cores due to the highly temperature-dependent CNO cycle. On the otherhand, ZAMS stars with masses less than 1.2M⊙are dominated by the less temperature-dependent pp chain. This implies that ZAMS stars in the range 0.3M⊙to 1.2M⊙possessradiative cores. However, the lowest-mass ZAMS stars again have convective cores becausetheir high surface opacities drive surface convection zones deep into the interior, makingthe entire star convective.
the pp chain nuclear reaction rate goes asρX2T46,the increased tempera-ture and density more than offset the decrease in the mass fraction of hydrogen, and theluminosity of the star slowly increases, along with its radius and effective temperature.Main-sequence and post-main-sequence evolutionary tracks of stars of various masseswere ﬁrst computed in a pioneering study by Icko Iben, Jr., and published in the mid-1960s.Modern calculations of theoretical evolutionary tracks that include the effects of convectiveovershooting as well as mass lost from stars during their lifetimes are shown in Fig. 1.2According to the calculations, the amount of time required to evolve from the zero-age mainsequence to points indicated in Fig. 1 are as given in Table 1. The locus of points2Convective overshooting takes into consideration the inertia of a convective bubble, which causes it to travelsome distance into an otherwise radiative region of the star.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar EvolutionCareful study of the main sequence of an observational H–R diagram such as the  observational mass–luminosity relation reveals that these curves are not simply thin lines but have ﬁnite widths. The widths of the main sequence and the mass–luminosityIn this section, we will consider the evolution of stars on the main sequence.  Although all stars on the main sequence are converting hydrogen into helium and, as a result, share similar evolutionary characteristics, differences do exist. For  instance, zero-age main-sequence (ZAMS) stars with masses greater than about 1.2M
Inaddition,sinceFirst consider a typical low-mass main-sequence star such as the Sun. The Sun’s lumi-nosity, radius, and temperature have all increased steadily since it reached the ZAMS 4.57 Gyr ago. This evolution occurs because, as the pp chain converts hydrogen into helium, the mean molecular weight µ of the coreincreases. According to the ideal gas law, unless the density and/or temperature of the core also increases, there will be insufﬁcient gas pres-sure to support the overlying layers of the star. As a result, the core must be compressed. While the density of the core increases, gravitational potential energy is released, and, as required by the virial theorem, half of the energy is radiated away and half of the energy goes into increasing the thermal energy and hence the temperature of the gas. One conse-quence of this temperature increase is that the region of the star that is hot enough to un-dergo nuclear reactions increases slightly during the main-sequence phase of evolution.⊙


<<<PAGE 503>>>

12213455786695891057966764231
43584422331125.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 M1221345578669589101057966764231
435844223311
–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
4.7 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.525.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 MLog10 (L/L  )Log10 (L/L  )
Log10 Te (K)FIGURE 1Main-sequence and post-main-sequence evolutionary tracks of stars with an initialcomposition ofX=0.68,Y=0.30, andZ=0.02. The location of the present-day Sun (see Fig. 2)is depicted by the solar symbol (⊙) between points 1 and 2 on the 1 M⊙track. The elapsed times topoints indicated on the diagram are given in Table 1. To enhance readability, only the points onthe evolutionary tracks for 0.8, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 5.0, and 12.0M⊙are labeled. The model calculationsinclude mass loss and convective overshooting. The diagonal line connecting the locus of points 1is the zero-age main sequence. For complete, and annotated, evolutionary tracks of 1 M⊙and 5 M⊙stars, see Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. (Data from Schaller et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96,269, 1992.)Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 504>>>

TABLE 1The elapsed times since reaching the zero-age main sequence to theindicated points in Fig. 1, measured in millions of years (Myr). (Data from Schalleret al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96, 269, 1992.)Initial Mass12345(M⊙) 6 7 8 9 1025 0 6.33044 6.40774 6.41337 6.437676.51783 7.04971 7.059115 0 11.4099 11.5842 11.5986 11.611811.6135 11.6991 12.755412 0 15.7149 16.0176 16.0337 16.055516.1150 16.4230 16.7120 17.5847 17.67499 0 25.9376 26.3886 26.4198 26.458026.5019 27.6446 28.1330 28.9618 29.22947 0 42.4607 43.1880 43.2291 43.338843.4304 45.3175 46.1810 47.9727 48.39165 0 92.9357 94.4591 94.5735 94.921895.2108 99.3835 100.888 107.208 108.4544 0 162.043 164.734 164.916 165.701166.362 172.38 185.435 192.198 194.2843 0 346.240 352.503 352.792 355.018357.310 366.880 420.502 440.5362.5 0 574.337 584.916 586.165 589.786595.476 607.356 710.235 757.0562 0 1094.08 1115.94 1117.74 1129.121148.10 1160.96 1379.94 1411.251.5 0 2632.52 2690.39 2699.52 2756.732910.761.25 0 4703.20 4910.11 4933.83 5114.835588.921 0 7048.40 9844.57 11386.0 11635.812269.80.8 0 18828.9 25027.9Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 505>>>

labeled 1 represents the theoretical ZAMS, with the present-day Sun located between points1 and 2 on the 1 M⊙track.Theinternalstructureofthepresent-daySunisshownin Fig. 2, this time as a function of interior mass. Along with radius, density, temperature,pressure, and luminosity, the ﬁgure illustrates the mass fractions of the species11H,32He,126C,147N, and168O. As the star’s evolution on the main sequence continues, eventuallythe hydrogen at its center will be completely depleted. Such a situation is illustrated inFig. 3 fora1M⊙star approximately 9.8 Gyr after arriving on the ZAMS; this modelroughly corresponds to point 3 in Fig.With the depletion of hydrogen in the core, the generation of energy via the pp chainmust stop. However, by now the core temperature has increased to the point that nuclearfusion continues to generate energy in a thick hydrogen-burning shell around a small,predominantly helium core. This effect can be seen in the luminosity curve in Fig. 3.
0.00.20.40.60.81.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Mass fraction (Mr/M  )X16X12X3
X14XLYTrP/H9267FIGURE 2The interior structure of the present-day Sun (a 1 M⊙star), 4.57 Gyr after reachingthe ZAMS. The model is located between points 1 and 2 in Fig. 1. The maximum ordinate valuesof the parameters arer=1.0R⊙,L=1.0L⊙,T=15.69×106K,ρ=1.527×105kg m−3,P=2.342×1016Nm−2,X=0.73925,Y=0.64046,X3=3.19×10−3,X12=3.21×10−3,X14=5.45×10−3, andX16=9.08×10−3. (Data from Bahcall, Pinsonneault, and Basu,Ap. J.,555, 990,2001.)1.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
Note that the luminosity remains close to zero throughout the inner 3% of the star’s mass. At the same time, the temperature is nearly constant over the same region. That the helium core must be isothermal when the luminosity gradient is zero can be seen from the radiative temperature gradient. Since Lr ≃ 0 over a ﬁnite region, d T/dr ≃ 0


<<<PAGE 506>>>

0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0Mass fractionPX14TRXHLX12X31 M
FIGURE 3The interior structure ofa1M⊙star near point 3 in Fig. 1, as described by thepioneering calculations of Icko Iben. Although speciﬁc values of quantities in modern models differsomewhat from those given here, state-of-the-art models do not signiﬁcantly differ qualitativelyfrom these calculations. The maximum ordinate values of the parameters for the Iben model areR=1.2681 R⊙,P=1.3146×1017Nm−2,T=19.097×106K,L=2.1283 L⊙,XH=0.708,X3=5.15×10−3,X12=3.61×10−3, andX14=1.15×10−2. The radius of the star is 1.3526 R⊙.(Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,47, 624, 1967.)andTis nearly constant. For an isothermal core to support the material above it in hydrostaticequilibrium, the required pressure gradient must be the result of a continuous increase indensity as the center of the star is approached.At this point, the luminosity being generated in the thick shell actually exceeds what wasproduced by the core during the phase of core hydrogen burning.As a result, the evolutionarytrack continues to rise beyond point 3 in Fig. 1, although not all of the energy generatedreaches the surface; some of it goes into a slow expansion of the envelope. Consequently,the effective temperature begins to decrease slightly and the evolutionary track bends to theright. As the hydrogen-burning shell continues to consume its nuclear fuel, the ash fromnuclear burning causes the isothermal helium core to grow in mass while the star movesfarther to the red in the H–R diagram.The Schönberg–Chandrasekhar LimitThis phase of evolution ends when the mass of the isothermal core has become too greatand the core is no longer capable of supporting the material above it. The maximum fractionof a star’s mass that can exist in an isothermal core and still support the overlying layerswas ﬁrst estimated by M. Schönberg and Chandrasekhar in 1942; it is given by/parenleftbiggMicM/parenrightbiggSC≃0.37/parenleftbiggµenvµic/parenrightbigg2,(1)Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 507>>>

whereµenvandµicare the mean molecular weights of the overlying envelope and the isother-mal core, respectively. TheSchönberg–Chandrasekhar limitis another consequence ofthe virial theorem. Based on the physical tools we have developed so far, an approximateform of this result can be obtained. The analysis is presented beginning on the facing page.The maximum fraction of the mass of a star that can be contained in an isothermal coreand still maintain hydrostatic equilibrium is a function of the mean molecular weights of thecore and the envelope. When the mass of the isothermal helium core exceeds this limit, thecore collapses on a Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale, and the star evolves very rapidly relativeto the nuclear timescale of main-sequence evolution. This occurs at the points labeled 4 inFig. 1. For stars below about 1.2M⊙, this deﬁnes the end of the main-sequence phase.What happens next is the subject of Section 2.Example 1.1.If a star is formed with the initial compositionX=0.68,Y=0.30, andZ=0.02,andifcompleteionizationisassumedatthecore–envelopeboundary,weﬁndthatµenv≃0.63.Assumingthatallofthehydrogenhasbeenconvertedinto helium in the isothermal core,µic≃1.34. Therefore, from Eq. ( 1), the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit is/parenleftbiggMicM/parenrightbiggSC≃0.08.The isothermal core will collapse if its mass exceeds 8% of the star’s total mass.The Degenerate Electron GasThe mass of an isothermal core may exceed the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit if anadditional source of pressure can be found to supplement the ideal gas pressure. This canoccur if the electrons in the gas start to becomedegenerate. When the density of a gasstacked into progressively higher energy states, beginning with the ground state. In the caseofcomplete degeneracy, the pressure of the gas is due entirely to the resultant nonthermalmotions of the electrons, and therefore it becomes independent of the temperature of thegas.If the electrons are nonrelativistic, the pressure of a completely degenerate electron gasis given byPe=Kρ5/3,(2)whereKis a constant.3If the degeneracy is only partial, some temperature dependenceremains. The isothermal core ofa1M⊙star between points 3 and 4 in Fig. 1 is partiallydegenerate; consequently, the core mass can reach approximately 13% of the entire mass3Note that Eq. ( 2) is a polytropic equation of state with a polytropic index ofn=1.5.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
becomes sufﬁciently high, the electrons in the gas are forced to occupy the lowest avail-able energy levels. Since electrons are fermions and obey the Pauli exclusion princi-ple, they cannot all occupy the same quantum state. Consequently, the electrons are


<<<PAGE 508>>>

of the star before it begins to collapse. Less massive stars exhibit even higher levels ofdegeneracy on the main sequence and may not exceed the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limitat all before the next stage of nuclear burning commences.Main-Sequence Evolution of Massive StarsThe evolution of more massive stars on the main sequence is similar to that of theirlower-mass cousins with one important difference: the existence of a convective core. Thethe nuclear timescale. Fora5M⊙star, the central convection zone decreases somewhat inmass during core hydrogen burning, leaving behind a slight composition gradient. Movingup the main sequence, as the star evolves the convection zone in the core retreats morerapidly with increasing stellar mass, disappearing entirely before the hydrogen is exhaustedfor those stars with masses greater than about 10 M⊙.When the mass fraction of hydrogen reaches aboutX=0.05 in the core ofa5M⊙star(point 2 in Fig. 1), the entire star begins to contract. With the release of some gravitationalpotential energy, the luminosity increases slightly. Since the radius decreases, the effectivetemperature must also increase. For stars with masses greater than 1.2M⊙, this stage ofoverall contraction is deﬁned to be the end of the main-sequence phase of evolution.A Derivation of the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limitTo estimate the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit, begin by dividing the equation of hydro-staticequilibriumbytheequationofmassconservation.ThisgivesdPdMr=−GMr4πr4,(3)which is just the condition of hydrostatic equilibrium, written with the interior mass as theindependent variable. Rewriting, Eq. ( 3) may be expressed as4πr3dPdMr=−GMrr.(4)The left-hand side is just4πr3dPdMr=d(4πr3P)dMr−12πr2PdrdMr=d(4πr3P)dMr−3Pρ,Substituting back into Eq. ( 4)and integrating over the mass (Mic) of the isothermal core, we have/integraldisplayMic0d(4πr3P)dMrdMr−/integraldisplayMic03PρdMr=−/integraldisplayMic0GMrrdMr.(5)This is called the Lagrangian form of the condition for hydrostatic equilibrium.4
4Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
convection zone continually mixes the material, keeping the core composition nearly homogeneous. This is because the timescale for convection, deﬁned by the amount of time it takes a convective element to travel one mixing length, is much shorter than


<<<PAGE 509>>>

To evaluate Eq. ( 5), we will consider each term separately. The ﬁrst term on theleft-hand side is just/integraldisplayMic0d(4πr3P)dMrdMr=4πR3icPic,whereRicandPicare the radius and the gas pressure at thesurfaceof the isothermal core,respectively (note thatr=0 atMr=0).The second term on the left-hand side of Eq. ( 5) can also be evaluated quickly byrealizing that, from the ideal gas law,Pρ=kTicµicmH,whereTicandµicare the temperature and mean molecular weight throughout the isothermalcore, respectively. Thus/integraldisplayMic03PρdMr=3MickTicµicmH=3NickTic=2Kic,whereNic≡MicµicmHis the number of gas particles in the core andKic=32NickTicis the total thermal energy of the core, assuming an ideal monatomic gas.The right-hand side of Eq. ( 5) is simply the gravitational potential energy of the core,or−/integraldisplayMic0GMrrdMr=Uic.Substituting each term into Eq. ( 5), we ﬁnd4πR3icPic−2Kic=Uic.(6)If we had integrated from the center of the star to the surface,whereP≃0, we would have obtained our original version of the theorem. The differencelies in the nonzero pressure boundary condition. Thus Eq. ( 6) is a generalized form ofthe virial theorem for stellar interiors in hydrostatic equilibrium.The core is actually supported in part by electron degeneracy pressure, meaning that the ideal gas law is notstrictly valid. For our purposes here, however, the assumption of an ideal gas gives reasonable results.5
5Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 510>>>

Next,thegravitationalpotentialenergyofthecoremaybeapproximated asUic∼−35GM2icRic.Furthermore, the internal thermal energy of the core is justKic=3MickTic2µicmH.Introducing these expressions into Eq. ( 6) and solving for the pressure at the surface ofthe isothermal core, we havePic=34πR3ic/parenleftbiggMickTicµicmH−15GM2icRic/parenrightbigg.(7)Notice that there are two competing terms in Eq. ( 7); the ﬁrst term is due to thethermal energy in the core and the second is due to gravitational effects. For speciﬁc valuesofTicandRic, as the core mass increases, the thermal energy tends to increase the pressureat the surface of the core while the gravitational term tends to decrease it. For some valueofMic,Picis maximized, meaning that there exists an upper limit on how much pressurethe isothermal core can exert in order to support the overlying envelope.To determine whenPicis a maximum, we must differentiate Eq. ( 7) with respect toMicand set the derivative equal to zero. It is left as an exercise to show that the radius ofthe isothermal core for whichPicis a maximum is given byRic=25GMicµicmHkTic(8)and that the maximum value of the surface pressure that can be produced by an isothermalcore is given byPic,max=37564π1G3M2ic/parenleftbiggkTicµicmH/parenrightbigg4.(9)The important feature of Eq. ( 9) is that, as the core mass increases, the maximumpressure at the surface of the coredecreases. At some point, it may no longer be possible forthe core to support the overlying layers of the star’s envelope. Clearly this critical conditionmust be related to the mass contained in the envelope and therefore to the total mass of thestar.To estimate the mass that can be supported by the isothermal core, we need to determinethe pressure exerted on the core by the overlying envelope. In hydrostatic equilibrium, thispressure must not exceed the maximum possible pressure that may be supported by theisothermal core. To estimate the envelope pressure, we will start again with Eq. ( 3), thistime integrating from the surface of the star to the surface of the isothermal core. AssumingMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 511>>>

for simplicity that the pressure at the surface of the star is zero,Pic,env=/integraldisplayPic,env0dP=−/integraldisplayMicMGMr4πr4dMr≃−G8π/angbracketleftbigr4/angbracketrightbig/parenleftbigM2ic−M2/parenrightbig,whereMis the total mass of the star and⟨r4⟩is some average value ofr4between thesurface of the star of radiusRand the surface of the core. Assuming thatM2ic≪M2, andmaking the crude approximation that⟨r4⟩∼R4/2, we havePic,env∼G4πM2R4(10)for the pressure at the core’s surface due to the weight of the envelope.The quantityR4can be written in terms of the mass of the star and the temperature ofthe isothermal core through the use of the ideal gas law,Tic=Pic,envµenvmHρic,envk,(11)whereµenvis the mean molecular weight of the envelope andρic,envis the gas density atthe core–envelope interface. Making the rough estimate thatρic,env∼M4πR3/3,(12)using Eq. ( 10), and solving forR, Eq. ( 11) givesR∼13GMTicµenvmHk.Substituting our solution for the radius of the envelope back into Eq. ( 10), we arrive atan expression for the pressure at the core–envelope interface due to the overlying envelope:Pic,env∼814π1G3M2/parenleftbiggkTicµenvmH/parenrightbigg4.Note thatPic,envis independent of the mass of the isothermal core.Finally, to estimate the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit, we set the maximum pressureof the isothermal core (Eq. 9) equal to the pressure needed to support the overlyingenvelope (Eq. 1). This immediately simpliﬁes to giveMicM∼0.54/parenleftbiggµenvµic/parenrightbigg2.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 512>>>

Our result is only slightly larger than the one obtained originally by Schönberg and Chan-drasekhar (Eq. 1).2LATE STAGES OF STELLAR EVOLUTIONFollowing the completion of the main-sequence phase of stellar evolution, a complicatedsequence of evolutionary stages occurs that may involve nuclear burning in the cores ofstars together with nuclear burning in concentric mass shells. At various times, core burningand/or nuclear burning in a mass shell may cease, accompanied by a readjustment of thestructure of the star. This readjustment may involve expansion or contraction of the coreor envelope and the development of extended convection zones. As the ﬁnal stages ofevolution are approached, extensive mass loss from the surface also plays a critical role indetermining the star’s ultimate fate.As examples of post-main-sequence stellar evolution, we will continue to explorechanges in the structures over time of alow-mass starof 1 M⊙and anintermediate-massstarof 5 M⊙. Detailed depictions of their evolutionary tracks in the H–R diagram areshown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively.Evolution Off the Main SequenceAs mentioned in Section 1, the end of the main-sequence phase of evolution occurs whenhydrogen burning ceases in the core of the star (in Fig. 1 this corresponds to point 3 forthe 1 M⊙star and point 2 for the 5 M⊙star). In the case of the 1 M⊙star, the core beginsto contract while a thick hydrogen-burning shell continues to consume available fuel. Withthe rising temperature in the shell due to core contraction, the shell actually produces moreenergy than the core did on the main sequence, causing the luminosity to increase, theenvelope to expand slightly, and the effective temperature to decrease.The situation is somewhat different for the 5 M⊙star, however. Rather than a thickhydrogen-burning shell immediately producing energy with the cessation of hydrogen burn-ing in the core, the entire star participates in an overall contraction on a Kelvin–Helmholtztimescale. This contraction phase releases gravitational potential energy, causing the lumi-nosity to increase slightly, the radius of the star to decrease, and the effective temperatureto increase (corresponding to the evolution between points 2 and 3 in Fig. 1). Eventuallythe temperature outside the helium core increases sufﬁciently to cause a thick shell of hy-drogen to burn (point 3 in Fig. 1). At this point the interior chemical composition of the5M⊙star resembles that of Fig. 6. Because the ignition of the shell is quite rapid, theoverlying envelope is forced to expand slightly, absorbing some of the energy released bythe shell. As a result, the luminosity decreases momentarily and the effective temperaturedrops, as can be seen in both Figs. 1 and 5. A sketch of the star’s structure at this pointis given in Fig. 7.The Subgiant BranchFor both low- and intermediate-mass stars, as the shell continues to consume the hydrogenthat is available at the base of the star’s envelope, the helium core steadily increases in massMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 513>>>

Pre-white dwarfPN formationPost-AGBSuperwindFirst He shell flash
He core exhaustedHe core burningH shell burningH core exhaustedCore contractionZAMSSecond dredge-up
To white dwarf phaseSGBRGBFirstdredge-upHe coreflashTP-AGBE-AGB
Log10 (Te)Log10 (L/L  )
1 MFIGURE 4A schematic diagram of the evolution of a low-mass star of 1 M⊙from the zero-agemainsequencetotheformationofawhitedwarfstar.Thedottedphaseofevolutionrepresents rapid evolution following the helium core ﬂash. The various phases of evolution are labeledas follows: Zero-Age-Main-Sequence (ZAMS), Sub-Giant Branch (SGB), Red Giant Branch (RGB),Early Asymptotic Giant Branch (E-AGB), Thermal Pulse Asymptotic Giant Branch (TP-AGB), Post-Asymptotic Giant Branch (Post-AGB), Planetary Nebula formation (PN formation), and Pre-whitedwarf phase leading to white dwarf phase.and becomes nearly isothermal. At points 4 in Fig. 1, the Schönberg–Chandrasekharlimit is reached and the core begins to contract rapidly, causing the evolution to proceedon the much faster Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale. The gravitational energy released by therapidly contracting core again causes the envelope of the star to expand and the effec-tive temperature cools, resulting in redward evolution on the H–R diagram. This phase ofevolution is known as thesubgiant branch(SGB).As the core contracts, a nonzero temperature gradient is soon re-established becauseof the release of gravitational potential energy. At the same time, the temperature anddensity of the hydrogen-burning shell increase, and, although the shell begins to narrowsigniﬁcantly, the rate at which energy is generated by the shell increases rapidly. Onceagain the stellar envelope expands, absorbing some of the energy produced by the shellMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 514>>>

Pre-white dwarfPN formationFirst He shell flashHe core exhaustedPost-AGBSuperwindThird dredge-upHBH shellburningZAMSTo white dwarf phaseH core exhaustedOverallcontractionFirst dredge-upRGBHe coreburningSeconddredge-upTP-AGBSGBE-AGBLog10 (L/L  )
Log10 (Te)5 MFIGURE 5A schematic diagram of the evolution of an intermediate-mass star of 5 M⊙fromthe zero-age main sequence to the formation of a white dwarf star.The diagram islabeledaccordingtoFig.4withtheadditionoftheHorizontalBranch(HB).
0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0Mass fractionX12X16XHX14X3X12X3X4X12X'13X14X4X14X16
FIGURE 6The chemical composition as a function of interior mass fraction fora5M⊙starduring the phase of overall contraction, following the main-sequence phase of core hydrogen burning.The maximum mass fractions of the indicated species areXH=0.708,X3=1.296×10−4(32He),X4=0.9762 (42He),X12=3.61×10−3(126C),X′13=3.61×10−3(136C),X14=0.0145 (147N), andX16=0.01080 (168O). (Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,143, 483, 1966.)Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 515>>>

He coreH-burning shellH, He envelopeL* = 1130 LTe  = 16,900 K
0.12R*R* = 3.94 R
0.06R*FIGURE 7A5M⊙star with a helium core and a hydrogen-burning shell shortly after shellignition (point 3 in Fig. 1). (Data from Iben,Ap. J.,143, 483, 1966.)before the energy reaches the surface. For the 5 M⊙star, in a situation analogous to thickhydrogen shell burning immediately following overall contraction, the expanding envelopeactually absorbs enough energy for a time to cause the luminosity to decrease slightly beforerecovering (point 5 in Fig. 1).The Red Giant BranchWith the expansion of the stellar envelope and the decrease in effective temperature, thephotospheric opacity increases due to the additional contribution of the H−ion. The result isthat a convection zone develops near the surface for both low- and intermediate-mass stars.As the evolution continues toward points 5 in Fig. 1, the base of the convection zoneextends deep into the interior of the star. With the nearly adiabatic temperature gradientassociated with convection throughout much of the stellar interior, and the efﬁciency withwhich the energy is transported to the surface, the star begins to rise rapidly upward alongthered giant branch(RGB) of the H-R diagram. This path is essentially the same onefollowed by pre-main-sequence stars descending the Hayashi track prior to the onset ofcore hydrogen burning.As the star climbs the RGB, its convection zone deepens until the base reaches downinto regions where the chemical composition has been modiﬁed by nuclear processes.In particular, because of its rather large nuclear reaction cross section, lithium burns viacollisions with protons at relatively cool temperatures (greater than about 2.7×106K).This means that because of the evolution of the star to this point, lithium has become nearlyMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 516>>>

depleted over most of the interior of the star (the inner 98% of the mass for the 5 M⊙star).At the same time, nuclear processing has increased the mass fraction of32He over the middlethird of the star (see, for example, Figs. 3 and 6) as well as altered the abundanceratios of the various species in the CNO cycle. When the surface convection zone encountersthis chemically modiﬁed region, the processed material becomes mixed with the materialabove it. The effect is observable changes in the composition of the photosphere; the amountof lithium at the surface will decrease and the amount of32He will increase. At the sametime, convection transports126C inward and147N outward, decreasing the observable ratio ofX12/X14. Other abundance ratios such asX′13/X12will also be modiﬁed. This transport ofmaterials from the deep interior to the surface is referred to as theﬁrst dredge-upphase.Nature has provided us with an opportunity to directly observe the products of nuclearreactions deep within stellar interiors. These observable changes in surface compositionprovide an important test of the predictions of stellar evolution theory.The Red Giant Tip.3×108Kand 7.7×106kg m−3for the 5 M⊙star) have ﬁnally become high enough that quantum-mechanical tunneling becomes effective through the Coulomb barrier acting between42Henuclei, allowing the triple alpha process to begin. Some of the resulting126C is furtherprocessed into168O as well.burning shell outward, cooling it and causing the rate of energy output of the shell to decreasesomewhat. The result is an abrupt decrease in the luminosity of the star. At the same time,the envelope contracts and the effective temperature begins to increase again.The Helium Core FlashAn interesting difference arises at this point between the evolution of stars with massesgreater than about 1.8M⊙and those that have masses less than 1.8M⊙. For stars of lowermass, as the helium core continues to collapse during evolution up to the tip of the red giantbranch, the core becomes strongly electron-degenerate. Furthermore, signiﬁcant neutrinolosses from the core of the star prior to reaching the tip of the RGB result in a negativetemperature gradient near the center (i.e., a temperature inversion develops); the core isactually refrigerated somewhat because of the energy that is carried away by the easilyescaping neutrinos! When the temperature and density become high enough to initiate thetriple alpha process (approximately 108K and 107kg m−3, respectively), the ensuing energyrelease is almost explosive. The ignition of helium burning occurs initially in a shell aroundthe center of the star, but the entire core quickly becomes involved and the temperatureinversion is lifted. The luminosity generated by the helium-burning core reaches 1011L⊙,comparable to that of an entire galaxy! However, this tremendous energy release lasts forhe surface abundance of lithium is also lower than expected in the present-daySun.6
6TMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
With the onset of a new and strongly temperature-dependent source of  energy, the core expands. Although the hydrogen-burning shell remains the dominant source of the star’s luminosity, the expansion of the core pushes the hydrogen-


<<<PAGE 517>>>

only a few seconds, and most of the energy never even reaches the surface. Instead, itis absorbed by the overlying layers of the envelope, possibly causing some mass to belost from the surface of the star. This short-lived phase of evolution of low-mass stars isreferred to as thehelium core ﬂash. The origin of the explosive energy release is in the veryweak temperature dependence of electron degeneracy pressure and the strong temperaturedependence of the triple alpha process. The energy generated must ﬁrst go into “lifting” thedegeneracy. Only after this occurs can the energy go into thermal (kinetic) energy requiredto expand the core, which decreases the density, lowers the temperature, and slows thereaction rate.It is because of the very rapid pace of the helium core ﬂash that stellar evolution cal-culations of low-mass stars are often terminated at that point. Given the dramatic changesoccuring deep in the interior of the star, it is very difﬁcult to follow the evolution adequately;very small time steps are required to model the evolution, meaning that a great deal of com-puter time is needed to follow a star through the helium core ﬂash (in fact, the star evolvesmuch fasterthan the computer can model it). This is why the evolutionary tracks of starswith masses of 1, 1.25, and 1.5M⊙are not followed past points 6 in Fig. 1. This isalso why the annotated evolutionary track in Fig. 4 immediately following the red gianttip is indicated by a dotted line; the evolution is extremely rapid and the computations areresumed when quiescent helium core burning and hydrogen shell burning are establishedin the star.The Horizontal BranchFor both low- and intermediate-mass stars, as the envelope of the model contracts followingthe red giant tip, the increasing compression of the hydrogen-burning shell eventually causesthe energy output of the shell, and the overall energy output of the stars, to begin to riseagain. With the associated increase in effective temperature, the deep convection zone inthe envelope rises toward the surface, while at the same time, a convective core develops.The appearance of a convective core is due to the high temperature sensitivity of the triplealpha process (just as the convective core of an upper-main-sequence star arises because ofthe temperature dependence of the CNO cycle). This generally horizontal evolution is theblueward portion of thehorizontal branch(HB) loop. The blueward portion of the HB isessentially the helium-burning analog of the hydrogen-burning main sequence, but with amuch shorter timescale.When the evolution of the star reaches its most blueward point (point 8 in Fig. 1 forthe 5 M⊙star), the mean molecular weight of the core has increased to the point that thecore begins to contract, accompanied by the expansion and cooling of the star’s envelope.Shortly after beginning the redward portion of the HB loop, the core helium is exhausted,having been converted to carbon and oxygen. Again the redward evolution proceeds rapidlyas the inert CO core contracts, much like the rapid evolution across the SGB following theextinction of core hydrogen burning.During their passage along the horizontal branch, many stars develop instabilities in theirouter envelopes, leading to periodic pulsations that are readily observable as variations inluminosity, temperature, radius, and surface radial velocity. Since these oscillations dependMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 518>>>

sensitively on the internal structure of the star, stellar pulsations provide yet another test ofstellar structure theory.With the increase in core temperature associated with its contraction, a thick helium-burning shell develops outside the CO core. As the core continues to contract, the helium-burning shell narrows and strengthens, forcing the material above the shell to expand andcool. This results in a temporary turn-off of the hydrogen-burning shell.Along with the contraction of the helium-exhausted core, neutrino production increasesto the point that the core cools a bit. As a consequence of the increasing central density anddecreasing temperature, electron degeneracy pressure becomes an important component ofthe total pressure in the carbon–oxygen core.The Early Asymptotic Giant BranchThe next phase of the evolution illustrated in Figs. 4 and 5 is very similar to the evolu-tion following the exhaustion of the hydrogen-burning cores. When the redward evolutionreaches the Hayashi track, the evolutionary track bends upward along a path referred toas theasymptotic giant branch(AGB). (The AGB is so named because the evolutionarytrack approaches the line of the RGB asymptotically from the left. The AGB may be thoughtof as the helium-burning-shell analog to the hydrogen-burning-shell RGB.) At this pointin its evolution the core temperature of the 5 M⊙star is approximately 2×108K, andits density is on the order of 109kg m−3. A diagram of anearlyAGB(E-AGB) star withtwo shell sources is shown in Fig. 8. Although two shell sources are depicted, it is thehelium-burning shell that dominates the energy output during the E-AGB; the hydrogen-burning shell is nearly inactive at this point. Note that the diagram is not to scale; in orderto visualize the structure from the hydrogen-burning shell inward, that region was enlargedby a factor of 100 relative to the surface of the star.The expanding envelope initially absorbs much of the energy produced by the helium-burning shell. As the effective temperature continues to decrease, the convective envelopedeepens again, this time extending downward to the chemical discontinuity between thehydrogen-rich outer layer and the helium-rich region above the helium-burning shell. Themixing that results during thissecond dredge-upphase increases the helium and nitrogencontent of the envelope. (The increase in nitrogen is due to the previous conversion ofcarbon and oxygen into nitrogen in the intershell region.)The Thermal-Pulse Asymptotic Giant BranchNear the upper portion of the AGB (labeled TP-AGB in Figs. 4 and 5 forthermal-pulseAGB), the dormant hydrogen-burning shell eventually reignites and again dominatesthe energy output of the star. However, during this phase of evolution, the narrowing helium-burning shell begins to turn on and off quasi-periodically. These intermittenthelium shellﬂashesoccur because the hydrogen-burning shell is dumping helium ash onto the heliumlayer below. As the mass of the helium layer increases, its base becomes slightly degenerate.Then, when the temperature at the base of the helium shell increases sufﬁciently, a heliumMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 519>>>

H-burning shellHe0.0009R*0.0008R*He-burning shellCO coreH, He envelopeL* = 1940 LTe  = 5770 KR* = 44.1 R
0.0029R*0.0056R*
FIGURE 8A5M⊙star on the early asymptotic giant branch with a carbon–oxygen core andhydrogen- and helium-burning shells. Note that relative to the surface radius, the scale of the shellsand core has been increased by a factor of 100 for clarity. (Data from Iben,Ap. J.,143, 483, 1966.)shell ﬂash occurs, analogous to the earlier helium core ﬂashes of low-mass stars (althoughmuch less energetic). This drives the hydrogen-burning shell outward, causing it to cooland turn off for a time. Eventually the burning in the helium shell diminishes, the hydrogen-burning shell recovers, and the process repeats. The period between pulses is a functionof the mass of the star, ranging from thousands of years for stars near 5 M⊙to hundredsof thousands of years for low-mass stars (0.6M⊙), with the pulse amplitude growing witheach successive event; see Fig. 9. This phase of periodic activity in the deep interior ofthe star is evident in abrupt changes in luminosity at the surface (see the TP-AGB phasesin Figs. 4 and 5).Details of thermal pulses fora7M⊙star are shown in Fig. 10. Following a heliumshell ﬂash, the luminosity arising from the hydrogen-burning shell drops appreciably whilethe energy output from the helium-burning shell increases. This is because the hydrogen-burning shell is pushed outward, causing it to cool. Since the hydrogen-burning shell isresponsible for most of the energy output of the star, the star’s luminosity abruptly decreaseswhen a helium shell ﬂash occurs. At the same time, the radius of the surface of the star alsodecreases and the star’s effective temperature increases. After a period of time, the energyoutput of the helium shell diminishes when the degeneracy is lifted, the hydrogen-burningshell moves deeper into the star, and the hydrogen-burning shell once again dominatesthe star’s total energy output. As a result, the surface radius, luminosity, and effectivetemperature relax back to near their pre-ﬂash values. It is important to note, however, thatMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 520>>>

02468 1 0–4.5–4.0–3.5–3.0–2.5–2.0–1.5
–3.0–3.5–4.0–4.5–5.0MbolMbolLog (L/L  )1.34¥105
3.26¥105 yr 3.32¥105 yr 3.11¥105 yr 2.66¥105 yr 2.08¥105 yr1.52¥1052.19¥105 yr 2.79¥105 yr 3.12¥105 yr
2.62.83.03.23.43.63.8
3.03.23.43.63.84.0
12 14 16 18 20 22 24Time (105 yr)Log (L/L  )
FIGURE 9The surface luminosity as a function of time for a 0.6M⊙stellar model that isundergoing helium shell ﬂashes on the TP-AGB. (Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,260, 821, 1982.)the overall evolutionary track of the star is toward greater luminosity and lower effectivetemperature throughout the TP-AGB.A class of pulsating variable stars known aslong-period variables(LPVs) are AGBstars. (LPVs have pulsation periods of 100 to 700 days and include the subclass ofMiravariable stars.) It has been suggested that the structural changes arising from shell ﬂashescould cause observable changes in the periods of some of these stars, providing anotherpossible test of stellar evolution theory. In fact, several Miras (e.g., W Dra, R Aql, andR Hya) have been observed to be undergoing relatively rapid period changes.Third Dredge-Up and Carbon StarsBecause of the sudden increase in energy ﬂux from the helium-burning shell during aﬂash episode, a convection zone is established between the helium-burning shell and thehydrogen-burning shell. At the same time, the depth of the envelope convection zoneMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 521>>>

Carbondiscontinuity
300 Years4.384.424.464.504.544.58Log (Ls/L  )Carbondiscontinuity0.95300.95250.95206.05.04.03.02.01.001960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080Time (109 sec)3.5103.5153.5203.525450500550600Log LsRSMCEMXYLog TeLog LHLog LHeLog (L/L  )M/M  
Log TeR/R   
FIGURE 10Time-dependent changes in the properties ofa7M⊙AGB star produced by heliumshell ﬂashes on the TP-AGB. The quantities shown are the surface radius (RS), the interior massfractions of the base of the convective envelope (MCE) and the hydrogen–helium discontinuity (MXY),the star’s luminosity and effective temperature (LsandTe, respectively), and the luminosities of thehydrogen- and helium-burning shells (LHandLHe, respectively). (Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,196, 525, 1975.)increases with the pulse strength of the ﬂashes. For stars that are massive enough (M>2M⊙), the convection zones will merge and eventually extend down into regions wherecarbon has been synthesized. In the region between the hydrogen- and helium-burningshells, the abundance of carbon exceeds that of oxygen by a factor of ﬁve to ten. This isin sharp contrast to the general excess of oxygen over carbon in the atmospheres of moststars. During thisthird dredge-upphase, the carbon-rich material is brought to the surface,decreasing the ratio of oxygen to carbon. If there are multiple third dredge-up events arisingfrom repeated helium shell ﬂashes, the oxygen-rich spectrum of a star will transform overtime to a carbon-rich spectrum. This appears to explain the difference, observed spectro-scopically, between oxygen-rich giants where the number density of oxygen atoms in theatmosphere exceeds the number density of carbon atoms (NO>NC) and carbon-rich giants(NC>NO) calledcarbon stars.Carbon stars are designated with a specialC spectral type(overlapping the traditionalK and M types). These stars are distinguished by an abundance of carbon-rich moleculesin their atmospheres, such as SiC, rather than SiO of typical M stars. This occurs becausecarbon monoxide (CO) is a very tightly bound molecule. If the atmosphere of the starcontains more oxygen than carbon, the carbon is almost completely tied up in CO, leavingoxygen to form additional molecules. Conversely, if the atmosphere contains more carbonthan oxygen, the oxygen is tied up in CO, allowing carbon to form in molecules.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 522>>>

Intermediate between the M and C spectral types are theS spectral typestars. These starsshow ZrO lines in their atmospheres, having replaced the TiO lines of M stars. S stars havealmost identical abundances of carbon and oxygen in their atmospheres.Of particular interest in the atmospheres of evolved TP-AGB stars is the presence oftechnetium (Tc), an element with no stable isotopes. In particular,9943Tc is the most abundantisotope of technetium found in the atmospheres of TP-AGB stars, yet it has a half-life ofonly 200,000 yr. The existence of technetium in S and C stars strongly suggests that theisotope must have been formed very recently in the star’s history and dredged up to thesurface from the deep interior.s-Process Nucleosynthesiscollide with nuclei (there is no Coulomb barrier to tunnel through). If the ﬂux of neutronsis not too great, radioactive nuclei produced by the absorption of stray neutrons have timeto decay into other nuclei before they absorb another neutron.9943Tc is one product of thisslows-processnucleosynthesis.Mass Loss and AGB EvolutionAGB stars are known to lose mass at a rapid rate, sometimes as high as˙M∼10−4M⊙yr−1.The effective temperatures of these stars are also quite cool (around 3000 K).As a result, dustgrains form in the expelled matter. Since silicate grains tend to form in an environment rich inoxygen, and graphite grains will form in a carbon-rich environment, the composition of theISM may be related to the relative numbers of carbon- and oxygen-rich stars. Observationsof ultraviolet extinction curves in the Milky Way and the Large and Small MagellanicClouds support the idea that mass loss from these stars does, in fact, help enrich the ISM.As evolution up the AGB continues, what happens next is strongly dependent on theoriginal mass of the star and the amount of mass loss experienced by that star during itslifetime. It appears that the ﬁnal evolutionary behavior of stars can be separated into twobasic groups: those with ZAMS masses above about 8 M⊙and those with masses belowthis value. The distinction between the two mass regimes is based on whether or not thecore of the star will undergo signiﬁcant further nuclear burning. In the remainder of thissection, we will consider the ﬁnal evolution of stars with initial masses less than 8 M⊙As stars with initial masses below 8 M⊙continue to evolve up the AGB, the helium-burning shell converts more and more of the helium into carbon and then into oxygen,increasing the mass of the carbon–oxygen core. At the same time, the core continues tocontract slowly, causing its central density to increase. Depending on the star’s mass, neu-trino energy losses may decrease the central temperature somewhat during this phase. Inany event, the densities in the core become large enough that electron degeneracy pressureThe LMC and the SMC are small satellite galaxies of the Milky Way, visible in the southern hemisphere.7.
7Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
Technetium-99 is one of a host of isotopes formed by the slow capture of neutrons by existing nuclei. Numerous nuclear reactions, such as carbon burning and oxygen burn-ing release neutrons. Since neutrons do not have an electric charge, they can easily


<<<PAGE 523>>>

begins to dominate. This situation is very similar to the development of an electron-degenerate helium core in a low-mass star during its rise up the red giant branch.For stars with ZAMS masses less than about 4 M⊙, the carbon–oxygen core will neverbecome large enough and hot enough to ignite nuclear burning. On the other hand,if theimportant contribution of mass loss is ignoredfor stars between 4 M⊙and 8 M⊙, theorysuggests that the C–O core would reach a sufﬁciently large mass that it could no longerremain in hydrostatic equilibrium, even with the assistance of pressure from the degenerateelectron gas. The outcome of this situation is catastrophic core collapse. The maximumvalue of 1.4M⊙for a completely degenerate core is known as theChandrasekhar limit.However, as has already been mentioned, observations of AGB stars do show enormousmass loss rates. When these mass loss rates are included in evolution calculations on theAGB, the situation described in the last paragraph does not actually occur. Instead, forstars between 4 M⊙and 8 M⊙, mass loss prevents catastrophic core collapse. Instead ofcollapse, these stars experience additional nucleosynthesis in their cores, leading to corecompositions of oxygen, neon, and magnesium (ONeMg cores) and masses remainingbelow the Chandrasekhar limit of 1.4M⊙.In addition, reactions such as2210Ne+42He→2512Mg+n2210Ne+42He→2612Mg+γalso affect the composition of these cores.Unfortunately, our understanding of the mechanism(s) that cause this mass loss is poor.Some astronomers have suggested that the mass loss may be linked to the helium shell ﬂashesor perhaps to the periodic envelope pulsations of LPVs. Other proposed mechanisms stemfrom the high luminosities and low surface gravities of these stars, coupled with radiationpressure on the dust grains, dragging the gas with them. Whatever the cause, its inﬂuenceon the evolution of AGB stars is signiﬁcant.As one might expect, the rate of mass loss accelerates with time because the luminosityand radius are increasing while the mass is decreasing during continued evolution up theAGB. The decreasing mass and increasing radius of the star imply that the surface gravityis also decreasing, and the surface material is becoming progressively less tightly bound.Consequently, mass loss becomes increasingly more important asAGB evolution continues.In the latest stages of evolution on the AGB, asuperwinddevelops with˙M∼10−4M⊙yr−1. Whether shell ﬂashes, envelope pulsations, or some other mechanismis the reason, the observed high mass loss rates seem to be responsible for the existenceof a class of objects known asOH/IR sources. These objects appear to be stars shroudedin optically thick dust clouds that radiate their energy primarily in the infrared part of theelectromagnetic spectrum.The OH part of the OH/IR designation is due to the detection of OH molecules, whichcan be seen via theirmaser emission. A maser is the molecular analog of a laser; electronsThe Chandrasekhar limit plays a critical role in the formation of the ﬁnal products of stellar evolution, namelywhite dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.The termmaseris an acronym formicrowaveampliﬁcation bystimulatedemission ofradiation.8
989Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 524>>>

EnergyPumpingtransitionMetastable state (E1)Excited state (E2)
Ground state (E0)Masertransitionby simulatedemissionSpontaneousde-excitation
FIGURE 11A schematic diagram of a hypothetical three-level maser. The intermediate energylevel is a relatively long-lived metastable state. A transition from the metastable state to the lowestenergy level can occur through stimulated emission by a photon of energy equal to the energy differencebetween the two states (Eγ=hν=E1−E0).are “pumped up” from a lower energy level into a higher, long-lived metastable energy state.The electron then makes a downward transition back to a lower state when it is stimulatedby a photon with an energy equal to the difference in energies between the two states. Theoriginal photon and the emitted photon will travel in the same direction and will be in phasewith each other; hence the ampliﬁcation of radiation. A schematic energy level diagram ofa hypothetical three-level maser is depicted in Fig. 11.Post-Asymptotic Giant BranchAs the cloud around the OH/IR source continues to expand, it eventually becomes opticallythin, exposing the central star, which characteristically exhibits the spectrum of an F or Gsupergiant. At this point in the evolution of our 1 and 5 M⊙stars (Figs. 4 and 5, re-spectively), the evolutionary tracks have turned blueward, leaving the TP-AGB and movingnearly horizontally across the H–R diagram aspost-AGBstars. During the ensuing ﬁnalphase of mass loss, the remainder of the star’s envelope is expelled, revealing the cindersproduced by its long history of nuclear reactions. With only a very thin layer of materialremaining above them, the hydrogen- and helium-burning shells are extinguished, and theluminosity of the star drops rapidly. The hot central object, now revealed, will cool to be-come awhite dwarf star, which is essentially the old red giant’s degenerate C–O core (orONeMg core in the case of the more massive stars), surrounded by a thin layer of residualhydrogen and helium.The last stages of evolution of a 0.6M⊙model are depicted in Fig. 12. The position ofthe star on the H–R diagram at the start of each ﬂash episode is indicated by a number nextto the evolutionary track (eleven pulses in all), with the resulting excursions in luminosityand effective temperature indicated for pulses 7, 9, and 10. It is after the tenth pulse thatthe star leaves the AGB, ejecting its envelope during the nearly constant luminosity pathMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 525>>>

15,000(0.00027)
18,600(0.00027)R = 0.028511Last thermalpulse begins35757
3Main-sequencebandE-AGBTP-AGB246810–30,000(0.00315)–20,000(0.00253)–10,000(0.00184)–5000(0.00147)Fundamentalblue edgeCore helium-burning band5000t = 010,000(0.00080)(0.00113)(0.00049)4.03.53.02.52.01.55.04.54.03.5Log10 Te (K)Log10 (L/L  )
FIGURE 12The AGB and post-AGB evolution of a 0.6M⊙star undergoing mass loss. Theinitial composition of the model isX=0.749,Y=0.25, andZ=0.001. The main-sequence andhorizontal branches of 3, 5, and 7 M⊙stars are shown for reference. Details of the ﬁgure are discussedin the body of the text. (Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,260, 821, 1982.)across the H–R diagram. The amount of mass remaining in the hydrogen-rich envelope isindicated in parentheses along the evolutionary track (in M⊙). Also indicated is the amountof time before (negative) or after (positive) the point when the star’s effective temperaturewas 30,000 K (the time is measured in years). Following the eleventh helium shell ﬂash,the star ﬁnally loses the last remnants of its envelope and becomes a white dwarf of radius0.0285 R⊙.10Planetary NebulaeThe expanding shell of gas around a white dwarf progenitor is called aplanetary nebula.Examples of planetary nebulae are shown in Figs. 13– 15. These beautiful, glowingclouds of gas were given this name in the nineteenth century because, when viewed througha small telescope, they look somewhat like giant gaseous planets.A planetary nebula owes its appearance to the ultraviolet light emitted by the hot, con-densed central star. The ultraviolet photons are absorbed by the gas in the nebula, causingthe atoms to become excited or ionized. When the electrons cascade back down to lower1The line labeled “Fundamental blue edge” corresponds to the high-temperature limit for fundamental modepulsations of a class of variable stars known asRR Lyraes.0Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 526>>>

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 13(a) The Helix nebula (NGC 7293) is one of the closest planetary nebulae to Earth,213 pc away in the constellation ofAquarius. Its angular diameter in the sky is about 16 arcmin, roughlyone-half the angular size of the full moon. The pre-white dwarf star is visible at the center of the nebula.[Credit: NASA, ESA, C.R. O’Dell (Vanderbilt University), M. Meixner, and P. McCullough.] (b) Aclose-up of “cometary knots” in the Helix nebula. The central star is located beyond the bottom ofthe picture. [Credit: NASA, NOAO, ESA, the Hubble Helix Nebula Team, M. Meixner (STScI), andT. A. Rector (NRAO).]Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 527>>>

FIGURE 14NGC 6543 (the “Cat’s Eye”) is a planetary nebula in Draco, 900 pc away. Thecomplex structure may be due to high-speed jets and the presence of a companion star, makingNGC 6543 part of a binary star system. The jets are clearly visible in the upper right-hand and lowerleft-hand portions of the image. Note the central star in the image. [Credit: NASA, ESA, HEIC, andthe Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA). Acknowledgment: R. Corradi (Isaac Newton Group ofTelescopes, Spain) and Z. Tsvetanov (NASA).]energy levels, photons are emitted whose wavelengths are in the visible portion of theelectromagnetic spectrum. As a result, the cloud appears to glow in visible light.1The bluish-green coloration of many planetary nebulae is due to the 500.68-nm and495.89-nm forbidden lines of [O III] (forbidden lines of [O II] and [Ne III] are also com-mon), and the reddish coloration comes from ionized hydrogen and nitrogen. Characteristictemperatures of these objects are in the range of the ionization temperature of hydrogen,104K.With the advent of high-resolution images of planetary nebulae obtained by telescopessuch as the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have come to realize that the morphologiesof planetary nebulae are often much more complex than might have been expected ofa spherically symmetric parent TP-AGB star. Some planetaries, like the Helix nebula inFig. 13(a), look as though they have a ringlike structure. This is because gas is ejectedpreferentially along the equator of the star due to the presence of angular momentum, andour viewing angle is down the star’s rotation axis. Suggestions for the surprising array ofstructures include varying viewing angles, multiple ejections of material from the stellarsurface, the presence of one or more companion stars, and magnetic ﬁelds.1This process is reminiscent of the creation of H II regions around newly formed O and B main-sequence stars1
1.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 528>>>

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 15Examples of two “butterﬂy” planetary nebulae. (a) M2-9 is a bipolar planetarynebula 800 pc distant in Ophiucus. [Credit: Bruce Balick (University of Washington), VincentIcke (Leiden University, The Netherlands), Garrelt Mellema (Stockholm University), and NASA.](b) Menzel 3 (Mz 3), in Norma, is also known as the Ant nebula. Outﬂow velocities of 1000 km s−1are much greater than for any other similar object. [Credit: NASA, ESA, and the Hubble HeritageTeam (STScI/AURA). Acknowledgment: R. Sahai (Jet Propulsion Lab) and B. Balick (University ofWashington).]Signiﬁcant detail is also evident at smaller scales. Figure 13(b) shows so-calledcometary knots that are pointed radially away from the central star in the Helix nebula.These clumps of material have dark cores with luminous cusps on the sides facing the star.The expansion velocities of planetaries, as measured by Doppler-shifted spectral lines,show that the gas is typically moving away from the central stars with speeds of between10 and 30 km s−1, although much greater speeds have been measured, as in the case ofMz 3 [Fig. 15(b)]. Combined with characteristic length scales of around 0.3 pc, theirestimated ages are on the order of 10,000 years. After only about 50,000 years, a planetarynebula will dissipate into the ISM. Compared with the entire lifetime of a star, the phase ofplanetary nebula ejection is ﬂeeting indeed.Despite their short lifetimes, roughly 1500 planetary nebulae are known to exist in theMilky Way Galaxy. Given the fact that we are unable to observe the entire galaxy fromMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 529>>>

Earth, it is estimated that the number of planetaries is probably close to 15,000. If, onaverage, each planetary contains about 0.5M⊙of material, the ISM is being enriched at therate of roughly one solar mass per year through this process.3STELLAR CLUSTERSOver the past two chapters we have seen a story develop that depicts the lives of stars. Theyare formed from the ISM, only to return most of that material to the ISM through stellarwinds, by the ejection of planetary nebulae, or via supernova explosionsThe matter that is given back, however, has been enriched with heavierelements that were produced through the various sequences of nuclear reactions governinga star’s life. As a result, when the next generation of stars is formed, it possesses higherconcentrations of these heavy elements than did its ancestors. This cyclic process of starformation, death, and rebirth is evident in the variations in composition between stars.Population I, II, and III StarsThe universe began with the Big Bang 13.7 billion years ago. At that time hydrogen andhelium were essentially the only elements produced by the nucleosynthesis that occurredduring the initial ﬁreball. Consequently, the ﬁrst stars to form did so with virtually no metalcontent;Z=0. The next generation of stars that formed were extremelymetal-poor, havingvery low but non-zero values ofZ. Each succeeding generation of star production resultedin higher and higher proportions of heavier elements, leading to metal-rich stars for whichZmay reach values as high as 0.03. The (thus far hypothetical) original stars that formedimmediately after the Big Bang are referred to asPopulation IIIstars, metal-poor starswithZ/greaterorsimilar0 are referred to asPopulation II, and metal-rich stars are calledPopulation I.The classiﬁcations of Population II and Population I are due originally to their identi-ﬁcations with kinematically distinct groups of stars within our Galaxy. Population I starshave velocities relative to the Sun that are low compared to Population II stars. Furthermore,Population I stars are found predominantly in the disk of the Milky Way, while Population IIstars can be found well above or below the disk. It was only later that astronomers realizedthat these two groups of stars differed chemically as well. Not only do populations tell ussomething about evolution, but the kinematic characteristics, positions, and compositionsof Population I and Population II stars also provide us with a great deal of information aboutthe formation and evolution of the Milky Way Galaxy.Globular Clusters and Galactic (Open) Clustersuring the collapse of a molecular cloud,stellar clusterscanform, ranging in size from tens of stars to hundreds of thousands of stars. Every memberof a given cluster formed from the same cloud, they all formed with essentially identicalcompositions, and they all formed within a relatively short period of time. Thus, excludingsuch effects as rotation, magnetic ﬁelds, and membership in a binary star system, the V ogt–Russell theorem suggests that the differences in evolutionary states between the variousstars in the cluster are due solely to their initial masses..
DMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 530>>>

(b)(a)
FIGURE 16(a) M13, the great globular cluster in Hercules, is located approximately 7000 pcfrom Earth. (From the Digitized Sky Survey at STScI. Courtesy of Palomar/Caltech, the NationalGeographic Society, and the Space Telescope Science Institute.) (b) The Pleiades is a galactic clusterfound in the constellation of Taurus, at a distance of 130 pc. (Courtesy of the National OpticalAstronomical Observatories.)Extreme Population II clusters formed when the Galaxy was very young, making themsome of the oldest objects in the Milky Way. They also contain the largest number of mem-bers. Figure 16(a) shows M13, one suchglobular cluster, located in the constellation ofHercules. Population I clusters, such as the Pleiades [Fig. 16(b)], tend to be smaller andyounger. These smaller clusters are called alternatelygalactic clustersoropen clusters.Spectroscopic ParallaxThe H–R diagrams of clusters can be constructed in a self-consistent way without knowledgeof the exact distances to them. Since the dimensions of a typical cluster are small relativeto its distance from Earth, little error is introduced by assuming that each member of thecluster has the same distance modulus. As a result, plotting the apparent magnitude ratherthan the absolute magnitude only amounts to shifting the position of each star in the diagramvertically by the same amount. By matching the observational main sequence of the clusterto a main sequence calibrated in absolute magnitude, the distance modulus of the clustercan be determined, giving the cluster’s distance from the observer. This method of distancedetermination is known asspectroscopic parallax(the method is also often referred to asmain-sequence ﬁtting).Color–Magnitude DiagramsRather than attempting to determine the effective temperature of every member of a clusterby undertaking a detailed spectral line analysis of each star (which would be a major projectfor a globular cluster, even assuming that the stars were bright enough to get good spectra),it is much faster to determine their color indices (B−V). With knowledge of the apparentmagnitude and the color index of each star, acolor–magnitude diagramcan be constructed.Color–magnitude diagrams for M3 (a globular cluster) and h andχPersei (adoublegalacticcluster) are shown in Figs. 17 and 18, respectively.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 531>>>

13141516171819202122V
–0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6B – VP-AGBAGBRGB
SGBBSTOMSHBM3
FIGURE 17A color–magnitude diagram for M3, an old globular cluster. The major phases ofstellar evolution are indicated: main sequence (MS); blue stragglers (BS); the main-sequence turn-offpoint (TO); the subgiant branch of hydrogen shell burning (SGB); the red giant branch along theHayashi track, prior to helium core burning (RGB); the horizontal branch during helium core burning(HB); the asymptotic giant branch during hydrogen and helium shell burning (AGB); post-AGBevolution proceeding to the white dwarf phase (P-AGB). (Figure adapted from Renzini and FusiPecci,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,26, 199, 1988. Reproduced with permission from theAnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 26, ©1988 by Annual Reviews Inc.)Isochrones and Cluster AgesClusters, and their associated color–magnitude diagrams, offer nearly ideal tests of manyaspects of stellar evolution theory. By computing the evolutionary tracks of stars of variousmasses, all having the same composition as the cluster, it is possible to plot the position ofeach evolving model on the H–R diagram when the model reaches the age of the cluster.(The curve connecting these positions is known as anisochrone.) The relative number ofstars at each location on the isochrone depends on the number of stars in each mass rangeAs the cluster ages, beginning with the initial collapse of the molecular cloud, the mostmassive and least abundant stars will arrive on the main sequence ﬁrst, evolving rapidly.Before the lowest-mass stars have even reached the main sequence, the most massiveones have already evolved into the red giant region, perhaps even undergoing supernovaexplosions.Since core hydrogen-burning lifetimes are inversely related to mass, continued evolutionof the cluster means that the main-sequenceturn-off point, deﬁned as the point where starsMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution
within the cluster (the initial mass function), combined with the different rates of evolu-tion during each phase. Therefore, star counts in a color–magnitude diagram can shed light on the timescales involved in stellar evolution.


<<<PAGE 532>>>

6543210–1–2–3–4–5–6–7–8MV
–0.8–0.6–0.4–0.200.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.4B – VFIGURE 18A color–magnitude diagram for the young double galactic cluster, h andχPersei.Note that the most massive stars are pulling away from the main sequence while the low-mass stars inthe middle of the diagram are still contracting onto the main sequence. Red giants are present in theupper right-hand corner of the diagram. (Figure adapted from Wildey,Ap. J. Suppl.,8, 439, 1964.)in the cluster are currently leaving the main sequence, becomes redder and less luminouswith time. Consequently, it is possible to estimate the age of a cluster by the location ofthe uppermost point of its main sequence. This fundamental technique is an important toolfor determining ages of stars, clusters, our Milky Way Galaxy, and other galaxies withobservable clusters, and even for establishing a lower limit on the age of the universe itself.A composite color–magnitude diagram of a number of clusters is shown in Fig. 19.Labeled vertically on the right-hand side is the age of the cluster corresponding to thelocation of the main-sequence turn-off point.The Hertzsprung GapAnother consequence of varying timescales can be seen in the color–magnitude diagramof h andχPersei (Fig. 18). Apparent are red giants, together with low-mass pre-main-sequence stars. Also evident in the diagram is the complete absence of stars between themassive ones that are just leaving the main sequence and the few in the red giant region. It isunlikely that this represents an incomplete survey, since these stars are the brightest membersof the cluster. Rather, it points out the very rapid evolution that occurs just after leaving themain sequence. This feature, known as theHertzsprung gap, is a common characteristic ofthe color–magnitude diagrams of young, galactic clusters. The existence of the Hertzsprunggap is due to evolution on a Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale across the SGB, following thepoint when the hydrogen-depleted core exceeds the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit.Notice in Fig. 19 that the cluster M67 does not show the existence of the Hertzsprunggap; the same can be said of M3 (Fig. 17). Recall that below about 1.25 M⊙, the rapidMain Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 533>>>

86420–2–4–6–8MVPleiadesM41M11M67M67M41M11ComaHyadesHyadesSunPraesepeNGC 752NGC 2362h + /H9273 Perseih + /H9273 Persei
–0.4 0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0B – V2.9 ¥ 10107.1 ¥ 1091.9 ¥ 1091.6 ¥ 1082.8 ¥ 1076.5 ¥ 1062.0 ¥ 1061.0 ¥ 106Cluster age at turn-off point (yr)FIGURE 19A composite color–magnitude diagram for a set of Population I galactic clusters.The absolute visual magnitude is indicated on the left-hand vertical axis, and the age of the cluster,based on the location of its turn-off point, is labeled on the right-hand side. (Figure adapted from anoriginal diagram by A. Sandage.)contraction phase related to the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit is much less pronounced.As a result, color–magnitude diagrams of old globular clusters with turn-off points near orless than 1 M⊙have continuous distributions of stars leading to the red giant region.Relatively Few AGB and Post-AGB StarsClose inspection of Fig. 17 also shows that a relatively small number of stars exist onthe asymptotic giant branch and only a few stars are to be found in the region labeled P-AGB (post-asymptotic giant branch). This is just a consequence of the very rapid pace ofevolution during this phase of heavy mass loss that leads directly to the formation of whitedwarfs.Blue StragglersIt should be pointed out that a group of stars, known asblue stragglers, can be foundabove the turn-off point of M3. Although our understanding of these stars is incomplete, itappears that their tardiness in leaving the main sequence is due to some unusual aspect oftheir evolution. The most likely scenarios appear to be mass exchange with a binary starcompanion,orcollisionsbetweentwostars,extendingthestar’smain-sequencelifetime.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 534>>>

A Work in ProgressThe successful comparisons between theory and observation that are provided by stellarclusters give strong support to the idea that our picture of stellar evolution is fairly complete,although perhaps in need of some ﬁne-tuning. Continued reﬁnements in stellar opacities,revisions in nuclear reaction cross sections, and much-needed improvements in the treatmentof convection will probably lead to even better agreement with observations. However, muchfundamental work remains to be done as well, such as developing a better understanding ofthe effects of mass loss, rotation, magnetic ﬁelds, and the presence of a close companion.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBalick, B., et al., “The Shaping of Planetary Nebulae,”Sky and Telescope, February 1987.Harpaz, Amos, “The Formation of a Planetary Nebula,”The Physics Teacher, May 1991.Kwok, Sun,Cosmic Butterﬂies: The Colorful Mysteries of Planetary Nebulae, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 2001.The Space Telescope Science Institute,http://www.stsci.eduTechnicalAller, Lawrence H.,Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1991.Ashman, Keith M., and Zepf, Stephen E.,Globular Cluster Systems, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, 1998.Busso, M., Gallino, R., and Wasserburg, G. J., “Nucleosynthesis inAsymptotic Giant BranchStars: Relevance for Galactic Enrichment and Solar System Formation,”Annual Reviewof Astronomy and Astrophysics,37, 239, 1999.Carney, Bruce W., and Harris, William E.,Star Clusters, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001.Hansen, Carl J., Kawaler, Steven D., and Trimble, VirginiaStellar Interiors: Physical Prin-ciples, Structure, and Evolution, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2004.Herwig, Falk, “Evolution of Asymptotic Giant Branch Stars,”Annual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics,43, 435, 2005.Iben, Icko Jr., “Stellar Evolution Within and Off the Main Sequence,”Annual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics,5, 571, 1967.Iben, Icko Jr., and Renzini, Alvio, “Asymptotic Giant Branch Evolution and Beyond,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,21, 271, 1983.Kippenhahn, Rudolf, and Weigert, Alfred,Stellar Structure and Evolution, Springer-Verlag,Berlin, 1990.Kwok, Sun,The Origin and Evolution of Planetary Nebulae, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2000.Padmanabhan, T.,Theoretical Astrophysics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 535>>>

Prialnik, Dina,An Introduction to the Theory of Stellar Structure and Evolution, CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 2000.Schaller, G., et al., “New grids of stellar models from 0.8 to 120 solar masses atZ=0.020andZ=0.001,”Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series,96, 269, 1992.Willson, Lee Anne, “Mass Loss from Cool Stars: Impact on the Evolution of Stars andStellar Populations,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,38, 573, 2000.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution


<<<PAGE 536>>>

PROBLEM SET1 (a)For a 5 M⊙star, use the data in Table 1 associated with Fig. 1 to construct a tablethat expresses the evolutionary times between points 2 and 3, points 3 and 4, and so on,as a percentage of the lifetime of the star on the main sequence between points 1 and 2.Main Sequence andPost-Main-SequenceStellar Evolution
TABLE 1The elapsed times since reaching the zero-age main sequence to theindicated points in Fig. 1, measured in millions of years (Myr). (Data from Schalleret al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96, 269, 1992.)Initial Mass12345(M⊙) 6 7 8 9 1025 0 6.33044 6.40774 6.41337 6.437676.51783 7.04971 7.059115 0 11.4099 11.5842 11.5986 11.611811.6135 11.6991 12.755412 0 15.7149 16.0176 16.0337 16.055516.1150 16.4230 16.7120 17.5847 17.67499 0 25.9376 26.3886 26.4198 26.458026.5019 27.6446 28.1330 28.9618 29.22947 0 42.4607 43.1880 43.2291 43.338843.4304 45.3175 46.1810 47.9727 48.39165 0 92.9357 94.4591 94.5735 94.921895.2108 99.3835 100.888 107.208 108.4544 0 162.043 164.734 164.916 165.701166.362 172.38 185.435 192.198 194.2843 0 346.240 352.503 352.792 355.018357.310 366.880 420.502 440.5362.5 0 574.337 584.916 586.165 589.786595.476 607.356 710.235 757.0562 0 1094.08 1115.94 1117.74 1129.121148.10 1160.96 1379.94 1411.251.5 0 2632.52 2690.39 2699.52 2756.732910.761.25 0 4703.20 4910.11 4933.83 5114.835588.921 0 7048.40 9844.57 11386.0 11635.812269.80.8 0 18828.9 25027.9From Chapter 13 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,

<<<PAGE 537>>>

12213455786695891057966764231
43584422331125.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 M1221345578669589101057966764231
435844223311
–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
4.7 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.525.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 MLog10 (L/L  )Log10 (L/L  )
Log10 Te (K)FIGURE 1Main-sequenceandpost-main-sequenceevolutionarytracksofstarswithaninitialcompositionofX=0.68,Y=0.30,andZ=0.02.Thelocationofthepresent-daySunis depicted by the solar symbol (⊙) between points 1 and 2 on the 1 M⊙track. The elapsed times topoints indicated on the diagram are given in Table 1. To enhance readability, only the points onthe evolutionary tracks for 0.8, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 5.0, and 12.0M⊙are labeled. The model calculationsinclude mass loss and convective overshooting. The diagonal line connecting the locus of points 1is the zero-age main sequence. For complete, and annotated, evolutionary tracks of 1 M⊙and 5 M⊙stars,respectively. (Data from Schaller et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96,269, 1992.)(b)How long does it takea5M⊙star to cross the Hertzsprung gap relative to its main-sequencelifetime?(c)How long does the 5 M⊙star spend on the blueward portion of the horizontal branchrelative to its main-sequence lifetime?(d)How long does the 5 M⊙star spend on the redward portion of the horizontal branch relativeto its main-sequence lifetime?Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 538>>>

2Estimate the Kelvin–Helmholtz timescale fora5M⊙star on the subgiant branch and compareyour result with the amount of time the star spends between points 4 and 5 in Fig. 1.
12213455786695891057966764231
43584422331125.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 M1221345578669589101057966764231
435844223311
–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
4.7 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.525.0 M15.0 M12.0 M9.0 M7.0 M5.0 M4.0 M3.0 M2.5 M2.0 M1.5 M1.25 M1.0 M0.8 MLog10 (L/L  )Log10 (L/L  )
Log10 Te (K)FIGURE 1Main-sequenceandpost-main-sequenceevolutionarytracksofstarswithanis depicted by the solar symbol (⊙) between points 1 and 2 on the 1 M⊙track. The elapsed times topoints indicated on the diagram are given in Table 1. To enhance readability, only the points onthe evolutionary tracks for 0.8, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 5.0, and 12.0M⊙are labeled. The model calculationsinclude mass loss and convective overshooting. The diagonal line connecting the locus of points 1is the zero-age main sequence. For complete, and annotated, evolutionary tracks of 1 M⊙and 5 M⊙stars,respectively. (Data from Schaller et al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96,269, 1992.)3 (a)Beginning with Eq. ( 7), show that the radius of the isothermal core for which the gaspressure is a maximum is given by Eq. ( 8). Recall that this solution assumes that thegas in the core is ideal and monatomic.(b)From your results in part (a), show that the maximum pressure at the surface of theisothermal core is given by Eq. ( 9).Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set
initialcompositionofX=0.68,Y=0.30,andZ=0.02.Thelocationofthepresent-daySun


<<<PAGE 539>>>

Pic=34πR3ic/parenleftbiggMickTicµicmH−15GM2icRic/parenrightbigg(7)Ric=25GMicµicmHkTic(8)Pic,max=37564π1G3M2ic/parenleftbiggkTicµicmH/parenrightbigg4(9)4During the ﬁrst dredge-up phase ofa5M⊙star, would you expect the composition ratioX′13/X12to increase or decrease? Explain your reasoning.Hint:You may ﬁnd Fig. 6 helpful.
5Use the below equation to show that the ignition of the triple alpha process at the tip of the8K.red giant branch ought to occur at more than 10Tquantum=Z21Z22e4µm12π2ϵ20h2k
0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0Mass fractionX12X16XHX14X3X12X3X4X12X'13X14X4X14X16
FIGURE 6The chemical composition as a function of interior mass fraction fora5M⊙starduring the phase of overall contraction, following the main-sequence phase of core hydrogen burning.The maximum mass fractions of the indicated species areXH=0.708,X3=1.296×10−4(32He),X4=0.9762 (42He),X12=3.61×10−3(126C),X′13=3.61×10−3(136C),X14=0.0145 (147N), andX16=0.01080 (168O). (Figure adapted from Iben,Ap. J.,143, 483, 1966.)
6In an attempt to identify the important components of AGB mass loss, various researchers haveproposed parameterizations of the mass loss rate that are based on ﬁtting observed rates for aspeciﬁed set of stars with some general equation that includes measurable quantities associatedwith the stars in the sample. One of the most popular, developed by D. Reimers, is given by˙M=−4×10−13ηLgRM⊙yr−1(13)Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set.
.
.,

<<<PAGE 540>>>

whereL,g, andRare the luminosity, surface gravity, and radius of the star, respectively (all insolar units;g⊙=274 m s−2).ηis afree parameterwhose value is expected to be near unity.Note that the minus sign has been explicitly included here, indicating that the mass of the staris decreasing.(a)Explain qualitatively whyL,g, andRenter Eq. (13) in the way they do.(b)Estimate the mass loss rate ofa1M⊙AGB star that has a luminosity of 7000 L⊙and atemperature of 3000 K.7 (a)Show that the Reimers mass loss rate, given by Eq. (13) in Problem 6, can also bewritten in the form˙M=−4×10−13ηLRMM⊙yr−1,whereL,R, andMare all in solar units.(b)Assuming (incorrectly) thatL,R, andηdo not change with time, derive an expression forthe mass of the star as a function of time. LetM=M0when the mass loss phase begins.(c)UsingL=7000 L⊙,R=310 R⊙,M0=1M⊙, andη=1, make a graph of the star’smass as a function of time.(d)How long would it take for a star with an initial mass of 1 M⊙to be reduced to the massof the degenerate carbon–oxygen core (0.6M⊙)?8The Helix nebula is a planetary nebula with an angular diameter of 16′that is located approx-imately 213 pc from Earth.(a)Calculate the diameter of the nebula.(b)Assuming that the nebula is expanding away from the central star at a constant velocity of20 km s−1, estimate its age.9An old version of stellar evolution, popular at the beginning of the twentieth century, maintainedthat stars begin their lives as large, cool spheres of gas, like the giant stars on the H–R diagram.They then contract and heat up under the pull of their own gravity to become hot, bright blueO stars. For the remainder of their lives they lose energy, becoming dimmer and redder withage. As they slowly move down the main sequence, they eventually end up as cool, dim redM stars. Explain how observations of stellar clusters, plotted on an H–R diagram, contradictthis idea.10 (a)Using data available in the tables below, compare the pre-main sequence evolutionarytime of a 0.8M⊙star with the lifetime on the main sequence for a 15 M⊙star. How doesthis information help to explain the appearance of a color–magnitude diagram such asFig. 18?Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set
(13)
TABLEPre-main-sequence contraction times for the classical models presented inFig.11.(DatafromBernasconiandMaeder,Astron. Astrophys.,307, 829, 1996.)Initial Mass (M⊙) Contraction Time (Myr)600.0282250.0708150.11790.28851.1537.24223.41.535.4138.90.868.4˙M=−4×10−13ηLRMM⊙yr−1,(13)


<<<PAGE 541>>>

The elapsed times since reaching the zero-age main sequence to theindicated points in Fig. 1, measured in millions of years (Myr). (Data from Schalleret al.,Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.,96, 269, 1992.)Initial Mass12345(M⊙) 6 7 8 9 1025 0 6.33044 6.40774 6.41337 6.437676.51783 7.04971 7.059115 0 11.4099 11.5842 11.5986 11.611811.6135 11.6991 12.755412 0 15.7149 16.0176 16.0337 16.055516.1150 16.4230 16.7120 17.5847 17.67499 0 25.9376 26.3886 26.4198 26.458026.5019 27.6446 28.1330 28.9618 29.22947 0 42.4607 43.1880 43.2291 43.338843.4304 45.3175 46.1810 47.9727 48.39165 0 92.9357 94.4591 94.5735 94.921895.2108 99.3835 100.888 107.208 108.4544 0 162.043 164.734 164.916 165.701166.362 172.38 185.435 192.198 194.2843 0 346.240 352.503 352.792 355.018357.310 366.880 420.502 440.5362.5 0 574.337 584.916 586.165 589.786595.476 607.356 710.235 757.0562 0 1094.08 1115.94 1117.74 1129.121148.10 1160.96 1379.94 1411.251.5 0 2632.52 2690.39 2699.52 2756.732910.761.25 0 4703.20 4910.11 4933.83 5114.835588.921 0 7048.40 9844.57 11386.0 11635.812269.80.8 0 18828.9 25027.9Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem SetTABLE


<<<PAGE 542>>>

6543210–1–2–3–4–5–6–7–8MV
–0.8–0.6–0.4–0.200.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.4B – VFIGURE 18A color–magnitude diagram for the young double galactic cluster, h andχPersei.Note that the most massive stars are pulling away from the main sequence while the low-mass stars inthe middle of the diagram are still contracting onto the main sequence. Red giants are present in theupper right-hand corner of the diagram. (Figure adapted from Wildey,Ap. J. Suppl.,8, 439, 1964.)(b)Estimate the mass of a star that would have a main-sequence lifetime comparable to thepre-main-sequence evolutionary time of a 0.8M⊙star.11 (a)The age of the universe is 13.7 Gyr. Compare this value to the main-sequence lifetime ofa0.8M⊙star. Why isn’t it useful to compute the detailed post-main-sequence evolutionof stars with masses much lower than the mass of the Sun?(b)Would you expect to ﬁnd globular clusters with main-sequence turn-off points below0.8M⊙? Explain your answer.12 (a)Show that log10(LV/LB)+constant is, to within a multiplicative constant, equivalent tothe color index,B−V.(b)Estimating best-ﬁt curves through the data given in Fig. 20, trace the two color–magnitude diagrams, placing them on a single graph. Note that the abscissas have beennormalized so that the lowest-luminosity stars of both clusters are located at the samepositions on their respective diagrams.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 543>>>

Log10 LV (Solar luminosities)
–2–10123
–2–10123Log10 LV (Solar luminosities)–0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8–0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8(a)Log10(LV/LB) + constant(b)Log10(LV/LB) + constantFIGURE 20(a) A color–magnitude diagram for 47 Tuc, a relatively metal-rich globular clusterwithZ/Z⊙=0.17. (Data from Hesser et al.,Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac.,99, 739, 1987; ﬁgure courtesyof William E. Harris.) (b) A color–magnitude diagram for M15, a metal-poor globular cluster withZ/Z⊙=0.0060. (Data from Durrell and Harris,Astron. J.,105, 1420, 1993; ﬁgure courtesy of WilliamE. Harris.)13Using the technique of main-sequence ﬁtting, estimate the distance to M3; refer to Figs. 17and 19.Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set
13141516171819202122V
–0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6B – VP-AGBAGBRGB
SGBBSTOMSHBM3
FIGURE 17A color–magnitude diagram for M3, an old globular cluster. The major phases ofstellar evolution are indicated: main sequence (MS); blue stragglers (BS); the main-sequence turn-offpoint (TO); the subgiant branch of hydrogen shell burning (SGB); the red giant branch along theHayashi track, prior to helium core burning (RGB); the horizontal branch during helium core burning(HB); the asymptotic giant branch during hydrogen and helium shell burning (AGB); post-AGBevolution proceeding to the white dwarf phase (P-AGB). (Figure adapted from Renzini and FusiPecci,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,26, 199, 1988. Reproduced with permission from theAnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 26, ©1988 by Annual Reviews Inc.)(c)Given that 47 Tuc is relatively metal-rich for a globular cluster (Z/Z⊙=0.17, whereZ⊙is the solar value) and M15 is metal-poor (Z/Z⊙=0.0060), explain the differencein colors between the two clusters.


<<<PAGE 544>>>

Main Sequence and Post-Main-Sequence Stellar Evolution: Problem Set
86420–2–4–6–8MVPleiadesM41M11M67M67M41M11ComaHyadesHyadesSunPraesepeNGC 752NGC 2362h + /H9273 Perseih + /H9273 Persei
–0.4 0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0B – V2.9 × 10107.1 × 1091.9 × 1091.6 × 1082.8 × 1076.5 × 1062.0 × 1061.0 × 106Cluster age at turn-off point (yr)FIGURE 19A composite color–magnitude diagram for a set of Population I galactic clusters.The absolute visual magnitude is indicated on the left-hand vertical axis, and the age of the cluster,based on the location of its turn-off point, is labeled on the right-hand side. (Figure adapted from anoriginal diagram by A. Sandage.)


<<<PAGE 545>>>



<<<PAGE 546>>>

Stellar Pulsation
1 Observations of Pulsating Stars
2 The Physics of Stellar Pulsation
3 Modeling Stellar Pulsation
4 Nonradial Stellar Pulsation
5 Helioseismology and Asteroseismology
1 OBSERVATIONS OF PULSATING STARS
)N !UGUST OF  A ,UTHERAN PASTOR AND AMATEUR ASTRONOMER NAMED $AVID &ABRICIUS
n	OBSERVEDTHESTAR o#ETI!SHEWATCHEDOVERAPERIODOFMONTHSTHEBRIGHTNESS
OF THIS SECONDMAGNITUDE STAR IN THE CONSTELLATION #ETUS THE 3EA -ONSTER	 SLOWLY FADED
"Y /CTOBER THE STAR HAD VANISHED FROM THE SKY 3EVERAL MORE MONTHS PASSED AS THE STAR
EVENTUALLYRECOVEREDANDRETURNEDTOITSFORMERBRILLIANCE)NHONOROFTHISMIRACULOUSEVENT
o#ETI WAS NAMED -IRA MEANING hWONDERFULv
-IRACONTINUEDITSRHYTHMICDIMMINGANDBRIGHTENINGANDBYTHEMONTHPERIOD
OF ITS CYCLE WAS ESTABLISHED 4HE REGULAR CHANGES IN BRIGHTNESS WERE MISTAKENLY ATTRIBUTED
TO DARK hBLOTCHESv ON THE SURFACE OF A ROTATING STAR 3UPPOSEDLY -IRA WOULD APPEAR FAINTER
WHEN THESE DARK AREAS WERE TURNED TOWARD %ARTH
&IGURE  SHOWS THE light curve OF -IRA FOR A YEAR INTERVAL 4ODAY ASTRONOMERS
RECOGNIZE THAT THE CHANGES IN -IRAS BRIGHTNESS ARE DUE NOT TO DARK SPOTS ON ITS SURFACE BUT
TOTHEFACTTHAT-IRAISA pulsating star ASTARTHATDIMSANDBRIGHTENSASITSSURFACEEXPANDS
ANDCONTRACTS-IRAISTHEPROTOTYPEOFTHE long-period variables STARSTHATHAVESOMEWHAT
IRREGULAR LIGHT CURVES AND PULSATION PERIODS BETWEEN  AND  DAYS
.EARLYTWOCENTURIESELAPSEDBEFOREANOTHERPULSATINGSTARWASDISCOVERED)N*OHN
'OODRICKE n	 OF 9ORK %NGLAND FOUND THAT THE BRIGHTNESS OF THE STAR δ#EPHEI
VARIESREGULARLYWITHAPERIODOFDAYSHOURSMINUTES4HISDISCOVERYCOST'OODRICKE
HIS LIFE HE CONTRACTED PNEUMONIA WHILE OBSERVING δ#EPHEI AND DIED AT THE AGE OF 4HE
LIGHTCURVEOF δ#EPHEISHOWNIN&IG ISLESSSPECTACULARTHANTHATOF o#ETI)TVARIESBY
LESS THAN ONE MAGNITUDE IN BRIGHTNESS AND NEVER FADES FROM VIEW .EVERTHELESS PULSATING
STARS SIMILAR TO δ#EPHEI CALLED classical Cepheids  ARE VITALLY IMPORTANT TO ASTRONOMY
The Period–Luminosity Relation
"Y  NEARLY  PULSATING STARS HAD BEEN CATALOGED BY ASTRONOMERS /NE WOMAN
(ENRIETTA3WAN,EAVITTnSEE&IG 	DISCOVEREDMORETHANOFTHESESTARS
&ROM #HAPTER   OF  An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics 3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 
0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBY  


<<<PAGE 547>>>

V
V        
       *ULIAN $AY n FIGURE 14HELIGHTCURVEOF-IRAFROM3EPTEMBER*$	THROUGH3EPTEMBER 2ECALL THAT MAGNITUDES DIMMER THAN  ARE UNDETECTABLE TO THE UNAIDED EYE 7E ACKNOWLEDGEWITH THANKS THE VARIABLESTAR OBSERVATIONS FROM THE !!63/ )NTERNATIONAL $ATABASE CONTRIBUTED BYOBSERVERS WORLDWIDE	WHILE WORKING AS A hCOMPUTERv FOR %DWARD #HARLES 0ICKERING n	 AT (ARVARD5NIVERSITY(ERTEDIOUSTASKWASTOCOMPARETWOPHOTOGRAPHSOFTHESAMElELDOFSTARSTAKENAT DIFFERENT TIMES AND DETECT ANY STAR THAT VARIED IN BRIGHTNESS %VENTUALLY SHE DISCOVERED CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS WITH PERIODS BETWEEN  AND  DAYS MOST OF THEM LOCATED IN THE3MALL -AGELLANIC #LOUD 3-#	 ,EAVITT TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THIS OPPORTUNITY TO INVESTIGATETHENATUREOFTHECLASSICAL#EPHEIDSINTHE3-#.OTICINGTHATTHEMORELUMINOUS#EPHEIDSTOOK LONGER TO GO THROUGH THEIR PULSATION CYCLES SHE PLOTTED THE APPARENT MAGNITUDES OFTHESE 3-# STARS AGAINST THEIR PULSATION PERIODS 4HE RESULTING GRAPH SHOWN IN &IG DEMONSTRATEDTHATTHEAPPARENTMAGNITUDESOFCLASSICAL#EPHEIDSARECLOSELYCORRELATEDWITHTHEIR PERIODS WITH AN UNCERTAINTY OF ONLYλDelta1m≈±. AT A GIVEN PERIODStellar Pulsation
"ECAUSE ALL OF THE STARS IN THE 3MALL -AGELLANIC #LOUD ARE ROUGHLY THE SAME DISTANCE FROM US ABOUT  KPC	 THE DIFFERENCES IN THEIR APPARENT MAGNITUDES MUST BE THE SAME AS THE DIFFERENCES IN THEIR ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDES 4HUS THE


<<<PAGE 548>>>

FIGURE 24HELIGHTCURVEOFδ#EPHEI)TSPULSATIONPERIODISDAYS&IGUREFROM3TEBBINS*OELAp. J.27  	
FIGURE 3(ENRIETTA 3WAN ,EAVITT n	 #OURTESY OF (ARVARD #OLLEGE /BSERVATORY	OBSERVED DIFFERENCES IN THESE STARSAPPARENT BRIGHTNESSES MUST REmECT INTRINSIC DIFFERENCESINTHEIRLUMINOSITIES!STRONOMERSWEREEXCITEDATTHEPROSPECTOFDETERMININGTHEABSOLUTEMAGNITUDEORLUMINOSITYOFADISTANT#EPHEIDSIMPLYBYTIMINGITSPULSATIONBECAUSEKNOWINGBOTHASTARSAPPARENTANDABSOLUTEMAGNITUDESALLOWSTHEDISTANCEOFTHESTARTOBEEASILYStellar Pulsation
DETERMINED FROM THE DISTANCE MODULUS 4HIS WOULD PERMIT THE MEASUREMENT OF LARGE DISTANCES IN THE UNIVERSE FAR BEYOND THE LIMITED RANGE OF PARALLAX TECHNIQUES 4HE ONLY STUMBLING BLOCK WAS THE CALIBRATION OF ,EAVITTS RELATION !N INDEPENDENT DISTANCE TO A


<<<PAGE 549>>>

FIGURE 4#LASSICAL#EPHEIDSINTHE3MALL-AGELLANIC#LOUDWITHTHEPERIODINUNITSOFDAYS&IGURE FROM 3HAPLEYGalaxies (ARVARD 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE -! 	SINGLE#EPHEIDHADTOBEOBTAINEDTOMEASUREITSABSOLUTEMAGNITUDEANDLUMINOSITY/NCETHIS DIFlCULT CHORE WAS ACCOMPLISHED THE RESULTINGperiod–luminosity relationCOULD BEUSED TO MEASURE THE DISTANCE TO ANY #EPHEID4HE NEAREST CLASSICAL #EPHEID IS 0OLARIS SOME  PC AWAY )N THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY THIS DISTANCE WAS TOO GREAT TO BE RELIABLY MEASURED BY STELLAR PARALLAX (OWEVER IN %JNAR (ERTZSPRUNG SUCCEEDED IN USING THE LONGER BASELINE PROVIDED BY THE 3UNSMOTION THROUGH SPACE TOGETHER WITH STATISTICAL METHODS TO lND THE DISTANCES TO #EPHEIDSHAVINGASPECIlEDPERIOD4HEMEASUREMENTOFTHEABSOLUTEMAGNITUDEOFA#EPHEIDISALSOCOMPLICATED BY THE DIMMING EFFECT OF INTERSTELLAR EXTINCTION4HE CALIBRATED PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION DEPICTED IN &IG  FOR THEVBAND IS DESCRIBED BYM⟨V⟩=−.LOGPD−.,	WHEREM⟨V⟩IS THE AVERAGE ABSOLUTEVMAGNITUDE ANDPDIS THE PULSATION PERIOD IN UNITS OFDAYS )N TERMS OF THE AVERAGE LUMINOSITY OF THE STAR THE RELATION IS GIVEN BYLOG⟨L⟩L⊙=.LOGPD+..	!STRONOMERS CAN SUBSTANTIALLY DECREASE THE SCATTER IN THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATIONBY MAKING OBSERVATIONS IN INFRARED WAVELENGTHS WHERE INTERSTELLAR EXTINCTION IS LESS OF APROBLEM /NE SUCH lT MADE USING MAGNITUDES MEASURED IN THE INFRAREDHBAND CENTEREDAT .µM	 IS ILLUSTRATED IN &IG A	 4HE DATA ARE FOR  #EPHEIDS IN THE ,ARGE	Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 550>>>

nnnnnnM/H20883V/H20884
        ,OG P'ALACTIC CLUSTER #EPHEIDS,-# ;m n M	  =3-# ;m n M	  =-   ;m n M	  =  ;m n M	  =H  /H9273 0ERSEUS ASSOCIATION
FIGURE 54HEPERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATIONFORCLASSICAL#EPHEIDS&IGUREADAPTEDFROM3ANDAGEAND4AMMANNAp. J.151  	-AGELLANIC #LOUD4HE INFRARED PERIODnLUMINOSITY lT IS GIVEN BYH=−.LOGPD+..	4HESCATTERCANBEFURTHERREDUCEDBYADDINGACOLORTERMTOTHElT5SINGTHEINFRAREDCOLORINDEXJ−Ks &IG B	 SHOWS THAT THE lT IS INDEED SOMEWHAT TIGHTER JANDKsARECENTERED AT .µM AND .µM RESPECTIVELY	 4HE lT FOR THISperiod–luminosity–color relationIS GIVEN BYH=−.LOGPD+.⟨J−Ks⟩+..	#LASSICAL #EPHEIDS PROVIDE ASTRONOMY WITH ITS THIRD DIMENSION AND SUPPLY THE FOUNDATIONFORTHEMEASUREMENTOFEXTRAGALACTICDISTANCES"ECAUSE#EPHEIDSARESUPERGIANTSTARSLUMINOSITYCLASS)B	ABOUTlFTYTIMESTHE3UNSSIZEANDTHOUSANDSOFTIMESMORELUMINOUSTHEY CAN BE SEEN OVER INTERGALACTIC DISTANCES 4HEY SERVE AS hSTANDARD CANDLESv BEACONSSCATTERED THROUGHOUT THE NIGHT SKY THAT SERVE AS MILEPOSTS FOR ASTRONOMICAL SURVEYS OF THEUNIVERSEThe Pulsation Hypothesis for Brightness Variations4HE IMPORTANT USE OF #EPHEIDS AS COSMIC DISTANCE INDICATORS DOES NOT REQUIRE AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE PHYSICAL REASONS FOR THEIR LIGHT VARIATIONS )N FACT THE OBSERVED CHANGES INBRIGHTNESSWEREONCETHOUGHTTOBECAUSEDBYTIDALEFFECTSINTHEATMOSPHERESOFBINARYSTARS(OWEVER IN  THE!MERICAN ASTRONOMER (ARLOW 3HAPLEY n	 ARGUED THAT THEBINARY THEORY WAS FATALLY mAWED BECAUSE THE SIZE OF THE STAR WOULD EXCEED THE SIZE OF THEStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 551>>>

,OG P DAYS	,OG P DAYS	H MAG	
H n cJ n Ks	 MAG	
A	B	   
   
FIGURE 6A	4HEINFRAREDPERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATIONFOR#EPHEIDSINTHE,ARGE-AGELLANIC#LOUD4HEINFRAREDHBANDWASUSEDFORTHEOBSERVATIONS4HEOPENCIRCLESREPRESENTFOUR#EPHEIDSTHATWEREEXCLUDEDFROMTHELEASTSQUARESLINEARlTB	4HEPERIODnLUMINOSITYnCOLORRELATIONFORTHESAME #EPHEIDS $ATA FROM 0ERSSON 3 % ET ALAstron. J.128  	ORBITFORSOMEVARIABLES3HAPLEYADVANCEDANALTERNATIVEIDEATHATTHEOBSERVEDVARIATIONSIN THE BRIGHTNESS AND TEMPERATURE OF CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS WERE CAUSED BY THE RADIAL PULSATIONOFSINGLESTARS(EPROPOSEDTHATTHESESTARSWERERHYTHMICALLYhBREATHINGvINANDOUTBECOMINGALTERNATELYBRIGHTERANDDIMMERINTHEPROCESS&OURYEARSLATER3IR!RTHUR3TANLEY %DDINGTON PROVIDED A lRM THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PULSATION HYPOTHESIS WHICHRECEIVEDSTRONGSUPPORTFROMTHEOBSERVEDCORRELATIONSAMONGTHEVARIATIONSINBRIGHTNESSTEMPERATURE AND SURFACE VELOCITY THROUGHOUT THE PULSATION CYCLE &IGURE  SHOWS THEMEASURED CHANGES IN MAGNITUDE TEMPERATURE RADIUS AND SURFACE VELOCITY FORδ#EPHEI4HE CHANGE IN BRIGHTNESS IS PRIMARILY DUE TO THE ROUGHLY  + VARIATION INδ#EPHEISSURFACE TEMPERATURE THE ACCOMPANYING CHANGE IN SIZE MAKES A LESSER CONTRIBUTION TO THELUMINOSITY!LTHOUGHTHETOTALEXCURSIONOFδ#EPHEISSURFACEFROMITSEQUILIBRIUMRADIUSISLARGEINABSOLUTETERMSABITMORETHANTHEDIAMETEROFTHE3UN	ITISSTILLONLYABOUTTOOFTHESIZEOFTHISSUPERGIANTSTAR4HESPECTRALTYPEOFδ#EPHEICHANGESCONTINUOUSLYTHROUGHOUTTHECYCLEVARYINGBETWEEN&HOTTEST	AND'COOLEST	!CAREFULEXAMINATIONOF &IG  REVEALS THAT THE MAGNITUDE AND SURFACE VELOCITY CURVES ARE NEARLY IDENTICAL INSHAPE4HUSTHESTARISBRIGHTESTWHENITSSURFACEISEXPANDINGOUTWARDMOSTRAPIDLYafterIT HAS PASSED THROUGH ITS MINIMUM RADIUS ,ATER IN THIS CHAPTER WE WILL SEE THAT THE EXPLANATION OF THISphase lagOF MAXIMUM LUMINOSITY BEHIND MINIMUM RADIUS HAS ITS ORIGIN INTHE MECHANISM THAT MAINTAINS THE OSCILLATIONSThe Instability Strip4HE-ILKY7AY'ALAXYISESTIMATEDTOCONTAINSEVERALMILLIONPULSATINGSTARS#ONSIDERINGTHAT OUR 'ALAXY CONSISTS OF SEVERAL HUNDRED BILLION STARS THIS IMPLIES THAT STELLAR PULSATIONStellar Pulsation
MUST BE A TRANSIENT PHENOMENON 4HE POSITIONS OF THE PULSATING VARIABLES ON THE (n2 DIAGRAM SEE &IG  	 CONﬁRM THIS CONCLUSION 2ATHER THAN BEING LOCATED ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE WHERE STARS SPEND MOST OF THEIR LIVES THE MAJORITY OF PULSATING STARS OCCUPY

<<<PAGE 552>>>

nnnnnnnnnnnnnnMBOL%FFECTIVE TEMPERATURE +	r n R  M	3URFACE VELOCITY KM Sn	
          tPFIGURE 7/BSERVED PULSATION PROPERTIES OFδ#EPHEI A TYPICAL CLASSICAL #EPHEID $ATA FROM3CHWARZSCHILDHarvard College Observatory Circular431 	ANARROWABOUTn+WIDE	NEARLYVERTICALinstability stripONTHERIGHTHANDSIDEOF THE (n2 DIAGRAM 4HEORETICAL EVOLUTIONARY TRACKS FOR STARS OF VARIOUS MASSES ARE ALSOSHOWNIN&IG !SSTARSEVOLVEALONGTHESETRACKSTHEYBEGINTOPULSATEASTHEYENTERTHEINSTABILITYSTRIPANDCEASETHEIROSCILLATIONSUPONLEAVING/FCOURSEEVOLUTIONARYTIMESCALESARE FAR TOO LONG FOR US TO OBSERVE THE ONSET AND CESSATION OF A SINGLE STARS OSCILLATIONS BUTSEVERAL STARS HAVE BEEN CAUGHT IN THE lNAL PHASE OF THEIR PULSATIONAL HISTORYSome Classes of Pulsating Stars!STRONOMERS HAVE DIVIDED PULSATING STARS INTO SEVERAL CLASSES 3OME OF THESE ARE LISTEDIN 4ABLE  4HE 7 6IRGINIS STARS ARE METALDElCIENT 0OPULATION ))	 #EPHEIDS AND AREStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 553>>>

nn
             - - - - - - - - - - - - - -,06S#EPHEIDS
 22 ,YRAES/H9252 #EPHEIDS
/H9254 3CUTIS,OG LL  	
,OG Te	FIGURE 80ULSATINGSTARSONTHE(n2DIAGRAM$ATAFORTHEEVOLUTIONARYTRACKSFROM3CHALLERET ALAstron. Astrophys. Suppl.96  	ABOUTFOURTIMESLESSLUMINOUSTHANCLASSICAL#EPHEIDSWITHTHESAMEPERIOD4HEIRPERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATIONISTHUSLOWERTHANANDPARALLELTOTHEONESHOWNFORTHECLASSICAL#EPHEIDSIN&IG 22,YRAESTARSALSO0OPULATION))AREHORIZONTALBRANCHSTARSFOUNDINGLOBULARCLUSTERS "ECAUSE ALL 22 ,YRAE STARS HAVE NEARLY THE SAME LUMINOSITY THEY ARE ALSO USEFULYARDSTICKSFORDISTANCEMEASUREMENTS4HEδ3CUTIVARIABLESAREEVOLVED&STARSFOUNDNEARTHEMAINSEQUENCEOFTHE(n2DIAGRAM4HEYEXHIBITBOTHRADIALANDNONRADIALOSCILLATIONSTHE LATTER IS A MORE COMPLICATED MOTION THAT WILL BE DISCUSSED IN 3ECTION  "ELOW THEMAIN SEQUENCE NOT SHOWN IN &IG 	 ARE THE PULSATING WHITEDWARFS CALLED :: #ETI STARS!LL OF THE TYPES OF STARS LISTED THUS FAR LIE WITHIN THE INSTABILITY STRIP AND THEY SHARE ACOMMON MECHANISM THAT DRIVES THE OSCILLATIONS 4HE LONGPERIOD VARIABLES SUCH AS -IRAStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 554>>>

TABLE 10ULSATING 3TARS !DOPTED FROM #OXThe Theory of Stellar Pulsation 0RINCETON5NIVERSITY 0RESS 0RINCETON .* 	2ANGE OF 0OPULATION 2ADIAL OR4YPE0ERIODS 4YPE .ONRADIAL,ONG0ERIOD6ARIABLES n DAYS ))) 2#LASSICAL #EPHEIDS n DAYS)276IRGINIS STARS n DAYS)) 222 ,YRAE STARS n HOURS )) 2δ3CUTI STARSn HOURS) 2.2β#EPHEI STARSn HOURS) 2.2:: #ETI STARS n SECONDS ) .2AND THEβ#EPHEI STARS ARE LOCATED OUTSIDE OF THE INSTABILITY STRIP OCCUPIED BY THE CLASSICAL#EPHEIDSAND22,YRAESTARS4HEIRUNUSUALPOSITIONSONTHE(n2DIAGRAMWILLBEDISCUSSEDIN THE NEXT SECTION2THE PHYSICS OF STELLAR PULSATION'EOLOGISTS AND GEOPHYSICISTS HAVE OBTAINED A WEALTH OF INFORMATION ABOUT %ARTHS INTERIORFROMTHEIRSTUDYOFTHESEISMICWAVESPRODUCEDBYEARTHQUAKESANDOTHERSOURCES)NTHESAMEMANNER ASTROPHYSICISTS MODEL THE PULSATIONAL PROPERTIES OF STARS TO UNDERSTAND BETTER THEIRINTERNAL STRUCTURE "Y NUMERICALLY CALCULATING AN EVOLUTIONARY SEQUENCE OF STELLAR MODELSAND THEN COMPARING THE PULSATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS PERIODS AMPLITUDES AND DETAILS OF THELIGHT AND RADIAL VELOCITY CURVES	 OF THE MODELS WITH THOSE ACTUALLY OBSERVED ASTRONOMERSCAN FURTHER TEST THEIR THEORIES OF STELLAR STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION AND OBTAIN A DETAILED VIEWOF THE INTERIOR OF A STARThe Period–Density Relation4HE RADIAL OSCILLATIONS OF A PULSATING STAR ARE THE RESULT OF SOUND WAVES RESONATING IN THESTARS INTERIOR ! ROUGH ESTIMATE OF THE PULSATION PERIODΠ MAY BE EASILY OBTAINED BYCONSIDERING HOW LONG IT WOULD TAKE A SOUND WAVE TO CROSS THE DIAMETER OF A MODEL STAR OFRADIUSRAND CONSTANT DENSITYρ4HE ADIABATIC SOUND SPEED IS GIVEN BYvs=/radicalBiggγPρ.4HROUGHOUT THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSIONΠWILL BE USED TO DESIGNATE THE PULSATION PERIOD SO THAT IT IS NOT CONFUSEDWITHTHEPRESSUREPΠISCOMMONLYUSEDFORTHEPULSATIONPERIODINSTELLARPULSATIONTHEORYSTUDIESTANOTHERSYMBOL COMMONLY USED FOR PERIOD WOULD LEAD TO CONFUSION WITH TEMPERATURE	
Stellar Pulsation
4HE PRESSURE MAY BE FOUND FOR HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM USING THE UNREALISTIC	 ASSUMPTION OF CONSTANT DENSITY 4HUS


<<<PAGE 555>>>

dPdr=−GMrρr=−G/parenleftbigπrρ/parenrightbigρr=−πG ρr.4HIS IS READILY INTEGRATED USING THE BOUNDARY CONDITION THATP= AT THE SURFACE TO OBTAINTHE PRESSURE AS A FUNCTION OFrP (r)=πG ρ/parenleftbigR−r/parenrightbig.	4HUS THE PULSATION PERIOD IS ROUGHLYΠ≈/integraldisplayRdrvs≈/integraldisplayRdr/radicalBigγπG ρ/parenleftbigR−r/parenrightbig,ORΠ≈/radicalBiggπγG ρ.	1UALITATIVELY THIS SHOWS THAT THE PULSATION PERIOD OF A STAR IS INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TOTHE SQUARE ROOT OF ITS MEAN DENSITY 2EFERRING TO &IG  AND 4ABLE  THISperiod–mean density relationEXPLAINS WHY THE PULSATION PERIOD DECREASES AS WE MOVE DOWN THEINSTABILITY STRIP FROM THE VERY TENUOUS SUPERGIANTS TO THE VERY DENSE WHITE DWARFS 4HETIGHTPERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATIONDISCOVEREDBY,EAVITTEXISTSBECAUSETHEINSTABILITYSTRIPISROUGHLYPARALLELTOTHELUMINOSITYAXISOFTHE(n2DIAGRAMTHElNITEWIDTHOFTHEINSTABILITYSTRIPISREmECTEDINTHE±.MAGNITUDEUNCERTAINTYINTHEPERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATION	4HEQUANTITATIVEAGREEMENTOF%Q 	WITHTHEOBSERVEDPERIODSOF#EPHEIDSISNOTTOOBADCONSIDERINGITSCRUDEDERIVATION)FWETAKEM=-⊙ANDR=2⊙FORATYPICAL#EPHEIDTHENΠ≈ DAYS4HIS FALLS NICELY WITHIN THE RANGE OF PERIODS MEASURED FOR THE CLASSICAL#EPHEIDSRadial Modes of Pulsation4HESOUNDWAVESINVOLVEDINTHEradial modesOFSTELLARPULSATIONAREESSENTIALLYstandingwaves SIMILAR TO THE STANDING WAVES THAT OCCUR IN AN ORGAN PIPE THAT IS OPEN AT ONE ENDSEE &IG  "OTH THE STAR AND THE ORGAN PIPE CAN SUSTAIN SEVERAL MODES OF OSCILLATION4HESTANDINGWAVEFOREACHMODEHASAnodeATONEENDTHESTARSCENTERTHEPIPESCLOSEDEND	 WHERE THE GASES DO NOT MOVE AND ANantinodeAT THE OTHER END THE STARS SURFACETHE PIPES OPEN END	 &OR THEfundamental mode THE GASES MOVE IN THE SAME DIRECTION ATEVERY POINT IN THE STAR OR PIPE 4HERE IS A SINGLE NODE BETWEEN THE CENTER AND THE SURFACEFORTHEﬁrst overtoneMODE WITHTHEGASESMOVINGINOPPOSITEDIRECTIONSONEITHERSIDEOF0ULSATING WHITE DWARFS EXHIBIT NONRADIAL OSCILLATIONS AND THEIR PERIODS ARE LONGER THAN PREDICTED BY THE PERIODnMEAN DENSITY RELATION3OME TEXTS USE THE UNFORTUNATE TERMﬁrst harmonicFOR THE lRST OVERTONE
Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 556>>>

LR L L L^ R^ R^ R.ODAL LINE-OTION OF GAS
A	B	C	FIGURE 93TANDING SOUND WAVES IN AN ORGAN PIPE AND IN A STAR FOR A	 THE FUNDAMENTAL MODEB	 THE lRST OVERTONE AND C	 THE SECOND OVERTONE
n/H9254rR - MAINSEQUENCE STAR
          rR&UNDAMENTALST OVERTONEND OVERTONEFIGURE 102ADIALMODESFORAPULSATINGSTAR4HEWAVEFORMFOREACHMODEHASBEENARBITRARILYSCALED SO THATδr/R= AT THE SURFACE OF THE STAR !CTUALLY THE MAXIMUM SURFACE RATIO OFδr/RISAPPROXIMATELY  TO  FOR A CLASSICAL #EPHEIDTHENODEANDTWONODESFORTHEsecond overtoneMODE&IGURE SHOWSTHEFRACTIONALDISPLACEMENTδr/R OF THE STELLAR MATERIAL FROM ITS EQUILIBRIUM POSITION FOR SEVERAL RADIALMODESOFA-⊙MAINSEQUENCESTARMODEL.OTETHATδr/RHASBEENARBITRARILYSCALEDTOUNITY AT THE STELLAR SURFACE&OR RADIAL MODES THE MOTION OF THE STELLAR MATERIAL OCCURS PRIMARILY IN THE SURFACEREGIONSBUTTHEREISSOMEOSCILLATIONDEEPINSIDETHESTAR4HISEFFECTISMOSTPROMINENTFORStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 557>>>

THE FUNDAMENTAL MODE WHERE NONNEGLIGIBLE AMPLITUDES EXIST &OR THE STELLAR MODEL USEDIN &IG  ATr=.Rδr/RIS ABOUT  OF ITS SURFACE VALUE &OR THE lRST OVERTONE ATTHESAMELOCATIONδr/RISLESSTHANOFITSSURFACEVALUEANDISINTHEOPPOSITEDIRECTIONAND FOR THE SECOND OVERTONE THE OSCILLATION IS NEARLY ZERO AMPLITUDE r=.RIS CLOSE TOA NODE FOR THE SECOND OVERTONE	4HE VAST MAJORITY OF THE CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS AND 7 6IRGINIS STARS PULSATE IN THE FUNDAMENTALMODE4HE22,YRAEVARIABLESPULSATEINEITHERTHEFUNDAMENTALORTHElRSTOVERTONEMODEWITHAFEWOSCILLATINGINBOTHMODESSIMULTANEOUSLY4HELONGPERIODVARIABLESSUCHAS -IRA MAY ALSO OSCILLATE IN EITHER THE FUNDAMENTAL MODE OR THE lRST OVERTONE ALTHOUGHTHIS IS STILL NOT ENTIRELY CLEAREddington’s Thermodynamic Heat Engine4O EXPLAIN THE MECHANISM THAT POWERS THESE STANDING SOUND WAVES %DDINGTON PROPOSEDTHATPULSATINGSTARSARETHERMODYNAMICHEATENGINES4HEGASESCOMPRISINGTHELAYERSOFTHESTARDOPd VWORKASTHEYEXPANDANDCONTRACTTHROUGHOUTTHEPULSATIONCYCLE)FTHEINTEGRAL/contintegraltextPd V>FORTHECYCLEALAYERDOESNETPOSITIVEWORKONITSSURROUNDINGSANDCONTRIBUTESTO DRIVING THE OSCILLATIONS IF/contintegraltextPd V< THE NET WORK DONE BY THE LAYER IS NEGATIVE ANDTENDSTODAMPENTHEOSCILLATIONS&IGURES AND SHOWPnVDIAGRAMSFORADRIVINGLAYER AND A DAMPING LAYER RESPECTIVELY IN A NUMERICAL CALCULATION OF THE OSCILLATION OF AN22 ,YRAE STAR )F THE TOTAL WORK FOUND BY ADDING UP THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF ALL THE LAYERS OFTHE STAR	 IS POSITIVE THE OSCILLATIONS WILL GROW IN AMPLITUDE 4HE OSCILLATIONS WILL DECAYIF THE TOTAL WORK IS NEGATIVE 4HESE CHANGES IN THE PULSATION AMPLITUDE CONTINUE UNTIL ANEQUILIBRIUM VALUE IS REACHED WHEN THE TOTAL WORK DONE BY ALL THE LAYERS IS ZERO$RIVING
         3PECIFIC VOLUME  M KGn	0RESSURE  . Mn	

FIGURE 11PnVDIAGRAM FOR A DRIVING LAYER OF AN 22 ,YRAE STAR MODEL 9OU MAY RECALLTHE ANALOGOUS USE OFPnVDIAGRAMS IN DISCUSSING HEAT ENGINES IN INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS COURSES !CLOCKWISE PATH IN APnVDIAGRAM CORRESPONDS WITH NET DRIVINGStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 558>>>

3PECIFIC VOLUME  M KGn	0RESSURE  . Mn	

      $AMPING
FIGURE 12PnVDIAGRAMFORADAMPINGLAYEROFAN22,YRAESTARMODEL!COUNTERCLOCKWISEPATH IN APnVDIAGRAM CORRESPONDS TO NET DAMPING!SFORANYHEATENGINETHENETWORKDONEBYEACHLAYEROFTHESTARDURINGONECYCLEISTHEDIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE HEAT mOWING INTO THE GAS AND THE HEAT LEAVING THE GAS &OR DRIVINGTHEHEATMUSTENTERTHELAYERDURINGTHEHIGHTEMPERATUREPARTOFTHECYCLEANDLEAVEDURINGTHELOWTEMPERATUREPART*USTASTHESPARKPLUGOFANAUTOMOBILEENGINElRESATTHEENDOFTHE COMPRESSION STROKE THE DRIVING LAYERS OF A PULSATING STAR MUST ABSORB HEAT AROUND THETIME OF THEIR MAXIMUM COMPRESSION )N THIS CASE THE MAXIMUM PRESSURE WILL OCCURafterMAXIMUM COMPRESSION AND THE OSCILLATIONS WILL BE AMPLIlEDThe NuclearϵMechanism)N WHAT REGION OF THE STAR CAN THIS DRIVING TAKE PLACE !N OBVIOUS POSSIBILITY WAS lRSTCONSIDERED BY %DDINGTON 7HEN THE CENTER OF THE STAR IS COMPRESSED ITS TEMPERATURE ANDDENSITY RISE INCREASING THE RATE AT WHICH THERMONUCLEAR ENERGY IS GENERATED (OWEVERRECALL FROM &IG  THAT THE DISPLACEMENTδr/RHAS A NODE AT THE CENTER OF THE STAR 4HEPULSATIONAMPLITUDEISVERYSMALLNEARTHECENTER!LTHOUGHTHISENERGYMECHANISMCALLEDTHEϵ-mechanism	DOESINFACTOPERATEINTHECOREOFASTARITISUSUALLYNOTENOUGHTODRIVEϵSTARS WITH MASSES GREATER THAN APPROXIMATELY  -⊙Eddington’s Valve%DDINGTON THEN SUGGESTED AN ALTERNATIVE Avalve mechanism )F A LAYER OF THE STAR BECAMEMORE OPAQUE UPON COMPRESSION IT COULD hDAM UPv THE ENERGY mOWING TOWARD THE SURFACEANDPUSHTHESURFACELAYERSUPWARD4HENASTHISEXPANDINGLAYERBECAMEMORETRANSPARENTTHETRAPPEDHEATCOULDESCAPEANDTHELAYERWOULDFALLBACKDOWNTOBEGINTHECYCLEANEW)N %DDINGTONS OWN WORDS h4O APPLY THIS METHOD WE MUST MAKE THE STAR MORE HEATTIGHTStellar Pulsation
THE STARS PULSATION (OWEVER VARIATIONS IN THE NUCLEAR ENERGY GENERATION RATE 	 PRODUCE OSCILLATIONS THAT MAY CONTRIBUTE TO PREVENTING THE FORMATION OF


<<<PAGE 559>>>

WHEN COMPRESSED THAN WHEN EXPANDED IN OTHER WORDSthe opacity must increase withcompressionv)N MOST REGIONS OF THE STAR HOWEVER THE OPACITY ACTUALLYdecreasesWITH COMPRESSIONORA+RAMERSLAWTHEOPACITYκDEPENDS ON THE DENSITY ANDTEMPERATURE OF THE STELLARMATERIAL ASκ∝ρ/T.!STHELAYERSOF A STARARE COMPRESSEDTHEIRDENSITYANDOpacity Effects and theκandγMechanisms4HE CONDITIONS RESPONSIBLE FOR EXCITING AND MAINTAINING THE STELLAR OSCILLATIONS WERE lRSTIDENTIlEDBYTHE2USSIANASTRONOMER3!:HEVAKINANDTHENVERIlEDINDETAILEDCALCULATIONSBY A 'ERMAN AND TWO!MERICANS 2UDOLPH +IPPENHAHN .ORMAN "AKER AND *OHN 0 #OXn	 4HEY FOUND THAT THE REGIONS OF A STAR WHERE %DDINGTONS VALVE MECHANISMGAS 7ITHASMALLERTEMPERATURERISETHEINCREASEINDENSITYWITHCOMPRESSIONPRODUCESACORRESPONDINGINCREASEINTHE+RAMERSOPACITYSEE&IG 3IMILARLYDURINGEXPANSIONTHETEMPERATUREDOESNOTDECREASEASMUCHASEXPECTEDSINCETHEIONSNOWRECOMBINEWITHELECTRONS AND RELEASE ENERGY !GAIN THE DENSITY TERM IN THE +RAMERS LAW DOMINATES AND
nn/H9254/H9260 AND /H9254T
4EMPERATURE  +	/H9254T  +	/H9254/H9260 n M KGn	
FIGURE 136ARIATIONS IN THE TEMPERATURE AND OPACITY THROUGHOUT AN 22 ,YRAE STAR MODEL ATTHETIMEOFMAXIMUMCOMPRESSION)NTHE(E))PARTIALIONIZATIONZONET≈ +	δκ >ANDδTIS REDUCED4HESE ARE THEκ ANDγMECHANISMS THAT DRIVE THE STARS OSCILLATIONSHISCAUSESTHESPECIlCHEATSCPANDCVTOHAVELARGERVALUESINAPARTIALIONIZATIONZONE&

4Stellar Pulsation
CAN SUCCESSFULLY OPERATE ARE ITS partial ionization zones )N THESE LAYERS OF THE STAR WHERE THE GASES ARE PARTIALLY IONIZED PART OF THE WORK DONE ON THE GASES AS THEY ARE COMPRESSED PRODUCES FURTHER IONIZATION RATHER THAN RAISING THE TEMPERATURE OF THETEMPERATURE BOTH INCREASE "UT BECAUSE THE OPACITY IS MORE SENSITIVE TO THE TEMPERATURE THAN TO THE DENSITY THE OPACITY OF THE GASES USUALLY DECREASES UPON COMPRESSION )T TAKES SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES TO OVERCOME THE DAMPING EFFECT OF MOST STELLAR LAYERS WHICH  EXPLAINS WHY STELLAR PULSATION IS OBSERVED FOR ONLY ONE OF EVERY  STARS


<<<PAGE 560>>>

THE OPACITY DECREASES WITH DECREASING DENSITY DURING THE EXPANSION 4HIS LAYER OF THE STARCAN THUS ABSORB HEAT DURING COMPRESSION BE PUSHED OUTWARD TO RELEASE THE HEAT DURINGEXPANSION AND FALL BACK DOWN AGAIN TO BEGIN ANOTHER CYCLE !STRONOMERS REFER TO THISOPACITY MECHANISM AS THEκ-mechanism)N A PARTIAL IONIZATION ZONE THEκMECHANISM IS REINFORCED BY THE TENDENCY OF HEAT TOmOW INTO THE ZONE DURING COMPRESSION SIMPLY BECAUSE ITS TEMPERATURE HAS INCREASED LESSTHAN THE ADJACENT STELLAR LAYERS 4HIS EFFECT IS CALLED THEγ-mechanism AFTER THE SMALLERRATIOOFSPECIlCHEATSCAUSEDBYTHEINCREASEDVALUESOFCPANDCV0ARTIALIONIZATIONZONESARETHEPISTONSTHATDRIVETHEOSCILLATIONSOFSTARSTHEYMODULATETHEmOWOFENERGYTHROUGHTHE LAYERS OF THE STAR AND ARE THE DIRECT CAUSE OF STELLAR PULSATIONThe Hydrogen and Helium Partial Ionization Zones)N MOST STARS THERE ARE TWO MAIN IONIZATION ZONES4HE lRST IS A BROAD ZONE WHERE BOTH THEIONIZATIONOFNEUTRALHYDROGEN()→())	ANDTHElRSTIONIZATIONOFHELIUM(E)→(E))	OCCUR IN LAYERS WITH A CHARACTERISTIC TEMPERATURE OF  TO ×+ 4HESE LAYERS ARECOLLECTIVELYREFERREDTOASTHEhydrogen partial ionization zone4HESECONDDEEPERZONEINVOLVES THE SECOND IONIZATION OF HELIUM (E ))→(E )))	 WHICH OCCURS AT A CHARACTERISTICTEMPERATURE OF ×+ AND IS CALLED THEHe II partial ionization zone4HELOCATIONOFTHESEIONIZATIONZONESWITHINTHESTARDETERMINESITSPULSATIONALPROPERTIES!SSHOWNIN&IG IFTHESTARISTOOHOT+	THEIONIZATIONZONESWILLBELOCATEDVERY NEAR THE SURFACE !T THIS POSITION THE DENSITY IS QUITE LOW AND THERE IS NOT ENOUGHMASS AVAILABLE TO DRIVE THE OSCILLATIONS EFFECTIVELY 4HIS ACCOUNTS FOR THE HOTblue edgeOF THE INSTABILITY STRIP ON THE (n2 DIAGRAM )N A COOLER STAR  +	 THE CHARACTERISTIC
nnnnnnnn,OG  n MrM
	((E((E((E4O SURFACE  %FFECTIVE TEMPERATURE +	FIGURE 14(YDROGENANDHELIUMIONIZATIONZONESINSTARSOFDIFFERENTTEMPERATURES&OREACHPOINT IN THE STAR THE VERTICAL AXIS DISPLAYS THE LOGARITHM OF THE FRACTION OF THE STARS MASS THAT LIESaboveTHAT POINTStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 561>>>

TEMPERATURES OF THE IONIZATION ZONES ARE FOUND DEEPER IN THE STAR 4HERE IS MORE MASS FORTHE IONIZATION ZONE hPISTONv TO PUSH AROUND AND THE lRST OVERTONE MODE MAY BE EXCITED7HETHERAMODEISACTUALLYEXCITEDDEPENDSONWHETHERTHEPOSITIVEWORKGENERATEDWITHINTHEIONIZATIONZONESISSUFlCIENTTOOVERCOMETHEDAMPINGDUETONEGATIVEWORKOFTHEOTHERLAYERS OF THE STAR	 )N A STILL COOLER STAR  +	 THE IONIZATION ZONES OCCUR DEEP ENOUGHTO DRIVE THE FUNDAMENTAL MODE OF PULSATION (OWEVER IF A STARS SURFACE TEMPERATURE ISTOO LOW THE ONSET OF EFlCIENT CONVECTION IN ITS OUTER LAYERS MAY DAMPEN THE OSCILLATIONS"ECAUSETHETRANSPORTOFENERGYBYCONVECTIONISMOREEFFECTIVEWHENTHESTARISCOMPRESSEDTHECONVECTINGSTELLARMATERIALMAYLOSEHEATATMINIMUMRADIUS4HISCOULDOVERCOMETHEDAMMING UP OF HEAT BY THE IONIZATION ZONESAND SO QUENCH THE PULSATION OF THE STAR4HECOOLred edgeOF THE INSTABILITY STRIP IS THE RESULT OF THE DAMPING EFFECT OF CONVECTION$ETAILED NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS OF THE PULSATION OF MODEL STARS PRODUCE AN INSTABILITYSTRIP THAT IS IN GOOD AGREEMENT WITH ITS OBSERVED LOCATION ON THE (n2 DIAGRAM 4HESECOMPUTATIONS SHOW THAT IT IS THE (E )) PARTIAL IONIZATION ZONE THAT IS PRIMARILY RESPONSIBLEFOR DRIVING THE OSCILLATIONS OF STARS WITHIN THE INSTABILITY STRIP )F THE EFFECT OF THE HELIUMIONIZATION ZONE IS ARTIlCIALLY REMOVED THE MODEL STARS WILL NOT PULSATE4HEHYDROGENIONIZATIONZONEPLAYSAMORESUBTLEROLE!SASTARPULSATESTHEHYDROGENIONIZATIONZONEMOVESTOWARDORAWAYFROMTHESURFACEASTHEZONEEXPANDSANDCONTRACTSIN RESPONSE TO THE CHANGING TEMPERATURE OF THE STELLAR GASES )T HAPPENS THAT THE STAR ISBRIGHTEST WHEN THEleast massLIES BETWEEN THE HYDROGEN IONIZATION ZONE AND THE SURFACE!SASTAROSCILLATESTHELOCATIONOFANIONIZATIONZONECHANGESWITHRESPECTTOBOTHITSRADIALPOSITIONr AND ITS MASS INTERIOR TOrMr 4HE LUMINOSITY INCIDENT ON THEbottomOF THEHYDROGENIONIZATIONZONEISINDEEDAMAXIMUMATMINIMUMRADIUSBUTTHISMERELYPROPELSTHE ZONE OUTWARD THROUGH MASS	 MOST RAPIDLY AT THAT INSTANT 4HE EMERGENT LUMINOSITY ISTHUS GREATESTafterMINIMUM RADIUS WHEN THE ZONE IS NEAREST THE SURFACE 4HIS DELAYINGACTIONOFTHEHYDROGENPARTIALIONIZATIONZONEPRODUCESTHEPHASELAGOBSERVEDFORCLASSICAL#EPHEIDS AND 22 ,YRAE STARS4HE MECHANISMS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PULSATION OF STARS OUTSIDE THE INSTABILITY STRIP ARENOT ALWAYS AS WELL UNDERSTOOD 4HE LONGPERIOD VARIABLES ARE RED SUPERGIANTS !'" STARS	WITH HUGE DIFFUSE CONVECTIVE ENVELOPES SURROUNDING A COMPACT CORE 4HEIR SPECTRA AREDOMINATED BY MOLECULAR ABSORPTION LINES AND EMISSION LINES THAT REVEAL THE EXISTENCE OFATMOSPHERICSHOCKWAVESANDSIGNIlCANTMASSLOSS7HILEWEUNDERSTANDTHATTHEhydrogenPARTIAL IONIZATION ZONE DRIVES THE PULSATION OF A LONGPERIOD VARIABLE STAR MANY DETAILSREMAIN TO BE EXPLAINED SUCH AS HOW ITS OSCILLATIONS INTERACT WITH ITS OUTER ATMOSPHEREβCephei Stars and the Iron Opacity “Bump”4HEβ#EPHEISTARSPOSEANOTHERINTERESTINGCHALLENGE"EINGSITUATEDINTHEUPPERLEFTHANDSIDEOFTHE(n2DIAGRAMTHESESTARSAREVERYHOTANDLUMINOUSβ#EPHEISAREEARLY"STARSWITHEFFECTIVETEMPERATURESINTHERANGEOFTO+ANDTYPICALLYWITHLUMINOSITYCLASSES OF ))) )6 AND 6 'IVEN THEIR HIGH EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURES HYDROGEN IS COMPLETELY-UCHWORKREMAINSTOBEDONEONTHEEFFECTOFCONVECTIONONSTELLARPULSATIONALTHOUGHSOMERESULTSHAVEBEENOBTAINEDFOR22,YRAEAND::#ETISTARS0ROGRESSHASBEENHAMPEREDBYTHEPRESENTLACKOFAFUNDAMENTALTHEORYOF TIMEDEPENDENT CONVECTIONHE :: #ETI STARS ARE ALSO DRIVEN BY THE HYDROGEN PARTIAL IONIZATION ZONE

4Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 562>>>

IONIZEDANDTHEHELIUMIONIZATIONZONEISTOONEARTHESURFACETOEFFECTIVELYDRIVEPULSATIONSIN THESE STARS!FTER YEARS OF INVESTIGATION IT WAS REALIZED THAT THEκANDγMECHANISMS ARESTILL ACTIVE INβ#EPHEI STARS BUT THE ELEMENT RESPONSIBLE FOR THE DRIVING IS IRON!LTHOUGH
3MODELING STELLAR PULSATION4HE STAR WAS CONSIDERED TO BE DIVIDED INTO A NUMBER OF CONCENTRIC MASS SHELLS4HE DIFFERENTIALEQUATIONSOFSTATICSTELLARSTRUCTUREWERETHENCONVERTEDINTODIFFERENCEEQUATIONSANDAPPLIED TO EACH MASS SHELL AND THE SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS WAS SOLVED ON A COMPUTER SUBJECTTO CERTAIN BOUNDARY CONDITIONS AT THE CENTER AND SURFACE OF THE STELLAR MODELNonlinear Hydrodynamic Models"ECAUSE A PULSATING STAR IS NOT IN HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM THE STELLAR STRUCTURE EQUATIONSCOLLECTED AT THE BEGINNING OF 3ECTION  CANNOT BE USED IN THEIR PRESENT FORM )NSTEAD AMORE GENERAL SET OF EQUATIONS IS EMPLOYED THAT TAKES THE OSCILLATION OF THE MASS SHELLS INTOACCOUNT &OR EXAMPLE .EWTONS SECOND LAWρdrdt=−GMrρr−dPdr,	STAR IS MATHEMATICALLY DISPLACED FROM ITS EQUILIBRIUM CONlGURATION AND THEN hRELEASEDv TOBEGIN ITS OSCILLATION 4HE MASS SHELLS EXPAND AND CONTRACT PUSHING AGAINST EACH OTHER ASTHEY MOVE )F CONDITIONS ARE RIGHT THE IONIZATION ZONES IN THE MODEL STAR WILL DRIVE THEOSCILLATIONSANDTHEPULSATIONAMPLITUDEWILLSLOWLYINCREASEOTHERWISETHEAMPLITUDEWILLDECAYAWAY#OMPUTERPROGRAMSTHATCARRYOUTTHESECALCULATIONSHAVEBEENQUITESUCCESSFULATMODELINGTHEDETAILSOBSERVEDINTHELIGHTANDRADIALVELOCITYCURVESOF#EPHEIDVARIABLES4HEMAINADVANTAGEOFTHEPRECEDINGAPPROACHISTHATITISAnonlinearCALCULATIONCAPABLEINPRINCIPLEOFMODELINGTHECOMPLEXITIESOFLARGEPULSATIONAMPLITUDESANDREPRODUCINGTHE NONSINUSOIDAL SHAPE OF ACTUAL LIGHT CURVES /NE DISADVANTAGE LIES IN THE COMPUTER RESOURCES REQUIRED 4HIS PROCESS REQUIRES A SIGNIlCANT AMOUNT OF #05 TIME AND MEMORY-ANY SOMETIMES THOUSANDS OF	 OSCILLATIONS MUST BE CALCULATED BEFORE THE MODEL SETTLESDOWNINTOAWELLBEHAVEDPERIODICMOTIONANDEVENMOREPERIODSMAYBEREQUIREDFORTHEMODEL TO REACH ITSlimit cycle WHEN THE PULSATION AMPLITUDE HAS REACHED ITS lNAL VALUE )NFACTINSOMECASESTHECOMPUTERSIMULATIONSOFCERTAINCLASSESOFPULSATINGSTARSMAYNEVERStellar PulsationTHE ABUNDANCE OF IRON IS LOW IN ALL STARS THE LARGE NUMBER OF ABSORPTION LINES IN THE SPECTRUM OF IRON IMPLIES THAT IRON CONTRIBUTES SIGNIﬁCANTLY TO STELLAR OPACITIES AT TEMPERATURES NEAR  + 4HIS EFFECT CAN BE SEEN IN THE hIRON BUMPv ABOVE  + IN THE PLOT OF OPACITY 4HE DEPTH OF THIS IRON IONIZATION REGION IS SUFﬁCIENT TO PRODUCE NET POSITIVE PULSATIONAL DRIVING IN THESE STARS
MUST BE USED FOR HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM /NCE THE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS  DESCRIBING THE NONEQUILIBRIUM MECHANICAL AND THERMAL BEHAVIOR OF A STAR HAVE BEEN  ASSEMBLED ALONG WITH THE APPROPRIATE CONSTITUTIVE RELATIONS THEY MAY BE  REPLACED BY DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS AND SOLVED NUMERICALLY )N ESSENCE THE MODEL


<<<PAGE 563>>>

ATTAIN A TRULY PERIODIC SOLUTION BUT EXHIBIT CHAOTIC BEHAVIOR INSTEAD AS OBSERVED IN SOMEREAL STARS!SECONDDISADVANTAGEOFNONLINEARCALCULATIONSLIESINTHECHALLENGESINVOLVEDINACCURATELYCONVERGINGMODELSATEACHTIMESTEP.UMERICALINSTABILITIESINTHENONLINEAREQUATIONSCAN CAUSE CALCULATIONS TO MISBEHAVE AND LEAD TO UNPHYSICAL SOLUTIONS 4HIS IS PARTICULARLYTRUEWHENTHEORIESOFTIMEDEPENDENTCONVECTIONAREREQUIREDFORREDGIANTSANDSUPERGIANTSTARSLinearizing the Hydrodynamic Equations!N ALTERNATIVE TO THE NONLINEAR APPROACH IS TOlinearizeTHE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS BY CONSIDERING ONLY SMALLAMPLITUDE OSCILLATIONS 4HIS IS DONE BY WRITING EVERY VARIABLE IN THEDIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS AN EQUILIBRIUM VALUE FOUND IN THE STATIC MODEL OF THE STAR	 PLUSA SMALL CHANGE DUE TO THE PULSATION &OR EXAMPLE THE PRESSUREPWOULD BE WRITTEN ASP=P+δP WHEREPIS THE VALUE OF THE PRESSURE IN A MASS SHELL OF THE EQUILIBRIUMMODEL ANDδPIS THE SMALL CHANGE IN PRESSURE THAT OCCURS AS THAT MASS SHELL MOVES IN THEOSCILLATINGMODELSTAR4HUSδPISAFUNCTIONOFTIMEBUTPISCONSTANT7HENTHEVARIABLESWRITTENINTHISMANNERAREINSERTEDINTOTHEDIFFERENTIALEQUATIONSTHETERMSCONTAININGONLYEQUILIBRIUM QUANTITIES CANCEL AND TERMS THAT INVOLVE POWERS OF THE DELTAS HIGHER THAN THElRST SUCH AS(δP ) MAY BE DISCARDED BECAUSE THEY ARE NEGLIGIBLY SMALL4HE RESULTING LINEARIZEDDIFFERENTIALEQUATIONSANDTHEIRASSOCIATEDBOUNDARYCONDITIONSALSOLINEARIZEDARESIMILAR TO THE EQUATIONS FOR A WAVE ON A STRING OR IN AN ORGAN PIPE /NLY CERTAIN STANDINGWAVESWITHSPECIlCPERIODSAREPERMITTEDANDSOTHEPULSATIONMODESOFTHESTARARECLEANLYIDENTIlED 4HE EQUATIONS ARE STILL SUFlCIENTLY COMPLICATED THAT A COMPUTER SOLUTION IS REQUIREDBUTTHETIMEINVOLVEDISMUCHLESSTHANTHATREQUIREDFORANONLINEARCALCULATION4HEPENALTIESFORADOPTINGTHELINEARIZEDAPPROACHARETHATTHEMOTIONOFTHESTARISFORCEDTOBESINUSOIDAL AS IT MUST BE FOR SMALL AMPLITUDES OF OSCILLATION	 AND THE LIMITING VALUE OF THEPULSATIONAMPLITUDECANNOTBEDETERMINED-ODELINGTHECOMPLEXITIESOFTHEFULLNONLINEARBEHAVIOR OF THE STELLAR MODEL IS THUS SACRIlCEDExample 3.1.)NTHISEXAMPLEWECONSIDERANUNREALISTICBUTVERYINSTRUCTIVEMODELOF A PULSATING STAR CALLED Aone-zone model SEE &IG  )T CONSISTS OF A CENTRAL POINTMASSEQUALTOTHEENTIREMASSOFTHESTARMSURROUNDEDBYASINGLETHINSPHERICALSHELLOFMASSmANDRADIUSRTHATREPRESENTSTHESURFACELAYEROFTHESTAR4HEINTERIOROFTHESHELLISlLLED WITH A MASSLESS GAS OF PRESSUREPWHOSE SOLE FUNCTION IS TO SUPPORT THE SHELL AGAINSTTHEGRAVITATIONALPULLOFTHECENTRALMASSM.EWTONSSECONDLAW%Q 	APPLIEDTOTHISSHELL ISmdRdt=−GMmR+πRP.	&OR THE EQUILIBRIUM MODEL THE LEFTHAND SIDE OF THIS EQUATION IS ZERO SOGMmR=πRP.	Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 564>>>

MRm
0RESSURE P6ACUUMFIGURE 15/NEZONE MODEL OF A PULSATING STAR4HE LINEARIZATION IS ACCOMPLISHED BY WRITING THE STARS RADIUS AND PRESSURE ASR=R+δRANDP=P+δPAND INSERTING THESE EXPRESSIONS INTO %Q  	 GIVINGmd(R+δR )dt=−GMm(R+δR )+π(R+δR )(P+δP ).5SING THE lRSTORDER APPROXIMATION(R+δR )≈R/parenleftbigg−δRR/parenrightbiggAND KEEPING ONLY THOSE TERMS INVOLVING THE lRST POWERS OF THE DELTAS RESULTS INmd(δR)dt=−GMmR+GMmRδR+πRP+πRPδR+πRδP ,WHEREdR/dt=HASBEENUSEDFORTHEEQUILIBRIUMMODEL4HElRSTANDTHIRDTERMSONTHE RIGHTHAND SIDE CANCEL SEE %Q 	 LEAVINGmd(δR)dt=GMmRδR+πRPδR+πRδP .	4HIS IS THE LINEARIZED VERSION OF .EWTONS SECOND LAW FOR OUR ONEZONE MODEL4O REDUCE THE TWO VARIABLESδRANDδPTO ONE WE NOW ASSUME THAT THE OSCILLATIONS AREadiabatic )N THIS CASE THE PRESSURE AND VOLUME OF THE MODEL ARE RELATED BY THE ADIABATICcontinuedStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 565>>>

RELATIONPVγ=CONSTANTWHEREγISTHERATIOOFSPECIlCHEATSOFTHEGAS3INCETHEVOLUMEOFTHEONEZONEMODELISJUSTπRTHEADIABATICRELATIONSAYSTHATPRγ=CONSTANT)TISLEFT AS A PROBLEM TO SHOW THAT THE LINEARIZED VERSION OF THIS EXPRESSION ISδPP=−γδRR.	5SING THIS EQUATIONδPCAN BE ELIMINATED FROM %Q  	 )N ADDITION πRPCAN BEREPLACED BY GMm/RTHROUGH THE USE OF %Q  	!S A RESULT THE MASSmOF THE SHELLCANCELS LEAVING THE LINEARIZED EQUATION FORδRd(δR)dt=−(γ−)GMRδR .	)Fγ>/ SO THE RIGHTHAND SIDE OF THE EQUATION IS NEGATIVE	 THIS IS JUST THE FAMILIAREQUATION FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION )T HAS THE SOLUTIONδR=ASIN(ωt) WHEREAIS THEPULSATION AMPLITUDE ANDωIS THE ANGULAR PULSATION FREQUENCY )NSERTING THIS EXPRESSION FORδRINTO %Q 	 RESULTS INω=(γ−)GMR.	&INALLY THE PULSATION PERIOD OF THE ONEZONE MODEL IS JUSTΠ=π/ω ORΠ=π/radicalBigπG ρ(γ−),	WHEREρ=M/πRIS THE AVERAGE DENSITY OF THE EQUILIBRIUM MODEL &OR AN IDEALMONATOMIC GAS APPROPRIATE FOR HOT STELLAR GASES	γ=/ %XCEPT FOR FACTORS OF ORDERUNITYTHISISTHESAMEASOUREARLIERPERIODESTIMATE%Q 	OBTAINEDBYCONSIDERINGTHETIME REQUIRED FOR A SOUND WAVE TO CROSS THE DIAMETER OF A STAR)N %XAMPLE  THE APPROXIMATIONS THAT THE PULSATION OF THE ONEZONE MODEL WASlinearANDadiabaticWEREUSEDTOSIMPLIFYTHECALCULATION.OTETHATTHEPULSATIONAMPLITUDEA CANCELED IN THIS EXAMPLE 4HE INABILITY TO CALCULATE THE AMPLITUDE OF THE OSCILLATIONS ISAN INHERENT DRAWBACK OF THE LINEARIZED APPROACH TO PULSATIONNonlinear and Nonadiabatic Calculations4HESENONADIABATICEXPRESSIONSMAYALSOBELINEARIZEDANDSOLVEDTOOBTAINTHEPERIODSANDGROWTHRATESOFTHEINDIVIDUALMODES(OWEVERAMORESOPHISTICATEDANDCOSTLYnonLINEARnonADIABATIC CALCULATION IS NEEDED TO REPRODUCE THE COMPLICATED LIGHT AND RADIAL VELOCITYStellar Pulsation
"ECAUSE NO HEAT IS ALLOWED TO ENTER OR LEAVE THE LAYERS OF A STELLAR MODEL IN AN  ADIABATIC ANALYSIS THE AMPLITUDE WHATEVER IT MAY BE	 OF THE OSCILLATION REMAINS CONSTANT (OWEVER ASTRONOMERS NEED TO KNOW WHICH MODES WILL GROW AND WHICH WILL DECAY AWAY 4HIS CALCULATION MUST INCLUDE THE PHYSICS INVOLVED IN %DDINGTONS VALVE MECHANISM 4HE EQUATIONS DESCRIBING THE TRANSFER OF HEAT AND RADIATION THROUGH THE STELLAR LAYERS MUST BE INCORPORATED IN SUCH A nonadiabatic COMPUTATION


<<<PAGE 566>>>

CURVES THAT ARE OBSERVED FOR SOME VARIABLE STARS 4HE COMPUTER PROBLEM AT THE END OF THISCHAPTERASKSYOUTOCARRYOUTANONLINEARBUTSTILLADIABATIC	CALCULATIONOFTHEPULSATIONOFTHIS ONEZONE MODELDynamical Stability%QUATION 	PROVIDESAVERYIMPORTANTINSIGHTINTOTHEdynamical stabilityOFASTAR)Fγ</THENTHERIGHTHANDSIDEOF%Q 	ISPOSITIVE4HESOLUTIONISNOWδR=Ae−κtWHEREκISTHESAMEASωIN%Q 	)NSTEADOFPULSATINGTHESTARcollapsesIFγ</4HEINCREASEINGASPRESSUREISNOTENOUGHTOOVERCOMETHEINWARDPULLOFGRAVITYANDPUSHTHE MASS SHELL BACK OUT AGAIN RESULTING IN Adynamically unstableMODEL&ORTHECASEOFnonadiabaticOSCILLATIONSTHETIMEDEPENDENCEOFTHEPULSATIONISUSUALLYTAKEN TO BE THE REAL PART OFeiσt WHEREσIS THE COMPLEX FREQUENCYσ=ω+iκ )N THISEXPRESSIONωISTHEUSUALPULSATIONFREQUENCYWHILEκISAstability coefﬁcient4HEPULSATIONAMPLITUDE IS THEN PROPORTIONAL TOe−κt AND /κIS THE CHARACTERISTIC TIME FOR THE GROWTH ORDECAY OF THE OSCILLATIONS4NONRADIAL STELLAR PULSATION!SSOMETYPESOFSTARSPULSATETHEIRSURFACESDONOTMOVEUNIFORMLYINANDOUTINASIMPLEhBREATHINGv MOTION )NSTEAD SUCH A STAR EXECUTES A MORE COMPLICATED TYPE OFnonradialMOTION IN WHICH SOME REGIONS OF ITS SURFACE EXPAND WHILE OTHER AREAS CONTRACTNonradial Oscillations and Spherical Harmonic Functions&IGURE  SHOWS THE ANGULAR PATTERNS FOR SEVERAL NONRADIAL MODES )F THE STELLAR SURFACEIS MOVING OUTWARD WITHIN THE LIGHTER REGIONS THEN IT IS MOVING INWARD WITHIN THE SHADEDAREAS3CALARQUANTITIESSUCHASTHECHANGEINPRESSUREδP	FOLLOWTHESAMEPATTERNHAVINGPOSITIVE VALUES IN SOME AREAS AND NEGATIVE VALUES IN OTHERS &ORMALLY THESE PATTERNS AREDESCRIBED BY THE REAL PARTS OF THE SPHERICAL HARMONIC FUNCTIONSYmℓ(θ, φ) WHEREℓIS ANONNEGATIVE INTEGER ANDmIS EQUAL TO ANY OF THE ℓ+ INTEGERS BETWEEN−ℓAND+ℓ4HEREAREℓnodal circlesWHEREδr=	WITH|m|OFTHESECIRCLESPASSINGTHROUGHTHEPOLESOF THE STAR AND THE REMAININGℓ−|m|NODAL CIRCLES BEING PARALLEL TO THE STARS EQUATOR )Fℓ=m= THEN THE PULSATION IS PURELY RADIAL!FEW EXAMPLES OFYmℓ(θ, φ)FUNCTIONS AREY(θ, φ)=KY(θ, φ)=KCOSθY±(θ, φ)=K±SINθe±iφ3PHERICALHARMONICSAREOFTENENCOUNTEREDINPHYSICSWHENSPHERICALSYMMETRYISEMPLOYED!COMMONEXAMPLEIN THE UNDERGRADUATE PHYSICS CURRICULUM IS THE USE OF SPHERICAL HARMONICS TO DESCRIBE THE QUANTUM MECHANICALWAVE FUNCTIONS OF A HYDROGEN ATOMStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 567>>>

/H5133   m   RADIAL	/H5133   m  /H11006
/H5133   m  /H11006/H5133   m  /H11006
/H5133   m  /H5133   m  FIGURE 16.ONRADIAL PULSATION PATTERNS 4HE MODES OF PULSATION ARE REPRESENTED BY THE REALPARTS OF THE SPHERICAL HARMONIC FUNCTIONSYmℓ(θ, φ)Y(θ, φ)=K(COSθ−)Y±(θ, φ)=K±SINθCOSθe±iφY±(θ, φ)=K±COSθe±iφWHERE THEKmℓS ARE hNORMALIZATIONv CONSTANTS ANDiIS THE IMAGINARY NUMBERi≡√−2ECALLFROM%ULERSFORMULATHATe±miφ=COS(mφ)±iSIN(mφ)4HUSTHEREALPARTOFe±miφIS JUST COS(mφ)4HE PATTERNS FOR NONZEROmREPRESENTtraveling wavesTHAT MOVE ACROSS THE STAR PARALLELTO ITS EQUATOR )MAGINE THESE PATTERNS ON A BEACH BALL WITH THE BALL SLOWLY SPINNING ABOUTTHE VERTICAL AXIS	 4HE TIME REQUIRED FOR THE WAVES TO TRAVEL AROUND THE STAR IS|m|TIMESTHE STARS PULSATION PERIOD (OWEVER IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE STAR ITSELF MAY NOT BEROTATINGATALL*USTASWATERWAVESMAYTRAVELACROSSTHESURFACEOFALAKEWITHOUTTHEWATERITSELF MAKING THE TRIP THESE TRAVELING WAVES ARE DISTURBANCES THAT PASS THROUGH THE STELLARGASESStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 568>>>

The p and f Modes)N 3ECTION  THE RADIAL PULSATION OF STARS WAS ATTRIBUTED TO STANDING SOUND WAVES INTHE STELLAR INTERIOR &OR THE CASE OF NONRADIAL OSCILLATIONS THE SOUND WAVES CAN PROPAGATEHORIZONTALLYASWELLASRADIALLYTOPRODUCEWAVESTHATTRAVELAROUNDTHESTAR"ECAUSEpressurePROVIDES THE RESTORING FORCE FOR SOUND WAVES THESE NONRADIAL OSCILLATIONS ARE CALLEDp-modes!COMPLETEDESCRIPTIONOFAPMODEREQUIRESSPECIlCATIONOFITSRADIALANDANGULARNODES&OREXAMPLEAPMODEMAYBETHOUGHTOFASTHENONRADIALANALOGOFARADIALSECONDOVERTONE MODE 4HE PMODE WITHℓ= ANDm=− HAS TWO RADIAL NODES BETWEEN THECENTER AND THE SURFACE AND ITS ANGULAR PATTERN HAS FOUR NODAL LINES THREE THROUGH THE POLESANDONEPARALLELTOTHEEQUATOR&IGURE SHOWSTWOPMODESFORA-⊙MAINSEQUENCESTARMODELYOUMAYNOTETHESIMILARITIESBETWEENTHISlGUREAND&IG WITHMOSTOFTHEMOTIONOCCURRINGNEARTHESTELLARSURFACE!LSOSHOWNISTHEf-modeWHICHCANBETHOUGHTOFASASURFACEGRAVITYWAVENOTETHERAPIDRISEINAMPLITUDEWITHRADIUS	4HEFREQUENCYOFTHE FMODE IS INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE PMODES AND THE GMODES DISCUSSED LATER	 4HEREIS NO RADIAL ANALOG FOR THE FMODEThe Acoustic Frequency!N ESTIMATE OF THE ANGULAR FREQUENCY OF A PMODE MAY BE OBTAINED FROM THE TIME FOR ASOUND WAVE TO TRAVEL ONE HORIZONTAL WAVELENGTH FROM ONE ANGULAR NODAL LINE TO THE NEXT4HIS HORIZONTAL WAVELENGTH IS GIVEN BY THE EXPRESSIONλh=πr√ℓ(ℓ+),	
n/H9254rR - MAINSEQUENCE STARFPP
          rRFIGURE 17.ONRADIALPMODESWITHℓ=4HEWAVEFORMSHAVEBEENARBITRARILYSCALEDSOTHATδr/R= AT THE STARS SURFACE4HE FMODE IS ALSO SHOWNStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 569>>>

WHERErIS THE RADIAL DISTANCE FROM THE CENTER OF THE STAR 4HEacoustic frequencyAT THISDEPTH IN THE STAR IS THEN DElNED ASSℓ=πTIME FOR SOUND TO TRAVELλh,WHICH CAN BE WRITTEN ASSℓ=π/bracketleftbiggvsπr/√ℓ(ℓ+)/bracketrightbigg=/radicalBiggγPρ√ℓ(ℓ+)r,	vsP/ρ∝TWITH INCREASINGr 4HE FREQUENCY OF A PMODE IS DETERMINED BY THE AVERAGE VALUE OFSℓWITHTHELARGESTCONTRIBUTIONSTOTHEAVERAGECOMINGFROMTHEREGIONSOFTHESTARWHERETHEOSCILLATIONS ARE MOST ENERGETIC)N THE ABSENCE OF ROTATION THE PULSATION PERIOD DEPENDS ONLY ON THE NUMBER OF RADIALNODESANDTHEINTEGERℓ4HEPERIODISINDEPENDENTOFmBECAUSEWITHNOROTATIONTHEREARENO WELLDElNED POLES OR EQUATOR THUSmHAS NO PHYSICAL SIGNIlCANCE /N THE OTHER HANDIF THE STAR IS ROTATING THE ROTATION ITSELF DElNES THE POLES AND EQUATOR AND THE PULSATIONFREQUENCIESFORMODESWITHDIFFERENTVALUESOFmBECOMESEPARATEDORsplitASTHETRAVELINGWAVES MOVE EITHER WITH OR AGAINST THE ROTATION THE SIGN OFmDETERMINES THE DIRECTION INWHICH THE WAVES MOVE AROUND THE STAR	 4HE AMOUNT BY WHICH THE PULSATION FREQUENCIESARE SPLIT DEPENDS ON THE ANGULAR ROTATION FREQUENCYλOmega1 OF THE STAR WITH THE ROTATIONALLYPRODUCEDSHIFTINFREQUENCYPROPORTIONALTOTHEPRODUCTmλOmega1FORTHESIMPLECASEOFUNIFORMROTATION !S WE WILL DISCUSS LATER THIS FREQUENCY SPLITTING PROVIDES A POWERFUL PROBE FORMEASURING THE ROTATION OF THE 3UNS INTERIORThe g Modes*UST AS PRESSURE SUPPLIES THE RESTORING FORCE FOR THE COMPRESSION AND EXPANSION OF THE PMODESOUNDWAVESgravityISTHESOURCEOFTHERESTORINGFORCEFORANOTHERCLASSOFNONRADIALOSCILLATIONS CALLEDg-modes 4HE GMODES ARE PRODUCED BYinternal gravity waves 4HESEWAVESINVOLVEAhSLOSHINGvBACKANDFORTHOFTHESTELLARGASESWHICHISULTIMATELYCONNECTEDTOTHEbuoyancyOFSTELLARMATERIAL"ECAUSEhSLOSHINGvCANNOTOCCURFORPURELYRADIALMOTIONTHERE ARE NO RADIAL ANALOGS FOR THE GMODESThe Brunt–Väisälä (Buoyancy) Frequency4O GAIN A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THIS OSCILLATORY MOTION FOR GMODES CONSIDER A SMALLBUBBLE OF STELLAR MATERIAL THAT IS DISPLACED UPWARD FROM ITS EQUILIBRIUM POSITION IN THE STARStellar Pulsation
WHERE  IS THE ADIABATIC SOUND SPEED "ECAUSE THE SPEED OF SOUND IS PROPORTIONAL TO THE SQUARE ROOT OF THE TEMPERATURE ;RECALL FROM THE IDEAL GAS LAW THAT  = THE ACOUSTIC FREQUENCY IS LARGE IN THE DEEP INTERIOR OF THE STAR AND DECREASES


<<<PAGE 570>>>

BY AN AMOUNTdr7E WILL ASSUME THAT THIS MOTION OCCURS SLOWLYENOUGHTHATTHEPRESSUREWITHINTHEBUBBLEP(b)ISALWAYSEQUALTOTHEPRESSUREOF ITS SURROUNDINGSP(s) AND RAPIDLYENOUGHTHATTHEREISNOHEATEXCHANGEDBETWEENTHEBUBBLEANDITSSURROUNDINGS4HE SECOND ASSUMPTION MEANS THAT THE EXPANSION AND COMPRESSION OF THE GAS BUBBLE AREadiabatic )F THE DENSITY OF THE DISPLACED BUBBLE IS GREATER THAN THE DENSITY OF ITS NEWSURROUNDINGS THE BUBBLE WILL FALL BACK TO ITS ORIGINAL POSITION 4HE NET RESTORING FORCEperunit volumeONTHEBUBBLEINITSlNALPOSITIONISTHEDIFFERENCEBETWEENTHEUPWARDBUOYANTFORCE GIVEN BY!RCHIMEDESS LAW	 AND THE DOWNWARD GRAVITATIONAL FORCEfNET=/parenleftBigρ(s)f−ρ(b)f/parenrightBigg,WHEREg=GMr/rIS THE LOCAL VALUE OF THE GRAVITATIONAL ACCELERATION 5SING A 4AYLOREXPANSION FOR THE DENSITIES ABOUT THEIR INITIAL POSITIONS RESULTS INfNET=/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggρ(s)i+dρ(s)drdr/parenrightbigg−/parenleftbiggρ(b)i+dρ(b)drdr/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbiggg.4HEINITIALDENSITIESOFTHEBUBBLEANDITSSURROUNDINGSARETHESAMESOTHESETERMSCANCELLEAVINGfNET=/parenleftbiggdρ(s)dr−dρ(b)dr/parenrightbigggdr ."ECAUSETHEMOTIONOFTHEBUBBLEISADIABATICdρ(b)/drfNET=/parenleftBiggdρ(s)dr−ρ(b)iγP(b)idP(b)dr/parenrightBigggdr .,OOKING AT THIS EQUATION ALL OF THE hbv SUPERSCRIPTS MAY BE CHANGED TO hsv BECAUSE THEINITIALDENSITIESAREEQUALANDACCORDINGTOTHElRSTASSUMPTIONGIVENTHEPRESSURESINSIDEAND OUTSIDE THE BUBBLE AREalwaysTHE SAME 4HUS ALL QUANTITIES IN THIS EQUATION REFER TOTHESTELLARMATERIALSURROUNDINGTHEBUBBLE7ITHTHATUNDERSTANDINGTHESUBSCRIPTSMAYBEDROPPED COMPLETELY RESULTING INfNET=/parenleftbiggρdρdr−γPdPdr/parenrightbiggρg dr.&OR CONVENIENCE THE TERM IN PARENTHESES IS DElNED ASA≡ρdρdr−γPdPdr.	4HE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION IS JUST A REEXAMINATION OF THE PROBLEM OF CONVECTIONFROMANOTHER PERSPECTIVE CAN BE REPL CED A
Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 571>>>

4HUS THE NET FORCE PER UNIT VOLUME ACTING ON THE BUBBLE ISfNET=ρAg dr.	)FA>THENETFORCEONTHEDISPLACEDBUBBLEHASTHESAMESIGNASdrANDSOTHEBUBBLEWILL CONTINUE TO MOVE AWAY FROM ITS EQUILIBRIUM POSITION 4HIS IS THE CONDITION NECESSARYBACKTOWARDITSEQUILIBRIUMPOSITION)NTHISCASE%Q 	HASTHEFORMOF(OOKESLAWWITH THE RESTORING FORCE PROPORTIONAL TO THE DISPLACEMENT 4HUS IFA< THE BUBBLE WILLOSCILLATE ABOUT ITS EQUILIBRIUM POSITION WITH SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION$IVIDINGTHEFORCEPERUNITVOLUMEfNETBYTHEMASSPERUNITVOLUMEρGIVESTHEFORCEPER UNIT MASS OR ACCELERATIONa=fNET/ρ=Ag dr "ECAUSE THE ACCELERATION IS SIMPLYRELATED TO THE DISPLACEMENT FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION WE HAVEa=−Ndr=Ag dr,WHERENIS THE ANGULAR FREQUENCY OF THE BUBBLE ABOUT ITS EQUILIBRIUM POSITION CALLED THEBrunt–Väisälä frequencyOR THEbuoyancy frequencyN=/radicalbig−Ag=/radicalBigg/parenleftbiggγPdPdr−ρdρdr/parenrightbiggg.	4HE BUOYANCY FREQUENCY IS ZERO AT THE CENTER OF THE STAR WHEREg=	 AND AT THE EDGES OFCONVECTION ZONES WHEREA=	 2ECALL THATA< WHERE THERE IS NO CONVECTION SONISLARGER IN REGIONS THAT ARE MORE STABLE AGAINST CONVECTION )NSIDE A CONVECTION ZONE WHEREA> THE BUOYANCY FREQUENCY IS NOT DElNEDThe g and p Modes as Probes of Stellar Structure4HEhSLOSHINGvEFFECTOFNEIGHBORINGREGIONSOFTHESTARPRODUCESTHEINTERNALGRAVITYWAVESTHAT ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE GMODES OF A NONRADIALLY PULSATING STAR 4HE FREQUENCY OF AGMODE IS DETERMINED BY THE VALUE OFNAVERAGED ACROSS THE STAR &IGURE  SHOWSSEVERAL GMODES FOR THE SAME STELLAR MODEL THAT WAS USED FOR &IG !COMPARISON OFTHESE TWO lGURES REVEALS SIGNIlCANT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THESE CLASSES OF MODES MAKINGTHEMVERYUSEFULTOASTRONOMERSATTEMPTINGTOSTUDYTHEINTERIOROFTHE3UNANDOTHERSTARS-OSTIMPORTANTNOTICETHEDIFFERENCEINTHEVERTICALSCALESOFTHETWOlGURES4HEGMODESINVOLVESIGNIlCANTMOVEMENTOFTHESTELLARMATERIALDEEPWITHINTHESTARWHILETHEPMODESMOTIONS ARE CONlNED NEAR THE STELLAR SURFACE 4HUS GMODES PROVIDE A VIEW INTO THE VERYHEART OF A STAR WHILE PMODES ALLOW A DIAGNOSIS OF THE CONDITIONS IN ITS SURFACE LAYERS&OR EXAMPLE RECALL THATF=ma=−kxFOR A SPRING4HE ACCELERATION ISa=−ωx WHEREω=√k/mIS THEANGULAR FREQUENCY OF THE SPRINGS MOTION
Stellar PulsationFOR convection TO OCCUR AND IT IS EQUIVALENT TO THE OTHER REQUIREMENTS PREVIOUSLY FOUND FOR CONVECTIVE INSTABILITY (OWEVER IF A   THEN THE NET FORCE ON THE BUBBLE WILL BE IN A DIRECTION OPPOSITE TO THE DISPLACEMENT AND SO THE BUBBLE WILL BE PUSHED


<<<PAGE 572>>>

/H9254rR - MAINSEQUENCE STAR
rRGGG
nnn
     FIGURE 18.ONRADIALGMODESWITHℓ=4HEWAVEFORMSHAVEBEENARBITRARILYSCALEDSOTHATδr/R= AT THE STARS SURFACE5HELIOSEISMOLOGY AND ASTEROSEISMOLOGY!LLOFTHEIDEASOFNONRADIALPULSATIONCOMEINTOPLAYINTHESCIENCEOFhelioseismologyTHESTUDYOFTHEOSCILLATIONSOFTHE3UNlRSTOBSERVEDINBY!MERICANASTRONOMERS2OBERT,EIGHTONn	2OBERT.OYESAND'EORGE3IMON!TYPICALSOLAROSCILLATIONMODEHAS A VERY LOW AMPLITUDE WITH A SURFACE VELOCITY OF ONLY  M S−OR LESSAND ALUMINOSITYVARIATIONδL/L⊙OFONLY−7ITHANINCOHERENTSUPERPOSITIONOFROUGHLYtenmillionMODES RIPPLING THROUGH ITS SURFACE AND INTERIOR OUR STAR IS hRINGINGv LIKE A BELLThe Five-Minute Solar Oscillations4HE OSCILLATIONS OBSERVED ON THE 3UN HAVE MODES WITH PERIODS BETWEEN THREE AND EIGHTMINUTES AND VERY SHORT HORIZONTAL WAVELENGTHS ℓRANGING FROM  TO  OR MORE	4HESESOCALLEDﬁve-minute oscillationsHAVEBEENIDENTIlEDASPMODES4HElVEMINUTEPMODESARECONCENTRATEDBELOWTHEPHOTOSPHEREWITHINTHE3UNSCONVECTIONZONE&IG SHOWSATYPICALPMODEGMODESARELOCATEDDEEPINTHESOLARINTERIORBELOWTHECONVECTIONZONE"Y STUDYING THESE PMODE OSCILLATIONS ASTRONOMERS HAVE BEEN ABLE TO GAIN NEW INSIGHTSINTO THE STRUCTURE OF THE 3UN IN THESE REGIONS4HESEINCREDIBLYPRECISEVELOCITYMEASUREMENTSAREMADEBYCAREFULLYOBSERVINGTHE$OPPLERSHIFTSOFSPECTRALABSORPTION LINES SUCH AS &E )  NM	 THROUGH A NARROW SLIT THAT FOLLOWS THE ROTATING SOLAR SURFACE!SERIESOFMINUTEhGMODESvWEREBELIEVEDTOHAVEBEENOBSERVEDASWELL(OWEVERCONTINUOUSOBSERVATIONSOVERDAYSUSINGTHE'/,&INSTRUMENTONBOARDTHE3/(/SPACECRAFTWEREUNABLETODETECTANYEVIDENCEOF THE CONTROVERSIAL MODE )T IS BELIEVED THAT GROUNDBASED OBSERVATIONS THAT INDICATED A MINUTE MODE WEREDUE TO HARMONIC EFFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH %ARTHS ATMOSPHERE NOTE THAT  MINUTES IS EXACTLY  OF THE HOURSOLAR DAY
Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 573>>>

FIGURE 19&IVEMINUTE PMODE WITHℓ= ANDm= 4HE SOLAR CONVECTION ZONE IS THESTIPPLED REGION WHERE THE PMODES ARE FOUND #OURTESY OF .ATIONAL /PTICAL!STRONOMY /BSERVATORIES	
6ELOCITY M Sn Dvn	
&REQUENCY M(Z	FIGURE 202ELATIVEPOWEROFSOLARPMODESAPERIODOFlVEMINUTESCORRESPONDSTOAFREQUENCYOF  M(Z &IGURE ADAPTED FROM 'REC &OSSAT AND 0OMERANTZNature288  	&IGURE SHOWSTHERELATIVEPOWERCONTAINEDINTHESOLARPMODES4HISINFORMATIONCANALSOBEPLOTTEDINANOTHERMANNERASSHOWNIN&IG WITHℓONTHEHORIZONTALAXISANDTHEPULSATIONFREQUENCYONTHEVERTICALAXIS#IRCLESSHOWTHEOBSERVEDFREQUENCIESANDEACHCONTINUOUSRIDGECORRESPONDSTOADIFFERENTPMODEPPPETC	4HESUPERIMPOSEDLINES ARE THEtheoreticalFREQUENCIES CALCULATED FOR A SOLAR MODEL!LL OF THE OBSERVED lVEMINUTEMODESHAVEBEENIDENTIlEDINTHISWAY4HElTISCERTAINLYIMPRESSIVEBUTNOTQUITEEXACT ! SOLAR MODEL MUST BE CAREFULLY TUNED TO OBTAIN THE BEST AGREEMENT BETWEEN THETHEORETICAL AND OBSERVED PMODE FREQUENCIES 4HIS PROCEDURE CAN REVEAL MUCH ABOUT THEDEPTH OF THE SOLAR CONVECTION ZONE AND ABOUT THE ROTATION AND COMPOSITION OF THE OUTERLAYERS OF THE 3UNStellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 574>>>

&REQUENCY M(Z	     $EGREE /H5133 FIGURE 213OLAR PMODES OBSERVATIONS CIRCLES	 AND THEORY LINES	 &IGURE ADAPTED FROM,IBBRECHTSpace Sci. Rev.47  	Differential Rotation and the Solar Convection Zone
SOLAREQUATORCOMESFROMTHEDEPENDENCEOFTHEROTATIONALFREQUENCYSPLITTINGONm"ELOWTHE CONVECTION ZONE THE EQUATORIAL AND POLAR ROTATION RATES CONVERGE TO A SINGLE VALUE ATr/R⊙≈. "ECAUSE A CHANGE IN THE ROTATION RATE WITH DEPTH IS NEEDED TO CONVERT THETests of Composition4HEABUNDANCEOFHELIUMINTHEOUTERLAYERSOFTHE3UNCANALSOBEINFERREDFROMACOMPARISONOFTHEOBSERVEDANDTHEORETICALPMODERIDGESIN&IG 4HERESULTSARECONSISTENTWITH A VALUE OFY=. FOR THE MASS FRACTION OF HELIUM AT THE 3UNS SURFACEProbing the Deep Interior!STRONOMERSHAVEEXPERIENCEDMOREDIFlCULTYINTHEIRATTEMPTSTOUSETHESOLARGMODESASA PROBE OF THE 3UNS INTERIOR "ECAUSE THE GMODES DWELL BENEATH THE CONVECTION ZONEStellar Pulsation
"ASED ON HELIOSEISMOLOGY STUDIES COMBINED WITH DETAILED STELLAR EVOLUTION CALCULATIONS THE BASE OF THE SOLAR CONVECTION ZONE IS KNOWN TO BE LOCATED AT  2 WITH A TEMPERATURE OF ABOUT  ¾  + 4HE ROTATIONAL SPLITTING OBSERVED FOR PMODE FREQUENCIES INDICATES THAT DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION OBSERVED AT THE 3UNS SURFACE DECREASES SLIGHTLY DOWN THROUGH THE CONVECTION ZONE 4HOSE PMODES WITH SHORTER HORIZONTAL WAVELENGTHS LARGER   	 PENETRATE LESS DEEPLY INTO THE CONVECTION ZONE SO THE DIFFERENCE IN ROTATIONAL FREQUENCY SPLITTING WITH  REVEALS THE DEPTH DEPENDENCE OF THE ROTATION 4HE MEASUREMENT OF THE VARIATION IN ROTATION WITH THE DISTANCE FROM THEℓℓ⊙
Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld from a poloidal to a toroidal geometry, these results indicate that the Sun’s magnetic dynamo is probably seated in the tachocline at the interface between the radiation zone and the convection zone.


<<<PAGE 575>>>

THEIR AMPLITUDES ARE SIGNIlCANTLY DIMINISHED AT THE 3UNS SURFACE 4O DATE NO DElNITEIDENTIlCATION OF GMODES HAS BEEN MADE .EVERTHELESS THE POTENTIAL REWARDS OF USINGTHESEOSCILLATIONSTOLEARNMOREABOUTTHECOREOFTHE3UNCOMPELASTRONOMERSTOAPPLYTHEIROBSERVATIONAL INGENUITY TO THESE GMODESDriving Solar Oscillations4HE QUESTION OF THE MECHANISM RESPONSIBLE FOR DRIVING THE SOLAR OSCILLATIONS HAS NOT YETBEEN CONCLUSIVELY ANSWERED /UR MAINSEQUENCE 3UN IS NOT A NORMAL PULSATING STAR )T LIESFAR BEYOND THE RED EDGE OF THE INSTABILITY STRIP ON THE (n2 DIAGRAM SEE &IG 	 WHERETURBULENT CONVECTION OVERCOMES THE TENDENCY OF THE IONIZATION ZONES TO ABSORB HEAT ATMAXIMUM COMPRESSION %DDINGTONS VALVE MECHANISM THUS CANNOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THESOLAR OSCILLATIONS (OWEVER THE TIMESCALE FOR CONVECTION NEAR THE TOP OF THE CONVECTIONZONE IS A FEW MINUTES AND IT IS STRONGLY SUSPECTED THAT THE PMODES ARE DRIVEN BY TAPPINGINTO THE TURBULENT ENERGY OF THE CONVECTION ZONE ITSELF WHERE THE PMODES ARE CONlNEDδScuti Stars and Rapidly Oscillating Ap Stars4HETECHNIQUESOFHELIOSEISMOLOGYCANBEAPPLIEDTOOTHERSTARSASWELLAsteroseismologyIS THE STUDY OF THE PULSATION MODES OF STARS IN ORDER TO INVESTIGATE THEIR INTERNAL STRUCTURESCHEMICAL COMPOSITION ROTATION AND MAGNETIC lELDSδ3CUTI STARS ARE 0OPULATION ) MAINSEQUENCE STARS AND GIANT STARS IN THE SPECTRAL CLASSRANGE ! TO & 4HEY TEND TO PULSATE IN LOWOVERTONE RADIAL MODES AS WELL AS IN LOWORDERPMODESANDPOSSIBLYGMODES	4HEAMPLITUDESOFδ3CUTISAREFAIRLYSMALLRANGINGFROMA FEW MMAG TO ROUGHLY  MAG 0OPULATION )) SUBGIANTS ALSO EXHIBIT RADIAL AND NONRADIALOSCILLATIONS AND ARE KNOWN AS 38 0HOENICIS STARS!NOTHERINTERESTINGCLASSOFPULSATINGSTARSARETHErapidly oscillating Ap starsRO!P	FOUNDINTHESAMEPORTIONOFTHE(n2DIAGRAMASTHEδ3CUTISTARS4HESESTARSHAVEPECULIARSURFACE CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS HENCE THE hPv DESIGNATION	 ARE ROTATING AND HAVE STRONGMAGNETIC lELDS 4HE UNUSUAL CHEMICAL COMPOSITION IS LIKELY DUE TO SETTLING OF HEAVIERELEMENTS SIMILAR TO THE ELEMENTAL DIFFUSION THAT HAS OCCURRED NEAR THE SURFACE OF THE 3UN3OME ELEMENTS MAY ALSO HAVE BEEN ELEVATED IN THE ATMOSPHERE IF THEY HAVE A SIGNIlCANTNUMBER OF ABSORPTION LINES NEAR THE PEAK OF THE STARS BLACKBODY SPECTRUM 4HESE ATOMSPREFERENTIALLY ABSORB PHOTONS THAT IMPART A NET UPWARD MOMENTUM )F THE ATMOSPHERE ISSUFlCIENTLYSTABLEAGAINSTTURBULENTMOTIONSSOMEOFTHESEATOMSWILLTENDTODRIFTUPWARDRO!P STARS HAVE VERY SMALL PULSATION AMPLITUDES OF LESS THAN  MAG )T APPEARS THATTHEYPRIMARILYPULSATEINHIGHERORDERPMODESANDTHATTHEAXISFORTHEPULSATIONISALIGNEDWITHTHEMAGNETIClELDAXISWHICHISTILTEDSOMEWHATTOTHEROTATIONAXISANOBLIQUEROTATORMODEL	 RO!P STARS ARE AMONG THE MOST WELLSTUDIED OF MAINSEQUENCE STARS OTHER THAN THE3UN BUT THE PULSATION DRIVING MECHANISM STILL REMAINS IN QUESTIONSUGGESTED READINGGeneralThe American Association of Variable Star Observershttp://www.aavso.org/'IOVANELLI 2ONALDSecrets of the Sun #AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 576>>>

+ALER *AMES "Stars and Their Spectra #AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE ,EIBACHER *OHN7 ET AL h(ELIOSEISMOLOGYvScientiﬁc American 3EPTEMBER :IRKER*ACK"Sunquakes: Probing the Interior of the Sun*OHNS(OPKINS5NIVERSITY0RESS"ALTIMORE Technical!LLER,AWRENCE(Atoms, Stars, and Nebulae4HIRD%DITION#AMBRIDGE5NIVERSITY0RESS#AMBRIDGE "ROWN 4IMOTHY - ET AL h)NFERRING THE 3UNS )NTERNAL!NGULAR 6ELOCITY FROM /BSERVEDP-ODE &REQUENCY 3PLITTINGSvThe Astrophysical Journal343  #LAYTON $ONALD $Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis 5NIVERSITY OF#HICAGO 0RESS #HICAGO #OX *OHN 0The Theory of Stellar Pulsation 0RINCETON 5NIVERSITY 0RESS 0RINCETON .*&REEDMAN 7ENDY , ET AL h$ISTANCE TO THE 6IRGO #LUSTER 'ALAXY - FROM (UBBLE3PACE4ELESCOPE /BSERVATIONS OF #EPHEIDSvNature371  General Catalogue of Variable Stars 3TERNBERG !STRONOMICAL )NSTITUTE -OSCOW 2USSIAhttp://www.sai.msu.su/groups/cluster/gcvs/gcvs/(ANSEN#ARL*+AWALER3TEVEN$AND4RIMBLE6IRGINIAStellar Interiors: Physical Prin-ciples, Structure, and Evolution 3ECOND %DITION 3PRINGER6ERLAG .EW9ORK 0ERRSON3%ETALh.EW#EPHEID0ERIODn,UMINOSITY2ELATIONSFORTHE,ARGE-AGELLANIC#LOUD  .EAR)NFRARED ,IGHT #URVESvThe Astronomical Journal128  3VESTKA:DENEKAND(ARVEY*OHN7EDS	Helioseismic Diagnostics of Solar Convectionand Activity +LUWER!CADEMIC 0UBLISHERS $ORDRECHT Stellar Pulsation


<<<PAGE 577>>>



<<<PAGE 578>>>

PROBLEM SET1Use the light curve for Mira, Fig. 1, to estimate the ratio of Mira’s luminosity at visiblewavelengths, when it is brightest to when it is dimmest. For what fraction of its pulsation cycleis Mira visible to the naked eye?
2If the intrinsic uncertainty in the period–luminosity relation shown in Fig. 5 isλDelta1M≈0.5magnitude, ﬁnd the resulting fractional uncertainty in the calculated distance to a classicalCepheid.Stellar Pulsation
3245678910V
3245678910V0 1000 30002000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
10,000 12,00011,000 13,000 14,000 15,000 16,000 17,000 18,000Julian Day – 2,435,000FIGURE 1The light curve of Mira from September 14, 1954 (JD 2,435,000) through September2005. Recall that magnitudes dimmer than 6 are undetectable to the unaided eye. (We acknowledgewith thanks the variable-star observations from the AA VSO International Database contributed byobservers worldwide.)
From Chapter 14 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,

<<<PAGE 579>>>

–7–6–5–4–3–2M0/H20883V/H20884
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0Log10 PGalactic cluster CepheidsLMC [(m – M)0 = 18.45]SMC [(m – M)0 = 18.85]M31   [(m – M)0 = 24.20]6822  [(m – M)0 = 23.75]h + /H9273 Perseus association
FIGURE 5The period–luminosity relation for classical Cepheids. (Figure adapted from Sandageand Tammann,Ap. J.,151, 531, 1968.)3Several remote classical Cepheids were discovered in 1994 by the Hubble Space Telescope inthe galaxy denoted M100. (M100 is a member of the Virgo cluster, a rich cluster of galaxies.)Figure 22 shows the period–luminosity relation for these Cepheids. Use the two Cepheidsnearest the ﬁgure’s best-ﬁt line to estimate the distance to M100. The mean visual extinction isAV=0.15±0.17 magnitudes for the M100 Cepheids. Compare your result to the distanceof 17.1±1.8 Mpc obtained by Wendy Freedman and her colleagues. You are referred toFreedman et al. (1994) for more information on the discovery and importance of these remotepulsating stars.
272625V (mag)1.01.21.41.61.8Log10 PM100LMC
FIGURE 22A composite period–luminosity relation for Problem 3. The white circles denoteCepheids in M100, and the black circles show nearby Cepheids found in the Large Magellanic Cloud(a small galaxy that neighbors our Milky Way Galaxy). The average visual magnitudes of the LMCCepheids have been increased by the same amount to match those of the M100 variables. The requiredincrease inVfor a best ﬁt is then used to ﬁnd the relative distances to the LMC and M100. (Adaptedfrom Freedman et al.,Nature,371, 757, 1994.)Stellar Pulsation: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 580>>>

–7–6–5–4–3–2M0/H20883V/H20884
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0Log10 PGalactic cluster CepheidsLMC [(m – M)0 = 18.45]SMC [(m – M)0 = 18.85]M31   [(m – M)0 = 24.20]6822  [(m – M)0 = 23.75]h + /H9273 Perseus association
FIGURE 5The period–luminosity relation for classical Cepheids. (Figure adapted from Sandageand Tammann,Ap. J.,151, 531, 1968.)4Make a graph similar to Fig. 5 showing the period–luminosity relation for both the classicalCepheids and W Virginis stars.
6Use Eq. ( 6) to estimate the pulsation period that the Sun would have if it were to oscillateradially.7Derive Eq. ( 11) by linearizing the adiabatic relationPVγ=constant.8 (a)Linearize the Stefan–Boltzmann equation in the form of the below equation to show thatδLL0=2δRR0+4δTT0.(6)δPP0=−3γδRR0(11)
(b)Linearize the adiabatic relationTVγ−1=constant, and so ﬁnd a relation betweenδL/L0andδR /R0for a spherical blackbody model star composed of an ideal monatomic gas.9Consider a general potential energy function,U(r), for a forceF=−(dU/dr)ˆron a particleof massm. Assume that the origin (r=0) is a point of stable equilibrium. By expandingU(r)in a Taylor series about the origin, show that if a particle is displaced slightly from the originand then released, it will undergo simple harmonic motion about the origin. This explains why thelinearizationprocedureofSection3of Stllr Pulsationisguaranteedtoresultinsinusoidaloscillations.Stellar Pulsation: Problem Set
“”L=4πR2σT4e..5Assuming (incorrectly) that the oscillations ofδCephei are sinusoidal, calculate the greatestexcursion of its surface from its equilibrium position.Π≈/radicalBigg3π2γG ρ.
ae

<<<PAGE 581>>>

10Figure 23 shows a view of a hypothetical nonradially pulsating (ℓ=2,m=−2), rotatingstarfromabovethestar’snorthpole.FromthevantagepointofEarth,astronomersviewthestaralongitsequatorialplane.Assumingthataspectralabsorptionlineappearswhen the bottom of Fig. 23 is facing Earth, sketch the changes in the appearance of the
⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleact>⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingledTdr⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingle⎩vextendsingleadline proﬁle due to Doppler shifts caused by the total surface velocity as the star rotates. (Don’tworry about the timing; just sketch the spectral line as seen from the eight different pointsof view shown that are directly over the star’s equator.) Assume that the equivalent widthof the line does not change. You may wish to compare your line proﬁles with those actuallyobserved for a nonradially pulsating star such as theβCephei star 12 Lacertae; see Smith,Ap.J.,240, 149, 1980. For convenience, the magnitudes of the rotation and pulsation velocitiesare assumed to be equal.
11Show that the below equation, the condition for convection to occur, is the same as the require-A>0, whereAis given by Eq. ( 17). Assume that the mean molecular weight,µ,d o e snot vary.ment thatA≡1ρdρdr−1γPdPdr(17)12In a convection zone, the timescale for convectionis related to the value ofA(Eq. 17) bytc≃2/radicalbig2/Ag.Table 2 shows the values of the pressure and density at two points near the top of the Sun’sconvection zone as described by a solar model. Use these values andγ=5/3 to obtain anestimate of the timescale for convection near the top of the Sun’s convection zone. How doesyour answer compare with the range of periods observed for the Sun’s p-modes?Stellar Pulsation: Problem Set
Rotation axisrotationpulsationvector sum
12345678FIGURE 23Surface velocities for a rotating, pulsating star (ℓ=2,m=−2) for Problem 10.The arrows indicate the surface velocities due to rotation alone, pulsation alone, and their vector sum.
A≡1ρdρdr−1γPdPdr(17)...


<<<PAGE 582>>>

TABLE 2Data from a Solar Model for Problem 12. (Data from Joyce Guzik, privatecommunication.)r(m)P(N m−2)ρ(kg m−3)6.959318×1089286.02.2291×10−46.959366×1088995.72.1925×10−4COMPUTER PROBLEM13In this problem you will carry out a nonlinear calculation of the radial pulsation of the one-zonemodel described in Example 3.1 of Stellar Pulsation. The equations that describe the oscil-star are Newton’s second law for the forces on the shell,mdvdt=−GMmR2+4πR2P,(20)and the deﬁnition of the velocity,v, of the mass shell,v=dRdt.(21)As in Example 3.1, we assume that the expansion and contraction of the gas are adiabatic:PiVγi=PfVγf,(22)where the “initial” and “ﬁnal” subscripts refer to any two instants during the pulsation cycle.(a)Explain in words the meaning of each term in Eq. (20).(b)Use Eq. (22) to show that(c)You will not be taking derivatives. Instead, you will take the difference between the initialand ﬁnal values of the radiusRand radial velocityvof the shell divided by the time intervalλDelta1tseparating the initial and ﬁnal values. That is, you will use(vf−vi)/λDelta1tinstead ofdv/dt, and(Rf−Ri)/λDelta1tinstead ofdR/dtin Eqs. ( 20) and ( 21). A careful analysisshows that you should useR=RiandP=Pion the right-hand side of Eq. ( 20), andusev=vfon the left-hand side of Eq. ( 21). Make these substitutions in Eqs. ( 20)and ( 21), and show that you can writelation of this model
vf=vi+/parenleftbigg4πR2iPim−GMR2i/parenrightbiggλDelta1t(24)andRf=Ri+vfλDelta1t.(25)Stellar Pulsation: Problem Set
“”
mdvdt=−GMmR2+4πR2P,(20)PiR3γi=PfR3γf.(23)
mdvdt=−GMmR2+4πR2P,(20)v=dRdt.(21)

<<<PAGE 583>>>

new initial values, and ﬁnd new values forR,v, andPafter two time intervals (at timet=2×104s). Continue to ﬁndR,v, andPfor 150 time intervals, untilt=1.5×106s.Make three graphs of your results:Rvs.t,vvs.t, andPvs.t. Plot the time on the horizontalaxis.(e)From your graphs, measure the periodΠof the oscillation (both in seconds and in days)and the equilibrium radius,R0, of the model star. Compare this value of the period with thatobtained from Eq. ( 14). Also compare your results with the period and radial velocityobserved forδCephei.Stellar Pulsation: Problem Set
Π=2π/radicalBig43πG ρ0(3γ−4),and use a time interval ofλDelta1t=104s. Take the ratio of speciﬁc heats to beγ=5/3 for anidealmonatomicgas.UseEq.(24)tocalculatetheﬁnalvelocityvfat the end of onetime interval (at timet=1×104s); then use Eq. ( 25) to calculate the ﬁnal radiusRfand Eq. ( 23) to calculate the ﬁnal pressurePf. Now take these ﬁnal values to be your(d)Now you are ready to calculate the oscillation of the model star. The mass of a typicalclassical Cepheid isM=1×1031kg (5 M⊙), and the mass of the surface layers may bearbitrarily assignedm=1×1026kg. For starting values at timet=0, takeRi=1.7×1010mvi=0ms−1Pi=5.6×104Nm−2
(4)1vf=vi+/parenleftbigg4πR2iPim−GMR2i/parenrightbiggλDelta1t(24)Rf=Ri+vfλDelta1t.(25)


<<<PAGE 584>>>

&ROM #HAPTER   OF  An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics 3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 
0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBY The Fate of Massive Stars
 


<<<PAGE 585>>>

The Fate of Massive Stars
1 Post-Main-Sequence Evolution of Massive Stars
2 The Classiﬁcation of Supernovae
3 Core-Collapse Supernovae
4 Gamma-Ray Bursts
5 Cosmic Rays
1 POST-MAIN-SEQUENCE EVOLUTION OF MASSIVE STARS
!STRONOMERS HAVE BEEN OBSERVING THE FASCINATING 3OUTHERN (EMISPHERE STAR η#ARINAE
α=HM.Sδ=−◦′.′′	 SINCE AT LEAST  "ETWEEN  AND ABOUT
 OBSERVERS HAD REPORTED THE STAR AS BEING ABOUT SECOND MAGNITUDE ALTHOUGH IT WAS
SOMETIMES REPORTED TO BE A FOURTHMAGNITUDE STAR 4HEN IN  OR  IT MAY HAVE
STARTED BECOMING MORE ACTIVE (OWEVER IN  η#AR SUDDENLY BRIGHTENED SIGNIlCANTLY
mUCTUATING BETWEEN ZERO AND lRST MAGNITUDE FOR ABOUT TWENTY YEARS !T ONE POINT ITS
MAGNITUDE REACHED ABOUT − MAKING IT THE SECOND BRIGHTEST EXTRA3OLAR3YSTEM OBJECT IN
THESKYONLY3IRIUSWASBRIGHTER	$URINGTHISPERIOD*OHN(ERSCHELn	DESCRIBED
η#ARINAE AS BEING hlTFULLY VARIABLEv
η#ARSREMARKABLEBRIGHTNESSACHIEVEDINISALLTHEMOREIMPRESSIVEGIVENTHATTHE
STARISAPPROXIMATELYPCFROM%ARTHBYCOMPARISON3IRIUSISONLYPCFROM%ARTH	
!FTER  THIS MYSTERIOUS STAR BEGAN TO FADE AGAIN DROPPING TO ABOUT EIGHTH MAGNITUDE
BY7ITHTHEEXCEPTIONOFALESSERBRIGHTENINGEVENTTHATTOOKPLACEBETWEENAND
η#AR HAS BEEN RELATIVELY QUIET SINCE THE h'REAT %RUPTIONv BETWEEN  AND 
/VERTHEPASTCENTURYANDAHALF η#ARHASBRIGHTENEDSLIGHTLYANDITISCURRENTLYATAVISUAL
MAGNITUDE OF ABOUT SIX
!NOTHER STAR IN THE -ILKY 7AY 'ALAXY HAS BEHAVED SIMILARLY 0 #YGNI WAS APPARENTLY
TOO FAINT TO BE SEEN BY THE NAKED EYE PRIOR TO  BUT THEN SUDDENLY APPEARED REACHING
THIRD MAGNITUDE &OLLOWING THIS EARLY ERUPTION 0 #YG FADED FROM VIEW ONLY TO REAPPEAR
IN  BECOMING NEARLY AS BRIGHT AS IT WAS IN  0 #YG HAS BEEN A ROUGHLY CONSTANT
lFTHMAGNITUDE STAR SINCE  ALTHOUGH IT MAY HAVE BRIGHTENED SLIGHTLY OVER THE PAST
SEVERALCENTURIES; PECTRALLINEPROlLESKNOWNAS0#YGNIPROlLES NAMED FOR THIS EPISODIC
STAR ARE INDICATIVE OF MASS LOSS=3 


<<<PAGE 586>>>

Luminous Blue Variables! SMALL NUMBER OF OTHER STARS ARE KNOWN TO BEHAVE SIMILARLY TOη#ARINAE AND 0 #YGNISOME IN OUR GALAXY AND SOME FARTHER AWAY 3 $ORADUS LOCATED IN THE ,ARGE -AGELLANIC#LOUD,-#	ASATELLITEGALAXYOFTHE-ILKY7AYISPERHAPSTHEBESTKNOWNEXTRAGALACTICEXAMPLE 3IMILAR STARS WERE DISCOVERED IN NEARBY GALAXIES BY %DWIN (UBBLE AND !LLAN3ANDAGE4HISCLASSOFSTARSISREFERREDTOBYSEVERALDIFFERENTNAMESINCLUDINGS DoradusvariablesHubble–Sandage variablesANDluminous blue variables,"6S	)NTHISTEXTWE WILL ADOPT THE DESIGNATION OF ,"6FOR THIS CLASS OF STARS7HILE PERHAPS AN EXTREME EXAMPLE OF AN ,"6η#AR IS CERTAINLY THE BESTSTUDIED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CLASS!(UBBLE 3PACE 4ELESCOPE IMAGE OFη#AR IS SHOWN IN &IG )TS BIPOLAR STRUCTURE KNOWN AS THE hHOMUNCULUSv IS CLEARLY EVIDENT AS IS ITS EQUATORIALDISK &ROM $OPPLER MEASUREMENTS THE LOBES ARE EXPANDING OUTWARD AT ABOUT  KM S−ALTHOUGHANUMBEROFDIFFERENTVELOCITIESCANBERECORDEDALONGANYPARTICULARLINEOFSIGHTRATE OF MASS LOSS FROMη#AR IS ON THE ORDER OF −-⊙YR− BUT IT PROBABLY EJECTED ONETO THREE SOLAR MASSES OF MATERIAL DURING THE TWENTY YEARS OF THE 'REAT %RUPTION$URINGTHE'REAT%RUPTIONη#ARSLUMINOSITYMAYHAVEBEENABOUT×,⊙WHEREASITS PRESENT QUIESCENT LUMINOSITY IS NEAR ×,⊙ )T IS ALSO ESTIMATED THAT THE CENTRALSTARSEFFECTIVETEMPERATUREISROUGHLY +!LTHOUGHATTHETIMETHISTEXTWASWRITTENmV∼ FORη#AR MOST OF ITS LUMINOSITY IS INITIALLY EMITTED IN THE ULTRAVIOLET WAVELENGTHREGION OWING TO THE HIGH EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE -UCH OF THE 56 RADIATION IS SCATTEREDABSORBED AND REEMITTED BY DUST GRAINS IN THE INFRARED PORTION OF THE ELECTROMAGNETIC
FIGURE 1η#ARINAE IS A LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLE THAT IS ESTIMATED TO HAVE A MASS OF  -⊙ANDISRAPIDLYLOSINGMASS%ACHLOBEHASADIAMETEROFAPPROXIMATELYPC;#OURTESYOF*ON-ORSE5NIVERSITY OF #OLORADO	 AND .!3!=The Fate of Massive Stars
4HE EXPANDING LOBES ARE LARGELY HOLLOW BUT THE MATERIAL IN THE SHELLS CONTAINS MOLECULES OF ( #( AND /( (OWEVER IT APPEARS THAT THE HOMUNCULUS IS SIGNIﬁCANTLY DEPLETED IN # AND / WHILE BEING ENRICHED IN (E AND . 4HIS WOULD SUGGEST THAT THE EJECTED MATERIAL HAS UNDERGONE NUCLEAR PROCESSING BY THE #./ CYCLE 4HE PRESENT


<<<PAGE 587>>>

SPECTRUM AT TEMPERATURES RANGING FROM  + TO  + 4HE VISUAL MAGNITUDE ALONELEADS TO AN UNDERESTIMATE OF THE TOTAL LUMINOSITY OF THE OBJECT TODAY!S A CLASS ,"6S TEND TO HAVE HIGH EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURES OF BETWEEN  + AND + WITH LUMINOSITIES IN EXCESS OF ,⊙4HIS PLACES ,"6S IN THE UPPERLEFTHANDPORTIONOFTHE(n2DIAGRAM'IVENTHECOMPOSITIONOFTHEIRATMOSPHERESANDEJECTA,"6SARE CLEARLY EVOLVED POSTMAINSEQUENCE STARS )T ALSO APPEARS THAT ,"6S CLUSTER IN AN INSTABILITY REGION OF THE (n2 DIAGRAM SUGGESTING THAT THEIR BEHAVIOR IS TRANSIENT TURNING ONSHORTLY AFTER THEY LEAVE THE MAIN SEQUENCE AND CEASING AFTER SOME PERIOD OF TIMEPRESSUREMAYEQUALOREXCEEDTHEFORCEOFGRAVITYONSURFACELAYERSOFTHESTAR4HEDERIVEDEXPRESSION FOR THE %DDINGTON LUMINOSITY LIMITIS A FUNCTION OF THE 2OSSELANDMEANOPACITY OF THE SURFACE LAYERSL%D=πGcκM.4HE hCLASSICALv %DDINGTON LIMIT ASSUMES THAT THE OPACITY IS DUE ENTIRELY TO SCATTERING FROMSOME TEMPERATUREDEPENDENT COMPONENT OF OPACITY PERHAPS DUE TO IRON LINES MODIlESTHE OPACITY TERM AS THE STAR EVOLVES TO THE RIGHT IN THE (n2 DIAGRAM !S THE TEMPERATUREDECREASESANDTHEOPACITYINCREASESTHE%DDINGTONLUMINOSITYWOULDDROPBELOWTHEACTUALLUMINOSITYOFTHESTARIMPLYINGTHATRADIATIONPRESSUREDOMINATESGRAVITYDRIVINGMASSLOSSFROM THE ENVELOPE!SECOND SUGGESTION IS THAT ATMOSPHERIC PULSATION INSTABILITIES MAY DEVELOP MUCH LIKETHOSEIN#EPHEIDS22,YRAESANDLONGPERIODVARIABLES3OMEPRELIMINARYNONLINEARPULSATIONSTUDIESHAVESUGGESTEDTHATLARGEAMPLITUDEOSCILLATIONSCANDEVELOPIN,"6SWHICHCOULD CONCEIVABLY DRIVE MASS LOSS AS OUTWARDLY MOVING MASS SHELLS ARE LIFTED OFF THE SURFACE DURING THE PULSATION CYCLE -OREOVER SUCH PULSATIONS ARE LIKELY TO BE VERY IRREGULARIN SUCH A WEAKLY BOUND ATMOSPHERE 5NFORTUNATELY THESE MODELS ARE VERY SENSITIVE TO THETREATMENTOFTIMEDEPENDENTCONVECTIONWHICHISPOORLYUNDERSTOODINTHECONTEXTOFSTELLARPULSATIONS!LSO INTRIGUING IS THE APPARENT HIGH ROTATION VELOCITY OF AT LEAST SOME ,"6S 2APIDROTATION WOULD RESULT IN DECREASING THE hEFFECTIVEv GRAVITY AT THE EQUATOR OF THESE STARS DUETO CENTRIFUGAL EFFECTS MAKING THE GASES IN THE ATMOSPHERES OF THE EQUATORIAL REGIONS EASIERTODRIVEAWAYFROMTHESURFACE)THASBEENSUGGESTEDTHATTHEEQUATORIALDISKAROUNDη#ARCOULD HAVE FORMED FROM JUST SUCH AN EFFECT DURING THE LESSER ERUPTION BETWEEN  AND4HE POSSIBILITY THAT ,"6S ARE MEMBERS OF BINARY STAR SYSTEMS HAS ALSO BEEN SUGGESTEDASINmUENCINGTHEBEHAVIOROFTHESESTARS)NTERESTINGLYη#AREXHIBITSAYRPERIODICITYIN THE EQUIVALENT WIDTHS OF SOME OF ITS SPECTRAL LINES HINTING AT THE PRESENCE OF A BINARYCOMPANION ALTHOUGH IT IS UNCLEAR HOW THE PRESENCE OF A COMPANION CAN CAUSE THE EFFECTSOBSERVEDThe Fate of Massive Stars
! VARIETY OF MECHANISMS HAVE BEEN PROPOSED TO EXPLAIN THE BEHAVIOR OF ,"6S INCLUDING THEIR VARIABILITY AND DRAMATIC MASS LOSS 4HE UPPER END OF THE MAIN  SEQUENCE IS VERY NEAR THE %DDINGTON LUMINOSITY LIMIT WHERE THE FORCE DUE TO RADIATION
FREE ELECTRONS WHICH IS CONSTANT FOR A COMPLETELY IONIZED GAS ! hMODIﬁEDv  %DDINGTON LIMIT HAS BEEN PROPOSED BY 2OBERTA - (UMPHREYS AND +RIS $AVIDSON IN WHICH


<<<PAGE 588>>>

)T MAY TURN OUT THAT MORE THAN ONE OF THE MECHANISMS DISCUSSED ABOVE COULD INmUENCETHE BEHAVIOR OF ,"6S OR PERHAPS THE PRINCIPAL MECHANISM IS ONE THAT HAS NOT YET BEENIDENTIlEDWolf–Rayet Stars#LOSELYRELATEDTOTHE,"6SARETHEWolf–Rayet stars72	4HElRST72SWEREDISCOVEREDBY#*%7OLFAND'2AYETWHILEWORKINGATTHE0ARIS/BSERVATORYIN5SINGAVISUALWAVELENGTH SPECTROMETER TO CONDUCT A SURVEY OF STARS IN #YGNUS THEY OBSERVED THREE STARSALL WITHIN ONE DEGREE OF EACH OTHER THAT EXHIBITED UNUSUALLY STRONG VERY BROAD EMISSIONLINESRATHERTHANTHEABSORPTIONLINESUSUALLYSEENINOTHERSTARS4ODAYMORETHAN72STARS HAVE BEEN IDENTIlED IN THE -ILKY 7AY 'ALAXY ALTHOUGH THE TOTAL NUMBER OF 72S INTHE 'ALAXY IS ESTIMATED TO BE BETWEEN  AND  ON THE BASIS OF SAMPLING STATISTICSSEE &IG 	!LONGWITHTHESTRONGEMISSIONLINES72STARSAREVERYHOTWITHEFFECTIVETEMPERATURESOF  + TO  + 72S ARE ALSO LOSING MASS AT RATES IN EXCESS OF −-⊙YR−WITHWINDSPEEDSRANGINGFROMKM S−TOMORETHANKM S−)NADDITIONTHEREISSTRONG EVIDENCE THAT MANY AND PERHAPS ALL 72 STARS ARE RAPIDLY ROTATING WITH EQUATORIALROTATION SPEEDS OF TYPICALLY  KM S−7HEREAS ,"6S ARE ALL VERY MASSIVE STARS OF  -⊙OR MORE72S CAN HAVE PROGENITORMASSES AS LOW AS  -⊙ 72S ALSO DO NOT DEMONSTRATE THE DRAMATIC VARIABILITY THAT ISCHARACTERISTIC OF ,"6S
FIGURE 24HE NEBULA - AROUND THE 7OLFn2AYET STAR 72  4HE SURFACE TEMPERATUREOF THE STAR IS ABOUT  + #LUMPINESS IS CLEARLY EVIDENT IN THE NEBULA AND THE MASS OF EACH BLOBIS ABOUT  -⊕ 72  IS AT A DISTANCE OF  PC IN 3AGITTARIUS ;#OURTESY OF 9VES 'ROSDIDIER5NIVERSITYOF-ONTREALAND/BSERVATOIREDE3TRASBOURG	!NTHONY-OFFAT5NIVERSIT£DE-ONTR£AL	'ILLES *ONCAS 5NIVERSITE ,AVAL	!GNES!CKER /BSERVATOIRE DE 3TRASBOURG	 AND .!3!=The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 589>>>

7HATREALLYSETS7OLFn2AYETSTARSAPARTFROMOTHERSTARSISTHEIRUNUSUALSPECTRA.OTONLYARETHESPECTRADOMINATEDBYBROADEMISSIONLINESBUTTHEYALSOREVEALACOMPOSITIONTHATISDECIDEDLYATYPICAL4ODAYWERECOGNIZETHREECLASSESOF72STARS7.7#AND7/4HESPECTRAOF7.SAREDOMINATEDBYEMISSIONLINESOFHELIUMANDNITROGENALTHOUGHEMISSIONFROM CARBON OXYGEN AND HYDROGEN IS DETECTABLE IN SOME 7. STARS 7# STARS EXHIBITEMISSION LINES OF HELIUM AND CARBON WITH A DISTINCT ABSENCE OF NITROGEN AND HYDROGENLINES &INALLY THE 7/ STARS WHICH ARE MUCH RARER THAN EITHER 7.S OR 7#S HAVE SPECTRACONTAINING PROMINENT OXYGEN LINES WITH SOME CONTRIBUTION FROM HIGHLY IONIZED SPECIES4HELITERATUREFURTHERSUBCLASSIlES7.AND7#STARSBASEDONTHEDEGREEOFIONIZATIONOF SPECIES IN THE ATMOSPHERE &OR EXAMPLE 7. STARS SHOW SPECTRAL LINES OF (E )) . )6AND/6)AND7.STARSCONTAINSPECTRAOFLOWIONIZATIONSPECIESSUCHAS(E)AND.)))h%ARLYv %	 AND hLATEv ,	 TYPES ARE ALSO MENTIONED 7.% STARS ARE 7OLFn2AYET STARS OFIONIZATION CLASSES 7. TO 7. AND 7., STARS ARE OF IONIZATION CLASSES 7. THROUGH7. 3IMILARLY 7# STARS HAVE HIGHER IONIZATION LEVELS (E )) / )6 # 6)	 AND 7#STARS EXHIBIT LOWER IONIZATION LEVELS EG (E ) AND # ))	 7#%S RANGE FOR 7# THROUGH7# AND7#,S INCLUDE7# THROUGH7#4HIS STRANGE TREND IN COMPOSITION FROM 7. TO 7# TO 7/ WAS EVENTUALLY RECOGNIZEDTO BE A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE OF THE MASS LOSS OF THESE STARS 7.S HAVE LOST VIRTUALLY ALL OFTHEIRHYDROGENDOMINATEDENVELOPESREVEALINGMATERIALSYNTHESIZEDBYNUCLEARREACTIONSINTHE CORE #ONVECTION IN THE CORE OF THE STAR HAS BROUGHT EQUILIBRIUM #./ CYCLEPROCESSEDMATERIAL TO THE SURFACE &URTHER MASS LOSS RESULTS IN THE EJECTION OF THE #./ PROCESSEDMATERIALEXPOSINGHELIUMBURNING MATERIALGENERATEDBY THE TRIPLE ALPHA PROCESS4HENIF THE STARSURVIVESLONGENOUGHMASSLOSSWILLEVENTUALLYSTRIPAWAYALLBUT THE OXYGENCOMPONENT OF THE TRIPLEALPHA ASH)NADDITIONTO,"6SAND72STHEUPPERPORTIONOFTHE(n2DIAGRAMALSOCONTAINSbluesupergiant stars"3'	red supergiant stars23'	 ANDOf stars/ SUPERGIANTS WITHPRONOUNCED EMISSION LINES	A General Evolutionary Scheme for Massive Stars)N A SCHEME ORIGINALLY SUGGESTED BY 0ETER #ONTI IN  AND SUBSEQUENTLY MODIlED AGENERALEVOLUTIONARYPATHFORMASSIVESTARSHASBEENOUTLINED)NEACHCASETHESTARENDSITSLIFE IN Asupernova3.	 EXPLOSION TO BE DISCUSSED IN DETAIL IN 3ECTION  4HE MASSESLISTED BELOW ARE ONLY APPROXIMATE	M> -⊙:/→/F→,"6→7.→7#→3. -⊙<M< -⊙:/→/F→7.→7#→3. -⊙<M< -⊙:/→23'→7.→7#→3. -⊙<M< -⊙:/→23'→7.→3. -⊙<M< -⊙:/→23'→"3'→3.4HIS QUALITATIVE EVOLUTIONARY SCHEME HAS BEEN SUPPORTED BY DETAILED NUMERICAL EVOLUTIONARYMODELSOFMASSIVESTARFORMATION%VOLUTIONARYTRACKSFORSTARSOFSOLARCOMPOSITION4HIS VERSION HAS BEEN ADOPTED FROM -ASSEYAnnu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.41  The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 590>>>


 - - - - - - - - -,OG LL  	
,OG TEFFZ  
FIGURE 34HEEVOLUTIONOFMASSIVESTARSWITHZ=.4HESOLIDLINESAREEVOLUTIONARYTRACKSCOMPUTED WITH INITIAL ROTATION VELOCITIES OF  KM S− AND THE DOTTED LINES ARE EVOLUTIONARY TRACKSFOR STARS WITHOUT ROTATION -ASS LOSS HAS BEEN INCLUDED IN THE MODELS AND SIGNIlCANTLY IMPACTS THEEVOLUTION OF THESE STARS &IGURE FROM -EYNET AND -AEDERAstron. Astrophys.404  	RANGING IN MASS FROM  -⊙TO  -⊙ARE SHOWN IN &IG  4HESE MODELS OF 'EORGES-EYNET AND !NDR£S -AEDER INCLUDE MASS LOSS TYPICAL OF MASSIVE STARS 4HE MODELS AREALSOCOMPUTEDWITHANDWITHOUTROTATIONWHENROTATIONISINCLUDEDTHEEQUATORIALROTATIONSPEED IS TAKEN TO BE  KM S− -EYNET AND -AEDER POINT OUT THAT ROTATION CAN HAVE ANAPPRECIABLE AFFECT ON STELLAR EVOLUTION INCLUDING DRIVING INTERNAL MIXING AND ENHANCINGMASS LOSSThe Humphreys–Davidson Luminosity Limit4HESE MASSIVESTAR EVOLUTIONARY TRACKS INDICATE THAT THE MOST MASSIVE STARS NEVER EVOLVETO THE RED SUPERGIANT PORTION OF THE (n2 DIAGRAM 4HIS IS IN AGREEMENT WITH THE QUALITATIVE EVOLUTIONARY SCENARIO PRESENTED ABOVE AND IT IS ALSO CONSISTENT WITH OBSERVATIONS(UMPHREYSAND$AVIDSONWERETHElRSTTOPOINTOUTTHATTHEREISANUPPERLUMINOSITYCUTOFFINTHE(n2DIAGRAMTHATINCLUDESADIAGONALCOMPONENTRUNNINGFROMHIGHESTLUMINOSITIESANDEFFECTIVETEMPERATURESTOLOWERVALUESINBOTHPARAMETERS!TTHATPOINTWHENFULLREDWARDEVOLUTIONARYTRACKSDEVELOPFORSTARSBELOWABOUT-⊙THEHumphreys–Davidsonluminosity limitCONTINUES AT CONSTANT LUMINOSITY!LTHOUGH VERY MASSIVE STARS ARE EXTREMELY RARE ONLY ONE  -⊙STAR EXISTS FOR EVERYONE MILLION  -⊙STARS	 THEY PLAY A MAJOR ROLE IN THE DYNAMICS AND CHEMICAL EVOLUTIONOFTHEINTERSTELLARMEDIUM4HETREMENDOUSAMOUNTOFKINETICENERGYDEPOSITEDINTHE)3-THROUGHTHESTELLARWINDSOFMASSIVESTARSHASASIGNIlCANTIMPACTONTHEKINEMATICSOFTHE)3- )N FACT WHEN VERY MASSIVE STARS FORM THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO QUENCH STAR FORMATIONThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 591>>>

IN THEIR REGIONS 4HE ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT FROM MASSIVE STARS ALSO IONIZES GAS CLOUDS IN THEIRREGION !ND IN ADDITION THE HIGHLY ENRICHED GASES OF MASSIVE STELLAR WINDS INCREASE THEMETALCONTENTOFTHE)3-RESULTINGINTHEFORMATIONOFINCREASINGLYMETALRICHSTARS"ESIDESBEINGSPECTACULARANDEXOTICOBJECTSMASSIVESTARSARECRITICALLYIMPORTANTTOTHEEVOLUTIONOF THE GALAXIES IN WHICH THEY RESIDE2THE CLASSIFICATION OF SUPERNOVAE)Na.d. AN EXTREMELY BRIGHT STAR SUDDENLY APPEARED IN ,UPIS 2EACHING AN ESTIMATEDAPPARENTVISUALMAGNITUDEOFmV=−ITWASREPORTEDLYBRIGHTENOUGHTOREADBYATNIGHT4HISEVENTWASRECORDEDBYASTROLOGERSIN%UROPE#HINA*APAN%GYPTAND)RAQ"ASEDONTHEIR WRITINGS IT IS LIKELY THATSupernova 10063. 	 APPEARED ABOUT!PRIL  AND FADED FROM VIEW ROUGHLY ONE YEAR LATER/THER SIMILAR EVENTS HAVE BEEN SEEN THROUGHOUT HUMAN HISTORY ALTHOUGH ONLY RARELY0ERHAPSTHEMOSTFAMOUSCELESTIALEVENTOFITSKINDOCCURREDON*ULYONLYYEARSAFTERTHEa.d.EVENTWHENAhGUESTSTARvAPPEAREDINTHENIGHTSKYINTHECONSTELLATIONOF 4AURUS 9ANG 7EI4E A COURT ASTROLOGER DURING #HINAS 3UNG DYNASTY RECORDED THEREMARKABLE EVENT NOTING THAT hAFTER MORE THAN A YEAR IT GRADUALLY BECAME INVISIBLEv )NADDITION TO HAVING BEEN CAREFULLY DOCUMENTED IN THE OFlCIAL RECORDS OF THE 3UNG DYNASTYTHESTARWASNOTEDBYTHE*APANESEAND+OREANSANDWASALSORECORDEDINAN!RABICMEDICALTEXTBOOK 4HERE IS EVIDENCE ALTHOUGH THIS IS THE SUBJECT OF SOME DEBATE THAT %UROPEANSMAY HAVE WITNESSED THE EVENT AS WELL!S WITH THEa.d. EVENT THIS AMAZING STAR WASVISIBLEDURINGDAYLIGHT7ITHTHEDEVELOPMENTOFPOWERFULTELESCOPESMODERNASTRONOMERSHAVE IDENTIlED A RAPIDLY EXPANDING CLOUD KNOWN AS THECrab supernova remnantAT THEREPORTED LOCATION OF THIS ANCIENT hGUEST STARv SEE &IG 	)T WAS lVE HUNDRED YEARS BEFORE ANOTHER STAR SUDDENLY APPEARED IN THE HEAVENS IN SUCHDRAMATIC FASHION4YCHO "RAHE ;THE MOST FAMOUS ASTRONOMER OF HIS DAY=AND OTHERS WITNESSED A SUPERNOVA INa.d. 4HIS STRANGE OCCURRENCE WAS CLEARLY INCONTRAST TO THE WIDELY HELD BELIEF IN THE 7ESTERN WORLD AT THE TIME THAT THE HEAVENS WEREUNCHANGING .OT TO BE OUTDONE HIS STUDENT *OHANNES +EPLERALSO WITNESSED ASUPERNOVAEXPLOSIONINa.d.4HESETWOEVENTSARENOWKNOWNASTycho’s supernovaANDKepler’s supernova RESPECTIVELY5NFORTUNATELY+EPLERSSUPERNOVAWASTHELASTSUPERNOVAOBSERVEDTOOCCURINTHE-ILKY7AY'ALAXY(OWEVERON&EBRUARY54)AN3HELTONUSINGAINCHASTROGRAPHATTHE,AS#AMPANAS/BSERVATORYIN#HILEDETECTEDSN 1987AJUSTSOUTHWESTOFAMASSIVEMOLECULAR CLOUD REGION IN THE ,-# KNOWN AS  $ORADUS THE SUPERNOVA IS SHOWN IN&IG )TWASTHElRSTTIMESINCETHEDEVELOPMENTOFMODERNINSTRUMENTSTHATASUPERNOVAHADBEENSEENSOCLOSETO%ARTHTHEDISTANCETOTHE,-#ISKPC	4HEEXCITEMENTOFTHEASTRONOMICALCOMMUNITYWORLDWIDEWASIMMEDIATEANDINTENSE)TWASQUICKLYREALIZEDTHATTHEPROGENITOROFTHISSPECTACULARSUPERNOVAWASABLUESUPERGIANTSTAR.ICHOLAS3ANDULEAKn	 HAD CATALOGED THE STAR 3K−  WHILE INVESTIGATING HOT STARS IN THE -AGELLANIC#LOUDS4HECHANCETOOBSERVEASUPERNOVAFROMSUCHACLOSEVANTAGEPOINTUSING3K−  GETS ITS NAME FROM BEING THE ND ENTRY IN THE−◦DECLINATION BAND OF THE 3ANDULEAK CATALOG OFSTARS IN THE -AGELLANIC #LOUDSThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 592>>>

FIGURE 44HE #RAB SUPERNOVA REMNANT LOCATED  PC AWAY IN THE CONSTELLATION OF4AURUS4HE REMNANT IS THE RESULT OF A4YPE )) SUPERNOVA THAT WAS OBSERVED FOR THE lRST TIME ON *ULY  ;#OURTESY OF .!3! %3! * (ESTER AND! ,OLL !RIZONA 3TATE 5NIVERSITY	=
FIGURE 5!PORTIONOFTHE,ARGE-AGELLANIC#LOUDSHOWING3.!ONTHELOWERRIGHTHANDSIDE OF THE PHOTOGRAPH  $ORADUS ALSO KNOWN AS THE4ARANTULA .EBULA	 IS AN IMMENSE ( )) REGIONTHAT IS CLEARLY EVIDENT ON THE LEFTHAND SIDE OF THE PHOTOGRAPH #OURTESY OF THE %UROPEAN 3OUTHERN/BSERVATORY Ú%3/	The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 593>>>

THE ARSENAL OF TOOLS AVAILABLE TO MODERN ASTROPHYSICS PROVIDED AN IDEAL OPPORTUNITY TO TESTOUR THEORY OF THE FATE OF MASSIVE STARSClasses of Supernovae4ODAY ASTRONOMERS ARE ABLE TO ROUTINELY OBSERVE SUPERNOVAE IN OTHER GALAXIES HENCE THEh!vIN3.!REPRESENTINGTHElRSTSUPERNOVAREPORTEDTHATYEAR	(OWEVERSUPERNOVAEAREEXCEEDINGLYRAREEVENTSTYPICALLYOCCURRINGABOUTONCEEVERYONEHUNDREDYEARSORSOINANYONEGALAXY!STHESPECTRAANDLIGHTCURVESOFSUPERNOVAEHAVEBEENCAREFULLYSTUDIEDITHASBEENREALIZEDTHATTHEREARESEVERALDISTINCTCLASSESOFSUPERNOVAEWITHDIFFERENTCLASSESOF UNDERLYING PROGENITORS AND MECHANISMSType ISUPERNOVAE WERE IDENTIlED lRST AS THOSE SUPERNOVAE THAT DO NOT EXHIBIT ANYHYDROGEN LINES IN THEIR SPECTRA 'IVEN THAT HYDROGEN IS THE MOST ABUNDANT ELEMENT IN THEUNIVERSE THIS FACT ALONE SUGGESTS SOMETHING UNUSUAL ABOUT THESE OBJECTS #ONVERSELY THESPECTRA OFType IISUPERNOVAE CONTAIN STRONG HYDROGEN LINES4YPE ) SUPERNOVAE CAN BE FURTHER SUBDIVIDED ACCORDING TO THEIR SPECTRA 4HOSE 4YPE )SPECTRATHATSHOWASTRONG3I))LINEATNMARECALLEDType Ia4HEOTHERSAREDESIGNATEDType IbORType Ic BASED ON THE PRESENCE )B	 OR ABSENCE )C	 OF STRONG HELIUM LINES&IGURE SHOWSEXAMPLESOFTHESPECTRAOFEACHOFTHEFOURTYPESOFSUPERNOVAE3.E	DISCUSSED HERE
n LOG f/H9261  CONSTANT
2EST WAVELENGTH NM	3PECTRA OF 3.E NEARMAXIMUM LIGHT ^ WEEK	3. $ )A	3. ( ))	3. ) )C	
3. DT )B	#A ))#A ))#A ))3I ))#A ))#A ))
#A ))/ )/ )/ )/ )-G ))
(E )(/H9251(/H9252(/H9253
(E )&E ))&E ))&E ))3I ))&E )))&E ))
.A )3I ))3I ))3I ))3I ))
(E ).A )FIGURE 62EPRESENTATIVESPECTRAOFTHEFOURTYPESOFSUPERNOVAE4YPE)A)B)CAND)).OTETHATALTHOUGH3.)4YPE)C	DOESEXHIBITAWEAK3I))ABSORPTIONLINEITISMUCHLESSPROMINENTTHAN THE 3I LINES IN A 4YPE )A "RIGHTNESS IS IN ARBITRARY mUX UNITS #OURTESY OF 4HOMAS -ATHESON.ATIONAL /PTICAL!STRONOMY /BSERVATORY	The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 594>>>

4HE LACK OF HYDROGEN LINES IN 4YPE ) SUPERNOVAE INDICATES THAT THE STARS INVOLVED HAVEBEENSTRIPPEDOFTHEIRHYDROGENENVELOPES4HEDIFFERENCESINTHESPECTRALSIGNATURESBETWEEN4YPE)AAND4YPES)BAND)CINDICATETHATDIFFERENTPHYSICALMECHANISMSAREATWORK4HISISREmECTEDINTHEDIFFERENTENVIRONMENTSOBSERVEDFORTHESEOUTBURSTS4YPE)ASUPERNOVAEAREFOUND IN ALL TYPES OF GALAXIES INCLUDING ELLIPTICALS THAT SHOW VERY LITTLE EVIDENCE OF RECENTSTAR FORMATION /N THE OTHER HAND 4YPES )B AND )C HAVE BEEN SEEN ONLY IN SPIRAL GALAXIESNEARSITESOFRECENTSTARFORMATION())REGIONS	4HISIMPLIESTHATSHORTLIVEDMASSIVESTARSARE PROBABLY INVOLVED WITH4YPES )B AND )C BUT NOT WITH4YPE )A&IGURE  SHOWS A COMPOSITE LIGHT CURVE AT BLUE B	 WAVELENGTHS FOR 4YPE )S 4HETYPICALPEAKBRIGHTNESSOFA4YPE)AISMB=−.WHILETHELIGHTCURVESOF4YPES)BAND)CSUPERNOVAEAREFAINTERBYTOMAGNITUDESINBLUELIGHTBUTAREOTHERWISESIMILAR!LL4YPE ) SUPERNOVAE SHOW SIMILAR RATES OF DECLINE OF THEIR BRIGHTNESS AFTER MAXIMUM ABOUT.±.	MAGNITUDEPERDAYATDAYS!FTERABOUTDAYSTHERATEOFDIMMINGSLOWSANDBECOMESCONSTANTWITH4YPE)ASDECLININGFASTERTHANTHEOTHERSMAGD−VS  MAG D−	 )T IS BELIEVED THAT 3.  AND THE SUPERNOVAE DETECTED BY 4YCHO3. 	 AND +EPLER 3. 	 WERE4YPE )S/BSERVATIONALLY 4YPE )) SUPERNOVAE ARE CHARACTERIZED BY A RAPID RISE IN LUMINOSITYREACHINGAMAXIMUMBRIGHTNESSTHATISTYPICALLYMAGDIMMERTHAN4YPE)AS4HEPEAKLIGHT OUTPUT IS FOLLOWED BY A STEADY DECREASE DROPPING SIX TO EIGHT MAGNITUDES IN A YEAR4HEIRSPECTRAALSOEXHIBITLINESASSOCIATEDWITHHYDROGENANDHEAVIERELEMENTS&URTHERMORE0#YGNI PROlLES ARE COMMON IN MANY LINES INDICATING RAPID EXPANSION 4HE #RABSUPERNOVA 3. 	 AND 3. !WERE4YPE ))S4HELIGHTCURVESOF4YPE))SUPERNOVAECANBECLASSIlEDASEITHERType II-PPLATEAU	ORType II-LLINEAR	#OMPOSITEBMAGNITUDELIGHTCURVESOFEACHTYPEARESHOWNIN&IG ! TEMPORARY BUT CLEAR PLATEAU EXISTS BETWEEN ABOUT  AND  DAYS AFTER MAXIMUM LIGHTFOR4YPE))0SUPERNOVAENOSUCHDETECTABLEPLATEAUEXISTSFOR4YPE)),OBJECTS4YPE))0SUPERNOVAE ALSO OCCUR APPROXIMATELY TEN TIMES AS OFTEN AS4YPE )),S
4YPE ) 3UPERNOVAEBLUE LIGHT CURVE
      $AYS AFTER MAXIMUM LIGHTmB BELOW MAXIMUM LIGHT
FIGURE 7#OMPOSITE LIGHT CURVE FOR 4YPE ) SUPERNOVAE AT BLUE WAVELENGTHS!LL MAGNITUDESARERELATIVETOmBATMAXIMUM&IGUREADAPTEDFROM$OGGETTAND"RANCHAstron. J.90		The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 595>>>

4YPE ))0 SUPERNOVAEBLUE LIGHT CURVE
4YPE )), SUPERNOVAEBLUE LIGHT CURVE
$AYS AFTER MAXIMUM LIGHT
$AYS AFTER MAXIMUM LIGHTn         
        mB BELOW MAXIMUM LIGHTmB BELOW MAXIMUM LIGHT
FIGURE 84HECHARACTERISTICSHAPESOF4YPE))0AND4YPE)),LIGHTCURVES4HESEARECOMPOSITELIGHT CURVES BASED ON THE OBSERVATIONS OF MANY SUPERNOVAE &IGURES ADAPTED FROM $OGGETT AND"RANCHAstron. J.90  	!SUMMARY DECISION TREE OF SUPERNOVA CLASSIlCATION IS GIVEN IN &IG /F COURSE NATURE LOVES TO CONFOUND OUR CLEAN CLASSIlCATION SCHEMES 3. * IN THESPIRAL GALAXY - IN 5RSA -AJOR INITIALLY DISPLAYED STRONG HYDROGEN EMISSION LINES IE4YPE))	BUTWITHINAMONTHTHEHYDROGENLINESWEREREPLACEDBYHELIUMANDITSAPPEARANCECHANGED TO THAT OF A 4YPE )B 4HIS PROVIDES SOME INDICATION THAT AT LEAST 4YPE )BS AND4YPE ))S ARE RELATED IN SOME WAY7E WILL LEARN THAT4YPE )CS ARE ALSO CLOSELY RELATED7EKNOWTODAYTHAT4YPE)ASAREFUNDAMENTALLYDIFFERENTEVENTSFROMOTHERSUPERNOVAE)N 3ECTION  WE WILL DISCUSS THE PHYSICS INVOLVED IN 4YPES )B )C AND )) SUPERNOVAEThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 596>>>

3UPERNOVA #LASSIFICATION 3CHEMESPECTRA AT MAXIMUM LIGHT	NO ( LINES3I )) LINESNO 3I )) LINESNO (E LINES( LINES4YPE )4YPE ))4YPE ))0 4YPE )),4YPE )C4YPE )B4YPE )APLATEAU(E LINESNO PLATEAU
FIGURE 94HE CLASSIlCATION OF SUPERNOVAE BASED ON THEIR SPECTRA AT MAXIMUM LIGHT AND THEEXISTENCE OR ABSENCE OF A PLATEAU IN THE4YPE )) LIGHT CURVE3CORE-COLLAPSE SUPERNOVAE4HE GOAL OF UNDERSTANDING THE PHYSICAL PROCESSES INVOLVED IN GENERATING SUPERNOVAE HASBEENALONGSTANDINGCHALLENGE4HESHEERAMOUNTOFENERGYRELEASEDINASUPERNOVAEVENTIS STAGGERING!TYPICAL 4YPE )) RELEASES * OF ENERGY WITH ABOUT  OF THAT APPEARINGASKINETICENERGYOFTHEEJECTEDMATERIALANDLESSTHANBEINGRELEASEDASTHEPHOTONSTHATPRODUCETHESPECTACULARVISUALDISPLAY!SWEWILLSEELATERTHEREMAINDEROFTHEENERGYIS RADIATED IN THE FORM OF NEUTRINOS 3IMILAR VALUES ARE OBTAINED FOR 4YPE )B AND 4YPE )CSUPERNOVAEExample 3.1.4O ILLUSTRATE HOW MUCH ENERGY IS INVOLVED IN A 4YPE )) EVENT CONSIDERTHE EQUIVALENT AMOUNT OF REST MASS AND HOW MUCH IRON COULD ULTIMATELY BE PRODUCED BYRELEASING THAT MUCH NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY&ROME=mc THE ENERGY RELEASED BY A 4YPE )) SUPERNOVA CORRESPONDS TO A REST MASSOFm=E/c=*/c=×KG=. -⊙.4HE BINDING ENERGY OF AN IRON NUCLEUS &E	 THE MOST STABLE OF ALL NUCLEI IS -E6 AND THE MASS OF THE NUCLEUS IS  U)N ORDER TORELEASE* OFENERGYTHROUGHTHEFORMATIONOFIRONNUCLEIFROMPROTONSANDNEUTRONSITWOULD BENECESSARY TO FORMN=/parenleftbigg×*. -E6/NUCLEUS/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg -E6.×−*/parenrightbigg=.×NUCLEI,continuedThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 597>>>

CORRESPONDING TO A MASS OF IRON OFm=N(. U)(.×−KG/U)=.×KG=.-⊙./FCOURSETHISWOULDREQUIRETHAT.-⊙OFIRONBEPRODUCEDALLATONCEINANEXPLOSIVEEVENT IF THIS IS THE SOURCE OF THE ENERGY FOR A 4YPE )) SUPERNOVA /N THE OTHER HAND IF THISMUCH IRON WERE BROKEN DOWN TO THE ORIGINAL PROTONS AND NEUTRONS THE EQUIVALENT AMOUNTOF ENERGY WOULD NEED TO BE ABSORBED!S WE WILL SEE LATERiron is not formedAS A RESULT OF RELEASING THE ENERGY INVOLVED IN ASUPERNOVA EXPLOSION IN FACT THE ENERGY SOURCE IS NOT NUCLEAR (OWEVER IRON IS CRITICALLYINVOLVED IN THE PROCESS IN A PERHAPS UNEXPECTED WAYCore-Collapse Supernova MechanismCORETHEVERYHIGHTEMPERATUREINTHECOREOFAMASSIVESTARMEANSTHATCARBONANDOXYGENCAN BURN AS WELL 4HE END RESULT IS THAT RATHER THAN THE STAR ENDING ITS LIFE THROUGH THEFORMATION OF A PLANETARY NEBULA A CATASTROPHIC SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION OCCURS INSTEAD7HAT FOLLOWS IS A DISCUSSION OF THAT EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS !LTHOUGH ALL OF THE DETAILSHAVE YET TO BE WORKED OUT AT THE TIME OF WRITING THE STORY OF HOW 4YPE )B 4YPE )C AND4YPE))SUPERNOVAEAREPRODUCEDISBECOMINGCLEARER4HETHREETYPESAREALLCLOSELYRELATEDANDALLINVOLVETHECOLLAPSEOFAMASSIVEEVOLVEDSTELLARCORE(ENCECOLLECTIVELY4YPES)B)C AND )) ARE KNOWN AScore-collapse supernovae!STHEHELIUMBURNINGSHELLCONTINUESTOADDASHTOTHECARBONnOXYGENCOREANDASTHECORE CONTINUES TO CONTRACT IT EVENTUALLY IGNITES IN CARBON BURNING GENERATING A VARIETY OFBYPRODUCTS SUCH AS/.E.A-G AND-G4HIS LEADSTOASUCCESSIONOFNUCLEARREACTIONSEQUENCESTHEEXACTDETAILSOFWHICHDEPENDSENSITIVELYON THE MASS OF THE STARBY3I &INALLY AT TEMPERATURES NEAR ×+ SILICON BURNING CAN COMMENCE THROUGH ASERIES OF REACTIONS SUCH AS3I+(E/harpoonleftright3+γ	3+(E/harpoonleftright!R+γ	...#R+(E/harpoonleftright.I+γ.	3ILICON BURNING PRODUCES A HOST OF NUCLEI CENTERED NEAR THE&E PEAKOF THEBINDINGENERGYPERNUCLEONCURVETHEMOSTABUNDANTOFWHICHAREPROBABLY&E&EAND.I!NYFURTHERREACTIONSTHATPRODUCENUCLEIMOREMASSIVETHAN&EAREENDOTHERMICThe Fate of Massive Stars
4HE POSTMAINSEQUENCE EVOLUTION OF STARS MORE MASSIVE THAN ABOUT  -IS DECIDEDLY DIFFERENT !LTHOUGH HYDROGEN IS CONVERTED INTO HELIUM ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE FOLLOWED BY HELIUM BURNING LEADING TO A CARBONnOXYGEN
!SSUMING THAT EACH REACTION SEQUENCE REACHES EQUILIBRIUM AN hONIONLIKEv SHELL STRUCTURE DEVELOPS IN THE INTERIOR OF THE STAR &OLLOWING CARBON BURNING THE OXYGEN IN THE RESULTING NEONnOXYGEN CORE WILL IGNITE PRODUCING A NEW CORE COMPOSITION DOMINATED⊙


<<<PAGE 598>>>

4O SURFACE
)RON CORE3ILICON BURNING/XYGEN BURNING#ARBON BURNING(ELIUM BURNING(YDROGEN BURNING( (E ENVELOPE(E RICH# RICH/ RICH3I RICHFIGURE 104HE ONIONLIKE INTERIOR OF A MASSIVE STAR THAT HAS EVOLVED THROUGH CORE SILICONBURNING)NERTREGIONSOFPROCESSEDMATERIALARESANDWICHEDBETWEENTHENUCLEARBURNINGSHELLS4HEINERTREGIONSEXISTBECAUSETHETEMPERATUREANDDENSITYARENOTSUFlCIENTTOCAUSENUCLEARREACTIONSTOOCCUR WITH THAT COMPOSITION 4HIS DRAWING IS NOT TO SCALE	AND CANNOT CONTRIBUTE TO THE LUMINOSITY OF THE STAR 'ROUPING ALL OF THE PRODUCTS TOGETHERSILICONBURNINGISSAIDTOPRODUCEANiron core!SKETCHOFTHEONIONLIKEINTERIORSTRUCTUREOF A MASSIVE STAR FOLLOWING SILICON BURNING IS GIVEN IN &IG "ECAUSECARBONOXYGENANDSILICONBURNINGPRODUCENUCLEIWITHMASSESPROGRESSIVELYNEARERTHEiron peakOFTHEBINDINGENERGYCURVELESSANDLESSENERGYISGENERATEDPERUNITCARBONBURNINGLASTSYEARSOXYGENBURNINGTAKESROUGHLYDAYSANDSILICONBURNINGIS COMPLETED IN ONLY TWO DAYS!TTHEVERYHIGHTEMPERATURESNOWPRESENTINTHECORETHEPHOTONSPOSSESSENOUGHENERGYTODESTROYHEAVYNUCLEINOTETHEREVERSEARROWSINTHESILICONBURNINGSEQUENCE	APROCESSKNOWN ASphotodisintegration 0ARTICULARLY IMPORTANT ARE THE PHOTODISINTEGRATION OF&EAND(E&E+γ→(E+n	(E+γ→p++n.	7HEN THE MASS OF THE CONTRACTING IRON CORE HAS BECOME LARGE ENOUGH AND THE TEMPERATURESUFlCIENTLYHIGHPHOTODISINTEGRATIONCANINAVERYSHORTPERIODOFTIMEUNDOWHATTHESTARHASBEENTRYINGTODOITSENTIRELIFENAMELYPRODUCEELEMENTSMOREMASSIVETHANHYDROGENANDHELIUM/FCOURSETHISPROCESSOFSTRIPPINGIRONDOWNTOINDIVIDUALPROTONSANDNEUTRONSISHIGHLYENDOTHERMICASSUGGESTEDIN%XAMPLE THERMALENERGYISREMOVEDFROMTHEGASTHATWOULDOTHERWISEHAVERESULTEDINTHEPRESSURENECESSARYTOSUPPORTTHECOREOFTHESTAR4HECOREMASSESFORWHICHTHISPROCESSOCCURSVARYFROM.-⊙FORA-⊙:!-3STAR TO .-⊙FOR A  -⊙STARThe Fate of Massive Stars
MASS OF FUEL !S A RESULT THE TIMESCALE FOR EACH SUCCEEDING REACTION SEQUENCE  BECOMES SHORTER &OR EXAMPLE FOR A  - STAR THE MAINSEQUENCE LIFETIME CORE HYDROGEN BURNING	 IS ROUGHLY  YEARS CORE HELIUM BURNING REQUIRES  YEARS⊙


<<<PAGE 599>>>

5NDERTHEEXTREMECONDITIONSTHATNOWEXISTEGTc∼×+ANDρc∼KG M−FORA-⊙STAR	THEFREEELECTRONSTHATHADASSISTEDINSUPPORTINGTHESTARTHROUGHDEGENERACYPRESSUREARECAPTUREDBYHEAVYNUCLEIANDBYTHEPROTONSTHATWEREPRODUCEDTHROUGHPHOTODISINTEGRATION FOR INSTANCEp++e−→n+νe.	4HE AMOUNT OF ENERGY THAT ESCAPES THE STAR IN THE FORM OF NEUTRINOS BECOMES ENORMOUSDURING SILICON BURNING THE PHOTON LUMINOSITY OF A  -⊙STELLAR MODEL IS .×7WHILE THE NEUTRINO LUMINOSITY IS .×74HROUGH THE PHOTODISINTEGRATION OF IRON COMBINED WITH ELECTRON CAPTURE BY PROTONSAND HEAVY NUCLEI MOST OF THE CORES SUPPORT IN THE FORM OF ELECTRON DEGENERACY PRESSUREIS SUDDENLY GONE AND THE CORE BEGINS TO COLLAPSE EXTREMELY RAPIDLY )N THE INNER PORTIONOF THE CORE THE COLLAPSE IS HOMOLOGOUS AND THE VELOCITY OF THE COLLAPSE IS PROPORTIONALTO THE DISTANCE AWAY FROM THE CENTER OF THE STARIN FREEFALL $URING THE COLLAPSE SPEEDS CAN REACH ALMOST  KM S−IN THE OUTER COREAND WITHIN ABOUT ONE SECOND A VOLUME THE SIZE OF %ARTH HAS BEEN COMPRESSED DOWN TO ARADIUS OF  KMExample 3.2.)F A MASS WITH THE RADIUS OF %ARTH R⊕	 COLLAPSES TO A RADIUS OF ONLY KM A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL ENERGY WOULD BE RELEASED #AN THISENERGY RELEASE BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ENERGY OF A CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA!SSUME FOR SIMPLICITY THAT WE CAN USE .EWTONIAN PHYSICS TO ESTIMATE THE AMOUNT OFENERGY RELEASED DURING THE COLLAPSE &ROM THE VIRIAL THEOREMTHE POTENTIALENERGY OF ASPHERICALLY SYMMETRIC STAR OF CONSTANT DENSITY ISU=−GMR.%QUATINGTHEENERGYOFA4YPE))SUPERNOVAE))=*TOTHEGRAVITATIONALENERGYRELEASEDDURING THE COLLAPSE AND GIVEN THATRf= KM≪R⊕ THE AMOUNT OF MASS REQUIRED TOPRODUCE THE SUPERNOVA WOULD BEM≃/radicalbiggE))RfG≃×KG≃.-⊙.4HIS VALUE IS CHARACTERISTIC OF THE CORE MASSES MENTIONED EARLIER3INCEMECHANICALINFORMATIONWILLPROPAGATETHROUGHTHESTARONLYATTHESPEEDOFSOUNDAND BECAUSE THE CORE COLLAPSE PROCEEDS SO QUICKLY THERE IS NOT ENOUGH TIME FOR THE OUTERLAYERS TO LEARN ABOUT WHAT HAS HAPPENED INSIDE 4HE OUTER LAYERS INCLUDING THE OXYGENCARBON AND HELIUM SHELLS AS WELL AS THE OUTER ENVELOPE ARE LEFT IN THE PRECARIOUS POSITIONOF BEING ALMOST SUSPENDED ABOVE THE CATASTROPHICALLY COLLAPSING COREThe Fate of Massive Stars
!T THE RADIUS WHERE THE VELOCITY EXCEEDS THE LOCAL SOUND SPEED THE  COLLAPSE CAN NO LONGER REMAIN HOMOLOGOUS AND THE INNER CORE DECOUPLES FROM THE NOW SUPERSONIC OUTER CORE WHICH IS LEFT BEHIND AND NEARLY


<<<PAGE 600>>>

4HE HOMOLOGOUS COLLAPSE OF THE INNER CORE CONTINUES UNTIL THE DENSITY THERE EXCEEDSABOUT×KG M−ROUGHLYTHREETIMESTHEDENSITYOFANATOMICNUCLEUS!TTHATPOINTTHE NUCLEAR MATERIAL THAT NOW MAKES UP THE INNER CORE STIFFENS BECAUSE THE STRONG FORCEUSUALLYATTRACTIVE	SUDDENLYBECOMESREPULSIVE4HISISACONSEQUENCEOFTHE0AULIEXCLUSIONPRINCIPLEAPPLIEDTONEUTRONS4HERESULTISTHATTHEINNERCOREREBOUNDSSOMEWHATSENDINGPRESSURE WAVES OUTWARD INTO THE INFALLING MATERIAL FROM THE OUTER CORE7HEN THE VELOCITYOF THE PRESSURE WAVES REACH THE SOUND SPEED THEY BUILD INTO A SHOCK WAVE THAT BEGINS TOMOVE OUTWARD!S THE SHOCK WAVE ENCOUNTERS THE INFALLING OUTER IRON CORE THE HIGH TEMPERATURES THATRESULTCAUSEFURTHERPHOTODISINTEGRATIONROBBINGTHESHOCKOFMUCHOFITSENERGY&OREVERY.-⊙OFIRONTHATISBROKENDOWNINTOPROTONSANDNEUTRONSTHESHOCKLOSES.×*#OMPUTER SIMULATIONS INDICATE THAT AT THIS POINT THE SHOCK STALLS BECOMING NEARLY STATIONARY WITH INFALLING MATERIAL ACCRETING ONTO IT )N OTHER WORDS THE SHOCK HAS BECOME ANaccretion shockS O M E W H A TA K I NT OT H ES I T U A T I O ND U R I N GP R O T O S T E L L A RC O L L A P S E(OWEVER∼4HE SUCCESS OF CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA MODELS SEEMS TO HINGE VERY SENSITIVELY ON THEDETAILSOFTHREEDIMENSIONALSIMULATIONSWHICHALLOWHOTRISINGPLUMESOFGASTOMIXWITHCOLDERINFALLINGGAS4HECHALLENGESLIEINTHEDETAILSOFCONVECTIONTHENEEDTOTREATTHENEUTRINOPHYSICSPROPERLYINCLUDINGELECTRONMUONANDTAUNEUTRINOSANDTHEIRANTIPARTICLES	ANDTHEVERYHIGHRESOLUTIONREQUIREDFORTHECALCULATIONS;UPTOMESHPOINTSLOCATIONS	IN THE COMPUTATIONAL GRID= )T MAY ALSO BE NECESSARY ULTIMATELY TO INCLUDE A PROPER TREATMENT OF SOUND WAVES DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION AND MAGNETIC lELDS IN ORDER TO DESCRIBE ALL OFTHE OBSERVED DETAILS OF A SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION 4HIS LEVEL OF COMPUTATIONAL SOPHISTICATIONCHALLENGES EVEN THE WORLDS MOST POWERFUL SUPERCOMPUTERS!SSUMING THAT THE SCENARIO JUST DESCRIBED IS ESSENTIALLY CORRECT AND THAT THE SHOCK ISABLETORESUMEITSMARCHTOTHESURFACETHESHOCKWILLDRIVETHEENVELOPEANDTHEREMAINDEROF THE NUCLEARPROCESSED MATTER IN FRONT OF IT 4HE TOTAL KINETIC ENERGY IN THE EXPANDINGMATERIAL IS ON THE ORDER OF * ROUGHLY  OF THE ENERGY LIBERATED IN NEUTRINOS &INALLYWHEN THE MATERIAL BECOMES OPTICALLY THIN AT A RADIUS OF ABOUT M OR ROUGHLY !5A TREMENDOUS OPTICAL DISPLAY RESULTS RELEASING APPROXIMATELY * OF ENERGY IN THE FORMOF PHOTONS WITH A PEAK LUMINOSITY OF NEARLY 7 OR ROUGHLY ,⊙ WHICH IS CAPABLEOF COMPETING WITH THE BRIGHTNESS OF AN ENTIRE GALAXY4HEEVENTSJUSTDESCRIBEDTHECATASTROPHICCOLLAPSEOFANIRONCORETHEGENERATIONOFASHOCKWAVEANDTHEENSUINGEJECTIONOFTHESTARSENVELOPEAREBELIEVEDTOBETHEGENERALMECHANISMTHATCREATESACORECOLLAPSESUPERNOVA4HEDETAILSTHATRESULTINA4YPE))RATHERTHAN A 4YPE )B OR 4YPE )C SUPERNOVA HAVE TO DO WITH THE COMPOSITION AND MASS OF THEENVELOPEATTHETIMEOFTHECORECOLLAPSEANDTHEAMOUNTOFRADIOACTIVEMATERIALSYNTHESIZEDIN THE EJECTA.EUTRONS ALONG WITH ELECTRONS AND PROTONS ARE FERMIONSThe Fate of Massive Stars
BELOW THE SHOCK A neutrinosphere DEVELOPS FROM THE PROCESSES OF PHOTODISINTEGRATION AND ELECTRON CAPTURE 3INCE THE OVERLYING MATERIAL IS NOW SO DENSE THAT EVEN NEUTRINOS CANNOT EASILY PENETRATE IT SOME OF THE NEUTRINO ENERGY   	 WILL BE DEPOSITED IN THE MATTER JUST BEHIND THE SHOCK 4HIS ADDITIONAL ENERGY HEATS THE MATERIAL AND ALLOWS THE SHOCK TO RESUME ITS MARCH TOWARD THE SURFACE )F THIS DOES NOT HAPPEN QUICKLY ENOUGH THE INITIALLY outﬂoWING MATERIAL WILL FALL BACK ONTO THE CORE MEANING THAT AN EXPLOSION DOESNT OCCUR


<<<PAGE 601>>>

4YPE))SUPERNOVAEWHICHAREMORECOMMONTHANEITHER4YPE)BOR4YPE)CAREUSUALLYREDSUPERGIANTSTARSINTHEEXTREMEUPPERRIGHTHANDCORNEROFTHE(n2DIAGRAMATTHETIMETHEYUNDERGOCATASTROPHICCORECOLLAPSE4YPE)BSAND4YPE)CSHAVELOSTVARIOUSAMOUNTSOFTHEIRENVELOPESPRIORTODETONATION)TISNOWBELIEVEDTHATTHESEARETHEPRODUCTSOFEXPLODED7OLFn2AYET STARS 4YPE )BS AND 4YPE )CS MAY CORRESPOND TO THE DETONATION OF 7. AND7#7OLFn2AYETSRESPECTIVELYRECALLTHE#ONTISCENARIOFORTHEEVOLUTIONOFMASSIVESTARSDESCRIBED Stellar Remnants of a Core-Collapse Supernova)F THE INITIAL MASS OF THE STAR ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE WAS NOT TOO LARGE PERHAPSM:!-3<-⊙	THEREMNANTINTHEINNERCOREWILLSTABILIZEANDBECOMEAneutron starESSENTIALLYAGIGANTICNUCLEUS	SUPPORTEDBYDEGENERATENEUTRONPRESSURE(OWEVERIFTHEINITIALSTELLARMASS IS MUCH LARGER EVEN THE PRESSURE OF NEUTRON DEGENERACY CANNOT SUPPORT THE REMNANTAGAINST THE PULL OF GRAVITY AND THE lNAL COLLAPSE WILL BE COMPLETE PRODUCING Ablack holeANOBJECTWHOSEMASSHASCOLLAPSEDTOAsingularityOFINlNITEDENSITY	 )NEITHERCASETHECREATION OF THESE EXOTIC OBJECTS IS ACCOMPANIED BY A TREMENDOUS PRODUCTION OF NEUTRINOSTHE MAJORITY OF WHICH ESCAPE INTO SPACE WITH A TOTAL ENERGY ON THE ORDER OF THE BINDINGENERGYOFANEUTRONSTARAPPROXIMATELY×*4HISREPRESENTSROUGHLYTIMESMOREENERGY THAN THE 3UN WILL PRODUCE OVER ITS ENTIRE MAINSEQUENCE LIFETIMEThe Light Curves and the Radioactive Decay of the Ejecta!4YPE ))0 SUPERNOVA IS THE MOST COMMON TYPE OF CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA 4HE SOURCEOF THE PLATEAU IN4YPE ))0LIGHT CURVES IS DUE LARGELY TO THE ENERGY DEPOSITED BY THE SHOCKINTO THE HYDROGENRICH ENVELOPE 4HE GAS WHICH WAS IONIZED BY THE SHOCK ENTERS A STAGEOFPROLONGEDRECOMBINATIONRELEASINGTHEENERGYATANEARLYCONSTANTTEMPERATUREOFABOUT +4HE PLATEAU MAY BE SUPPORTED FURTHER BY THE ENERGY DEPOSITED IN THE ENVELOPE BY THEradioactive decayOF.ITHATWASPRODUCEDBYTHESHOCKFRONTDURINGITSMARCHTHROUGHTHESTARTHEHALFLIFEOF.IISτ/=.DAYS	)TISEXPECTEDTHATTHEEXPLOSIVENUCLEOSYNTHESISOF THE SUPERNOVA SHOCK SHOULD HAVE PRODUCED SIGNIlCANT AMOUNTS OF OTHER RADIOACTIVEISOTOPES AS WELL SUCH AS#O τ/= DAYS	.A τ/=. YR	 AND4I τ/≃YR	)FTHEISOTOPESAREPRESENTINSUFlCIENTQUANTITIESEACHINTURNMAYCONTRIBUTETOTHEOVERALL LIGHT CURVE CAUSING THE SLOPE OF THE CURVE TO CHANGE4HE.I IS TRANSFORMED INTO#O THROUGH THEbeta-decayREACTION.I→#O+e++νe+γ.	4HEENERGYRELEASEDBYTHEDECAYISDEPOSITEDINTOTHEOPTICALLYTHICKEXPANDINGSHELLWHICHISTHENRADIATEDAWAYFROMTHESUPERNOVAREMNANTSPHOTOSPHERE4HIShHOLDSUPvTHELIGHT4HEUPPERMASSLIMITOFTHEPROGENITORTHATRESULTSINTHEFORMATIONOFANEUTRONSTARDEPENDSONHOWMETALRICHTHEORIGINALSTARWAS!STARSUFlCIENTLYMETALRICHMAYFORMANEUTRONSTAREVENIFITSINITIALMASSISMUCHGREATERTHAN  -⊙%LECTRONS AND POSITRONS ARE ALSO KNOWN ASβPARTICLES EARLIER

The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 602>>>

CURVE FOR A TIME EXTENDING THE OBSERVED PLATEAU %VENTUALLY THE EXPANDING GAS CLOUD WILLBECOME OPTICALLY THIN EXPOSING THE CENTRAL PRODUCT OF THE EXPLOSION THE NEUTRON STAR ORBLACK HOLE#O THE PRODUCT OF THE RADIOACTIVE DECAY OF.I IS ITSELF RADIOACTIVE WITH A LONGERHALFLIFE OF  DAYS#O→&E+e++νe+γ.	4HIS IMPLIES THAT AS THE LUMINOSITY OF THE SUPERNOVA DIMINISHES OVER TIME IT SHOULD BEPOSSIBLE TO DETECT THE CONTRIBUTION TO THE LIGHT BEING MADE BY#O 4YPE )),SUPERNOVAEAPPEARTOHAVEHADPROGENITORSTARSWITHSIGNIlCANTLYREDUCEDHYDROGENENVELOPESIMPLYINGTHAT THE SIGNATURE OF THE RADIOACTIVE DECAY BECOMES EVIDENT ALMOST IMMEDIATELY AFTER THEEVENT3INCERADIOACTIVEDECAYISASTATISTICALPROCESSTHERATEOFDECAYMUSTBEPROPORTIONALTOTHE NUMBER OF ATOMS REMAINING IN THE SAMPLE ORdNdt=−λN,	WHEREλIS A CONSTANT )T IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE TO SHOW THAT %Q  	 CAN BE INTEGRATED TOGIVEN(t)=Ne−λt,	WHERENIS THE ORIGINAL NUMBER OF RADIOACTIVE ATOMS IN THE SAMPLE SEE &IG 	 ANDλ=LNτ/.
           4IME D	!MOUNT NN	
FIGURE 114HE RADIOACTIVE DECAY OF.I WITH A HALFLIFE OFτ/=. DAYS 4HERE IS A CHANCE THAT ANY GIVEN.I ATOM WILL DECAY DURING A TIME INTERVAL OF  DAYS )F THE ORIGINAL SAMPLEIS ENTIRELY COMPOSED OF.I AFTERnSUCCESSIVE HALFLIVES THE FRACTION OF .I ATOMS REMAINING IS −nThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 603>>>

3INCE THE RATE AT WHICH DECAY ENERGY IS BEING DEPOSITED INTO THE SUPERNOVA REMNANT MUSTBE PROPORTIONAL TOdN/dt THE SLOPE OF THE BOLOMETRIC LIGHT CURVE IS GIVEN BYdLOGLdt=−.λ	ORdMBOLdt=.λ.	4HEREFORE BY MEASURING THE SLOPE OF THE LIGHT CURVE WE CAN DETERMINEλAND VERIFY THEPRESENCE OF LARGE QUANTITIES OF A SPECIlC RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPE LIKE#O'IVEN ITS PROXIMITY TO %ARTH THE MOST CAREFULLY STUDIED SUPERNOVA TO DATE HAS BEEN3. ! (OWEVER ALMOST AS SOON AS IT WAS DISCOVERED ASTRONOMERS REALIZED THAT3. ! WAS UNUSUAL WHEN COMPARED WITH OTHER MORE DISTANT 4YPE ))S THAT HAD BEENOBSERVED4HISWASMOSTEVIDENTINTHERATHERSLOWRISETOMAXIMUMLIGHTTAKINGDAYS	WHICHPEAKEDONLYATANABSOLUTEBOLOMETRICMAGNITUDEOF−.WHEREASATYPICAL4YPE))REACHESMBOL=− 4HE LIGHT CURVE THROUGH DAY  AFTER THE OUTBURST IS SHOWN IN&IG 4HE DECAY OF THE . -⊙OF.I THAT WAS PRODUCED BY THE SHOCK OCCURRED WHILE THETIMESCALE REQUIRED FOR ENERGY TO BE RADIATED AWAY WAS STILL QUITE LONG #ONSEQUENTLY THE
,OG L 7	
$AYS SINCE OUTBURST.A4I ¥ #O#O
FIGURE 124HE BOLOMETRIC LIGHT CURVE OF 3. ! THROUGH THE lRST  DAYS AFTER THEEXPLOSION4HEDASHEDLINESSHOWTHECONTRIBUTIONSEXPECTEDFROMTHERADIOACTIVEISOTOPESPRODUCEDBY THE SHOCK WAVE 4HE INITIAL MASSES ARE ESTIMATED TO BE.I AND LATER#O	 . -⊙#O. -⊙lVE TIMES THE SOLAR ABUNDANCE	4I ×−-⊙ AND.A ×−-⊙ &IGUREADAPTED FROM 3UNTZEFF ET ALAp. J. Lett.384 , 	The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 604>>>

ADDED DECAY ENERGY PRODUCED A BUMP ON THE LIGHT CURVE NEAR MAXIMUM LIGHT RATHER THANFORMING A PLATEAU "Y THE TIME THE RESULTING#O BEGAN TO DECAY THIS DIFFUSION TIMESCALEHAD BECOME SUFlCIENTLY SHORT THAT THE DECREASE IN THE LUMINOSITY OF THE REMNANT BEGAN TOTRACK CLOSELY THE RATE OF DECAY OF COBALT 3UBSEQUENTLY THE NEXT IMPORTANT RADIOACTIVEISOTOPE#O BEGAN TO PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIGHT CURVE 4HEEXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE VARIOUS RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPES TO THE LIGHT CURVE OF 3. !ARE SHOWN IN &IG  THE SLOPES IN THE LIGHT CURVE BEING RELATED TO THE HALFLIVES OF THEISOTOPES THROUGH %Q  	3.!ALSOALLOWEDASTRONOMERSFORTHElRSTTIMETODIRECTLYMEASURETHE8RAYANDGAMMARAY EMISSION LINES PRODUCED BY RADIOACTIVE DECAY )N PARTICULAR THE KE6 ANDKE6LINESOF#OWEREDETECTEDBYANUMBEROFEXPERIMENTSCONlRMINGTHEPRESENCEOFTHISISOTOPE$OPPLERSHIFTMEASUREMENTSINDICATETHATTHEHEAVIERISOTOPESINTHEREMNANTARE EXPANDING AT SEVERAL THOUSAND KILOMETERS PER SECONDThe Subluminous Nature of SN 1987A4HE MYSTERY OF THE SUBLUMINOUS NATURE OF 3. !WAS SOLVED WHEN THE IDENTITY OF ITSPROGENITOR WAS ESTABLISHED4HE STAR THAT BLEW UP WAS THE THMAGNITUDEblueSUPERGIANTSPECTRALCLASS")	3K−3INCEWHATEXPLODEDWASAMUCHSMALLERBLUESUPERGIANTRATHERTHANAREDSUPERGIANTASISUSUALLYASSUMEDTOBETHECASE	THESTARWASMOREDENSE!S A RESULT BEFORE THE THERMAL ENERGY PRODUCED BY THE SHOCK COULD DIFFUSE OUT AND ESCAPEASLIGHTITWASCONVERTEDINTOTHEMECHANICALENERGYREQUIREDTOLIFTTHEENVELOPEOFTHESTAROUTOFTHEDEEPERPOTENTIALWELLOFABLUESUPERGIANT-EASUREMENTSOF(αLINESINDICATETHATSOME OF THE OUTER HYDROGEN ENVELOPE WAS EJECTED AT SPEEDS NEAR  KM S− OR .c4HEAVAILABLEOBSERVATIONSOF3K−TOGETHERWITHTHEORETICALEVOLUTIONARYMODELSSUGGEST THAT THE PROGENITOR OF 3. !HAD A MASS OF ROUGHLY  -⊙WHEN IT WAS ON THEMAIN SEQUENCE AND THAT IT LOST PERHAPS A FEW SOLAR MASSES BEFORE ITS IRON CORE COLLAPSEDESTIMATED TO BE BETWEEN  AND .-⊙	 !LTHOUGH IT WAS APPARENTLY A RED SUPERGIANTFOR BETWEEN SEVERAL HUNDRED THOUSAND AND ONE MILLION YEARS IT EVOLVED TO THE BLUE JUSTYEARSBEFORETHEEXPLOSIONREFERTOTHEEVOLUTIONARYTRACKSIN&IG THEBLUEWARDLOOPOFA-⊙STARISNOTSHOWNBUTTHEBLUEWARDLOOPOFA-⊙STARISPRESENTONTHEDIAGRAM	3UPPORTINGTHISHYPOTHESISISTHEOBSERVATIONTHATHYDROGENWASMOREABUNDANTIN THE ENVELOPE OF 3K−  THAN WAS HELIUM SUGGESTING THAT THE STAR HAD NOT SUFFEREDEXTENSIVE AMOUNTS OF MASS LOSS 7HETHER AND WHEN A MASSIVE STAR EVOLVES FROM BEING AREDSUPERGIANTTOABLUESUPERGIANTBEFOREEXPLODINGDEPENDSSENSITIVELYONTHEMASSOFTHESTARITCANNOTBEMUCHMORETHANABOUT-⊙	ITSCOMPOSITIONITMUSTBEMETALPOORASARE THE STARS OF THE ,-#	 THE RATE OF MASS LOSS WHICH MUST BE LOW	 AND THE TREATMENT OFCONVECTION ALWAYS A MAJOR UNCERTAINTY IN THEORETICAL STELLAR MODELS	Supernova Remnants4HEREARENOWMANYEXAMPLESOFsupernova remnants3.2	INCLUDINGTHE#RAB.EBULALOCATEDINTHECONSTELLATIONOF4AURUSRECALL&IG 	4ODAYNEARLYYEARSSINCETHEThe Fate of Massive Stars
3.  EXPLOSION THE #RAB IS STILL EXPANDING AT A RATE OF ALMOST  KM S AND IT HAS A LUMINOSITY OF  ¾  ,  -UCH OF THE RADIATION BEING EMITTED IS IN THE FORM OF  HIGHLY  POLARIZED  SYNCHROTRON  RADIATION  INDICATING  THE  PRESENCE  OF  RELATIVISTIC⊙


<<<PAGE 605>>>

FIGURE 13!N(347&0#IMAGEOFAPORTIONOFTHE#YGNUS,OOPPCAWAY#OURTESYOF * (ESTER!RIZONA 3TATE 5NIVERSITY AND .!3!	ELECTRONSTHATARESPIRALINGAROUNDMAGNETIClELDLINES4HEONGOINGSOURCEOFTHEELECTRONSAND THE CONTINUED HIGH LUMINOSITY SO LONG AFTER THE EXPLOSION REMAINED MAJOR PUZZLES INASTRONOMY UNTIL THE DISCOVERY OF ApulsarA RAPIDLY SPINNING NEUTRON STAR	 AT THE CENTER OFTHE #RAB 3.2! SECOND EXAMPLE OF A SUPERNOVA REMNANT IS SHOWN IN &IG  4HE IMAGE IS OF ASMALL PORTION OF THE YEAROLD #YGNUS ,OOP NEBULA LOCATED  PC FROM %ARTH INTHE CONSTELLATION OF #YGNUS 4HE REMNANT IS EXPANDING FROM LEFT TO RIGHT IN THE IMAGEPRODUCING SHOCK FRONTS SEVERAL ASTRONOMICAL UNITS WIDE AS THE DEBRIS FROM THE SUPERNOVAEXPLOSIONENCOUNTERSMATERIALINTHEINTERSTELLARMEDIUM4HESHOCKSEXCITEANDIONIZETHE)3- CAUSING THE OBSERVED EMISSION!LTHOUGHMASSLOSSPRIORTOTHEEXPLOSIONCOULDNOTHAVEBEENEXCESSIVETHEPROGENITOROF3.!DIDLOSESOMEMASSRESULTINGINAVERYUNUSUALSTRUCTUREAROUNDTHEEXPANDINGSUPERNOVAREMNANT4HE(UBBLE3PACE4ELESCOPEHASRECORDEDTHREERINGSAROUND3.!&IG 	4HEINNERMOSTRINGMEASURESPCINDIAMETERANDLIESINAPLANETHATCONTAINSTHECENTEROFTHESUPERNOVAEXPLOSION)TGLOWSINVISIBLELIGHTASACONSEQUENCEOFEMISSIONSFROM / ))) ENERGIZED BY RADIATION FROM THE SUPERNOVA AND APPEARS ELONGATED BECAUSE IT ISINCLINED RELATIVE TO OUR LINE OF SIGHT 4HE MATERIAL MAKING UP THE CENTRAL RING WAS EJECTEDBY STELLAR WINDS  YEARS BEFORE THE EXPLOSION OF 3. !4HE TWO LARGER RINGS ARE NOT IN PLANES CONTAINING THE CENTRAL EXPLOSION BUT LIE IN FRONTOF AND BEHIND THE STAR /NE EXPLANATION FOR THESE FASCINATING AND UNEXPECTED FEATURES ISTHAT 3K−  RESIDED NEAR A COMPANION STAR POSSIBLY A NEUTRON STAR OR A BLACKHOLEThe Fate of Massive Stars
!S THIS COMPANION SOURCE WOBBLES NARROW JETS OF RADIATION FROM THE SOURCE hPAINTv THE RINGS ON AN HOURGLASSSHAPED BIPOLAR DISTRIBUTION OF MASS THAT WAS EJECTED FROM 3K   )T IS IN THE DENSER EQUATORIAL PLANE OF THE BIPOLAR MASS DISTRIBUTION THAT THE CENTRAL RING IS LOCATED )N SUPPORT OF THIS HYPOTHESIS RESEARCHERS BELIEVE THAT THEY MAY HAVE identiﬁed THE SOURCE OF THESE BEAMS OF RADIATION ABOUT  PC FROM THE CENTER OF THE SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION CONSISTENT WITH THE FACT THAT THE LARGER RINGS  APPEAR TO BE OFFSET FROM THE EXPLOSIONS CENTER /PPONENTS OF THIS MODEL BELIEVE THAT THE  EXPLANATION IS TOO COMPLICATED )T REQUIRES TWO SOURCES OF HIGHENERGY RADIATION ONE TO

<<<PAGE 606>>>

FIGURE 142INGS AROUND 3. ! DETECTED BY THE (UBBLE 3PACE 4ELESCOPE IN  4HEDIAMETEROFTHEINNERRINGISPC#OURTESYOF$R#HRISTOPHER"URROWS%3!343C)AND.!3!	EXPLAIN THE CENTRAL RING AND ANOTHER TO EXPLAIN THE LARGER ONES !LTERNATIVELY THE LARGERRINGS COULD BE THE PRODUCT OF A HOT FAST STELLAR WIND FROM THE BLUE SUPERGIANT PROGENITOROVERTAKING THE SLOWER COOLER WIND GIVEN OFF BY THE STAR WHEN IT WAS STILL A RED SUPERGIANT)N THE SUMMER OF  mUCTUATING RADIO EMISSIONS WERE lNALLY DETECTED FROM THE SUPERNOVA !LTHOUGH RADIO WAVELENGTH ENERGY WAS DETECTED DURING THE lRST DAYS FOLLOWINGTHE EXPLOSION 3. !HAD REMAINED RADIO QUIET SINCE THAT TIME!PPARENTLY THE SHOCKWAVE STILL PROPAGATING OUTWARD AT A SPEED CLOSE TO .c COLLIDED WITH CLUMPS OF MATERIALLOST FROM 3K−  PRIOR TO THE SUPERNOVA EVENT4HE SHOCK FRONT FROM THE EXPANDING SUPERNOVA REMNANT OF 3. !BEGAN TO COLLIDEWITH THE SLOWERMOVING STELLAR WIND COMPRISING THE INNER RING IN  4HE RESULT WAS ABRILLIANTDISPLAYOFBRIGHTCLUMPSINTHEINNERRINGTHATDEVELOPEDOVERTHENEXTSEVERALYEARS4HEEXPANDINGSHOCKFRONTANDTHEINNERRINGARESHOWNINSUCCESSIVEIMAGESIN&IG The Detection of Neutrinos from SN 1987A!RGUABLY THE MOST EXCITING EARLY OBSERVATIONS OF 3. !WERE BASED ON ITS NEUTRINOSREPRESENTING THE lRST TIME THAT NEUTRINOS HAD BEEN DETECTED FROM AN ASTRONOMICAL SOURCEOTHER THAN THE 3UN 4HE MEASUREMENT OF THE NEUTRINO BURST CONlRMED THE BASIC THEORY OFCORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVAE AND AMOUNTS TO OUR hSEEINGv THE FORMATION OF A NEUTRON STAR OUTOF THE COLLAPSED IRON CORE4HEARRIVALOFTHENEUTRINOBURSTWASRECORDEDOVERAPERIODOFSECONDSBEGINNINGAT&EBRUARY54THREEHOURSbeforeTHEARRIVALOFTHEPHOTONSAT&EBRUARY544WELVE EVENTS WERE RECORDED AT *APANS +AMIOKANDE )) #ERENKOV DETECTOR AND AT THESAME TIME EIGHT EVENTS WERE DETECTED BY THE UNDERGROUND )-" #ERENKOV DETECTOR NEAR)-" STANDS FOR THE CONSORTIUM THAT OPERATES THE OBSERVATORY 5NIVERSITY OF #ALIFORNIA AT )RVINE 5NIVERSITY OF-ICHIGAN AND "ROOKHAVEN .ATIONAL ,ABORATORYThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 607>>>

3EPTEMBER   -ARCH   &EBRUARY   *ULY   &EBRUARY  *ANUARY   !PRIL   &EBRUARY   *UNE   .OVEMBER  -ARCH   $ECEMBER   *ANUARY   !UGUST   .OVEMBER  FIGURE 154HEEXPANDINGNEBULAFROM3.!ISSEENINTHECENTEROFTHISSERIESOFIMAGES4HEINNERRINGSHOWNIN&IG  IS BEINGOVERTAKENBYTHESHOCKFRONTCAUSINGCLUMPSOFGASTOGLOW4HE BRIGHT SPOT VISIBLE IN THE LOWERRIGHTHAND PORTION OF THE RING IN EVERY IMAGE IS ANOTHER STAR THATHAPPENSTOBESITUATEDINTHELINEOFSIGHTOFTHERING;.!3!AND2+IRSHNER(ARVARDn3MITHSONIAN#ENTER FOR!STROPHYSICS	=&AIRPORT/HIO !SSUMINGTHATTHEEXPLODINGSTARBECAMEOPTICALLYTHINTONEUTRINOSBEFORETHESHOCKWAVEREACHEDTHESURFACEANDASSUMINGFURTHERTHATTHENEUTRINOSTRAVELEDFASTERTHANTHESHOCKWHILESTILLINSIDETHESTARTHENEUTRINOSBEGANTHEIRTRIPTO%ARTHAHEADOFTHEPHOTONS 'IVEN THE FACT THAT THE NEUTRINOS ARRIVED AHEAD OF THE LIGHT THEIR VELOCITY THROUGHSPACEMUSTHAVEBEENVERYNEARTHESPEEDOFLIGHTWITHINONEPARTIN	4HISOBSERVATIONTOGETHER WITH THE ABSENCE OF ANY SIGNIlCANT DISPERSION IN THE ARRIVAL TIME OF NEUTRINOS OFDIFFERENTENERGIESIEHIGHERENERGYNEUTRINOSDIDNOTARRIVEANYEARLIERTHANLOWERENERGYONES	SUGGESTSTHATTHERESTMASSOFELECTRONNEUTRINOSMUSTBEQUITESMALL4HEUPPERLIMITONTHEELECTRONNEUTRINOBASEDONDATAFROM3.!ISme≤E6CONSISTENTWITHTHERESULTS OF LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS THAT PLACE THE UPPER LIMIT AT . E6The Search for a Compact Remnant of SN 1987A)NTERESTINGLY AS OF  NEUTRINOS HAVE BEEN THE ONLY DIRECT EVIDENCE OF THE FORMATION OFA COMPACT OBJECT AT THE CENTER OF 3. ! !LL ATTEMPTS TO DETECT A REMNANT IN OPTICALULTRAVIOLET OR 8RAY WAVELENGTHS HAVE FAILED )N ADDITION EFFORTS TOlND ANY EVIDENCE OF ASURVIVINGBINARYCOMPANIONHAVEALSOBEENUNSUCCESSFUL4HEUPPERLIMITONTHELUMINOSITYIN THE OPTICAL PORTION OF THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM IS CURRENTLY LESS THAN ×7EQUIVALENT TO THE OPTICAL ENERGY OUTPUT OF AN & MAINSEQUENCE STAR 5LTAVIOLET SPECTRALEAD TO AN UPPER LIMIT OFL56≤.×7 AND #HANDRA HAS SET AN UPPER LIMIT ONTHE 8RAY LUMINOSITY OFLX≤.×7 IN THE ENERGY BAND BETWEEN  AND  KE64HEFAMOUS$AVISSOLARNEUTRINODETECTORDIDNOTMEASUREANYNEUTRINOSFROM 3. ! THE SOLAR NEUTRINOBACKGROUND WAS MUCHlargerTHAN THE NEUTRINO COUNT FROM THE SUPERNOVA INTHE ENERGY RANGE OF THE DETECTOR
The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 608>>>

4HESE LIMITS ARE SUFlCIENTLY STRINGENT THAT MODELS FOR THE FORM OF THE COMPACT COMPANIONAND ITS ENVIRONMENT THIN ACCRETION DISK THICK ACCRETION DISK SPHERICAL ACCRETION ETC	 AREBECOMINGSERIOUSLYRESTRICTED0ERHAPSFUTUREINFRAREDOBSERVATIONSWITH3PITZERWILLlNALLYDETECT THE ELUSIVE COMPACT REMNANT!LTHOUGH3.!HASPRESENTEDSOMEINTERESTINGTWISTSINOURSTUDYOFSTELLAREVOLUTION IT HAS ALSO CONlRMED OR CLARIlED IMPORTANT ASPECTS OF THE THEORYChemical Abundance Ratios in the Universe
THATHYDROGENISPRIMORDIALHAVINGBEENSYNTHESIZEDIMMEDIATELYFOLLOWINGTHE"IG"ANGTHAT BEGAN THE UNIVERSE -UCH OF THE PRESENTDAY HELIUM WAS ALSO PRODUCED DIRECTLY FROMTHE"IG"ANGWHILETHEREMAINDERWASGENERATEDFROMHYDROGENBURNINGINSTELLARINTERIORS2ELATIVETOHYDROGENANDHELIUMLITHIUMBERYLLIUMANDBORONAREVERYUNDERABUNDANT4HERE ARE TWO REASONS FOR THIS 4HEY ARE NOT PROMINENT END PRODUCTS OF NUCLEAR REACTIONCHAINS AND THEY CAN BE DESTROYED BY COLLISIONS WITH PROTONS &OR LITHIUM THIS OCCURS AT((E#/.E3I3!R#R4I.I:N'E'A2B3R:R9.B!G0D3N"A3B,A0R%U$Y9B.D0T0B(G5!U,U4M4B#O#U63C+0.A&""E,I,OG N
     !TOMIC NUMBERFIGURE 164HERELATIVEABUNDANCESOFELEMENTSINTHE3UNSPHOTOSPHERE!LLABUNDANCESARENORMALIZED RELATIVE TO HYDROGEN ATOMS $ATA FROM 'REVESSE AND 3AUVALSpace Sci. Rev.85 	The Fate of Massive Stars
&OLLOWING THE DISCUSSION OF CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVAE IT IS WORTH REVISITING THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS AND OBSERVED ABUNDANCE RATIOS IN THE UNIVERSE! CRITICAL COMPONENT IN DETERMINING THE SUCCESS OF CURRENT STELLAR EVOLUTION THEORY IS THE ABILITY TO EXPLAIN THE OBSERVED ABUNDANCE RATIOS OF THE ELEMENTS4HE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF THE 3UNS PHOTOSPHERE IS SHOWN IN &IG   WITH ALL VALUES NORMALIZED TO  FOR HYDROGEN "Y FAR THE MOST ABUNDANT ELEMENT IN THE UNIVERSE IS  HYDROGEN WITH HELIUM BEING LESS ABUNDANT BY ABOUT A FACTOR OF  )T IS BELIEVED


<<<PAGE 609>>>

TEMPERATURESGREATERTHANABOUT.×+WHILEFORBERYLLIUMTHEREQUIREDTEMPERATUREIS .×+ )T IS THE 3UNS SURFACE CONVECTION ZONE THAT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRANSPORTINGTHE SURFACE LITHIUM BERYLLIUM AND BORON INTO THE INTERIOR 7HEN THE PRESENTDAY SOLARCOMPOSITION IS COMPARED WITH THE ABUNDANCES OF METEORITES WHICH SHOULD BE SIMILAR TOTHE 3UNS PRIMORDIAL COMPOSITION	 WE lND THAT THE RELATIVE ABUNDANCES OF BERYLLIUM ARECOMPARABLEBUTTHATTHE3UNSSURFACECOMPOSITIONOFLITHIUMISSMALLERTHANTHEMETEORITESLITHIUM ABUNDANCE BY A FACTOR OF ABOUT 4HIS SUGGESTS THAT LITHIUM HAS BEEN DESTROYEDIN THE 3UN SINCE THE STARS FORMATION BUT THAT BERYLLIUM HAS NOT BEEN APPRECIABLY DEPLETEDNOT FAR ENOUGH TO BURN LITHIUM ADEQUATELY 4HE DISAGREEMENT OF STANDARD MODELS WITH THEOBSERVATIONS IS KNOWN AS THEsolar lithium problem0EAKS OCCUR IN &IG  FOR ELEMENTS SUCH AS CARBON NITROGEN OXYGEN NEON AND SOON BECAUSE THEY ARE CREATED AS A CONSEQUENCE OF A STARS EVOLUTIONARY TREK TOWARD THE IRONPEAK AND BECAUSE THEY ARE RELATIVELY STABLEαPARTICLERICH NUCLEI#ORECOLLAPSESUPERNOVAEAREALSORESPONSIBLEFORTHEGENERATIONOFSIGNIlCANTQUANTITIESOF OXYGEN AND 4YPE )A SUPERNOVAE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CREATION OF MOST OF THE IRONOBSERVED IN THE COSMOSs-Process andr-Process Nucleosynthesis7HEN NUCLEI HAVING PROGRESSIVELY HIGHER VALUES OFZTHE NUMBER OF PROTONS	 FORM VIASTELLAR NUCLEOSYNTHESIS IT BECOMES INCREASINGLY DIFlCULT FOR OTHER CHARGED PARTICLES SUCHAS PROTONS ALPHA PARTICLES AND SO ON TO REACT WITH THEM 4HE CAUSE IS THE EXISTENCE OF AHIGH#OULOMBPOTENTIALBARRIER(OWEVERTHESAMELIMITATIONDOESNOTEXISTWHENNEUTRONSCOLLIDE WITH THESE NUCLEI #ONSEQUENTLY NUCLEAR REACTIONS INVOLVING NEUTRONS CAN OCCUREVEN AT RELATIVELY LOW TEMPERATURES ASSUMING OF COURSE THAT FREE NEUTRONS ARE PRESENT INTHE GAS4HE REACTIONS WITH NEUTRONSAZ8+n→A+Z8+γRESULTINMOREMASSIVENUCLEITHATAREEITHERSTABLEORUNSTABLEAGAINSTTHEBETADECAYREACTIONA+Z8→A+Z+8+e−+νe+γ.)FTHEBETADECAYHALFLIFEISSHORTCOMPAREDTOTHETIMESCALEFORNEUTRONCAPTURETHENEUTRONCAPTUREREACTIONISSAIDTOBEAslow processORANs-processREACTIONs0ROCESSREACTIONS0ERHAPSBECAUSEOFTHEIRMOMENTADESCENDINGCONVECTIVEBUBBLESovershootTHEBOTTOMOFTHEZONEOFCONVECTIVEINSTABILITYCAUSINGLITHIUMTOBETRANSPORTEDDEEPERTHANTHESTANDARDMODELSSUGGEST!DDITIONALEFFECTSMAYALSODERIVE FROM DIFFUSION AND THE INTERACTION OF CONVECTION WITH ROTATION
The Fate of Massive Stars
!PPARENTLY THE BASE OF THE SOLAR CONVECTION ZONE EXTENDS DOWN SUFﬁCIENTLY FAR TO BURN LITHIUM BUT NOT FAR ENOUGH TO BURN BERYLLIUM (OWEVER COMBINING STELLAR STRUCTURE THEORY INCLUDING THE MIXINGLENGTH THEORY OF CONVECTION WITH THE ANALYSIS OF SOLAR OSCILLATIONS INDICATES THAT THE BASE OF THE CONVECTION ZONE EXTENDS DOWN TO  ¾  +
TEND TO YIELD STABLE NUCLEI EITHER DIRECTLY OR SECONDARILY VIA BETA DECAY /N THE OTHER HAND IF THE HALFLIFE FOR THE BETADECAY REACTION IS LONG COMPARED WITH THE TIME SCALE FOR NEUTRON CAPTURE THE NEUTRONCAPTURE REACTION IS TERMED A rapid 


<<<PAGE 610>>>

processORr-processANDRESULTSINNEUTRONRICHNUCLEIs0ROCESSREACTIONSTENDTOOCCURINNORMALPHASESOFSTELLAREVOLUTIONWHEREASrPROCESSESCANOCCURDURINGASUPERNOVAWHENA LARGE mUX OF NEUTRINOS EXISTS!LTHOUGH NEITHER PROCESS PLAYS SIGNIlCANT ROLES IN ENERGYPRODUCTION THEY DO ACCOUNT FOR THE ABUNDANCE RATIOS OF NUCLEI WITHA>4GAMMA-RAY BURSTS/NEOFTHEMANYGREATDETECTIVESTORIESOFMODERNASTROPHYSICSBEGANINTHESWITHTHELAUNCHOFTHE6ELASERIESOFMILITARYSATELLITES4HE6ELASPACECRAFTWEREDESIGNEDTOMONITORCOMPLIANCEOFTHEFORMER3OVIET5NIONWITHTHENUCLEARTESTBANTREATYBYLOOKINGFORSUDDENBURSTSOFGAMMARAYSOFTERRESTRIALORIGIN"YITWASCLEARTHATTHEgamma-raybursts'2"	 THAT WERE BEING DETECTED WERE COMING FROM ABOVE RATHER THAN BELOW BUT ITWAS NOT UNTIL  THAT THIS INFORMATION WAS RELEASED TO THE PUBLIC!BOUTONCEPERDAYATSOMERANDOMLOCATIONINTHESKYASHOWEROFGAMMARAYPHOTONSWITHENERGIESRANGINGFROMABOUTKE6TOMANY'E6APPEARS!LTHOUGHTHELOWERENDOFTHISRANGEINCLUDES8RAYPHOTONSMOSTOFTHEENERGYISINGAMMARAYS	4HEBURSTSLASTFROM−TOSANDTHEYHAVERISETIMESASFASTAS−SFOLLOWEDBYANEXPONENTIALDECAY4HE BURSTS ARE USUALLY MULTIPLY PEAKED AND COMPLEX ALTHOUGH THERE IS NO TYPICAL BURSTPROlLE 4WO EXAMPLES OF GAMMARAY BURSTS RECORDED BY THE "URST AND 4RANSIENT 3OURCE%XPERIMENT"!43%	ONBOARDTHE#OMPTON'AMMA2AY/BSERVATORY#'2/	ARESHOWNIN &IG 
2ATE COUNTS Sn	
2ATE COUNTS Sn	#H  	4IME 2ES  S#H  	4IME 2ES  S
n    n n   3ECONDS SINCE TRIGGER   	3ECONDS SINCE TRIGGER   	"!43% 4RIGGER "!43% 4RIGGER 
FIGURE 17,IGHT CURVES OF TWO GAMMARAY BURSTS '2"  AND '2"  IN THEENERGYRANGEBETWEENKE6ANDKE64HEDATAWEREOBTAINEDBY"!43%ONBOARDTHE#OMPTON'AMMA2AY/BSERVATORY4HEDATESOFTHETWOEVENTSARERECORDEDINTHEIRDESIGNATIONS'2"OCCURRED ON 3EPTEMBER   AND '2"  OCCURRED ON -AY   '2"  WASTHE LAST GAMMARAY BURST RECORDED BY "!43% BEFORE THE #OMPTON 'AMMA2AY /BSERVATORY WASDEORBITED #OURTESY OF THE "!43%4EAM n .!3!	The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 611>>>

Are the Sources of GRBs Galactic or Extragalactic?5NTIL THE LATE S MUCH OF THE MYSTERY OF '2"S WAS ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR DISTANCESAND THE RESULTING IMPLIED ENERGY OF THE EVENTS )T WAS NOT CLEAR WHETHER GAMMARAY BURSTSORIGINATED IN OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM PERHAPS IN THE /ORT CLOUD OF COMETS	 WITHIN OUR 'ALAXYOR THE FARTHEST REACHES OF THE UNIVERSE7ITHOUTKNOWINGTHEDISTANCETOTHESOURCESOFTHEGAMMARAYSWEMUSTGIVETHEIRENERGYOUTPUTINTERMSOFTHETOTALENERGYRECEIVEDPERUNITAREAOFDETECTORSURFACEDURINGTHEBURSTTHEENERGYmUXINTEGRATEDOVERTHEDURATIONOFTHEBURST	4HISQUANTITYCALLEDTHEﬂuenceS CAN BE AS SMALL AS −*M−OR AS GREAT AS −*M− 4HE MOST ENERGETIC BURSTSRECORDEDBYTHE#'2/SATURATEDITSDETECTORS&OREXAMPLETHEh3UPER"OWLBURSTvNAMEDBECAUSEITOCCURREDON3UPER"OWL3UNDAY*ANUARY	INLASTEDONLYASECONDBUTANAFTERGLOWOFENERGETICPHOTONSUPTO'E6EACH	PERSISTEDFORABOUTSECONDS4HENON$ECEMBERTHE#'2/MEASUREDABURSTTHATLASTEDFORMINUTESWITHAPEAKPHOTON ENERGY OF  'E6Example 4.1.3UPPOSE THAT THE mUENCE OF A PARTICULAR '2" WAS DETERMINED TO BE−*M−!SSUMINGTHATTHESOURCEOFTHEBURSTWASLOCATED!5AWAYINTHE/ORTCLOUD OF COMETS WITHIN OUR 3OLAR 3YSTEM AND ASSUMING FURTHER THAT THE EMISSION OF THEENERGY FROM THE SOURCE WAS ISOTROPIC THE ENERGY OF THE BURST WOULD NECESSARILY HAVE BEENE=/parenleftbigπr/parenrightbigS=π(!5)/parenleftbig−*M−/parenrightbig=×*./N THE OTHER HAND IF THE SOURCE OF THE '2" WERE LOCATED  'PC AWAY IN A DISTANT GALAXYTHENTHEAMOUNTOFENERGYINVOLVEDINTHEBURSTAGAINASSUMINGISOTROPY	WOULDHAVEBEENE=/parenleftbigπr/parenrightbigS=π( 'PC)/parenleftbig−*M−/parenrightbig=×*,COMPARABLE TO THE ENERGY RELEASED IN A4YPE )) SUPERNOVA INCLUDING ITS NEUTRINO EMISSION4HE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO ESTIMATES IS ALMOST  ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE #LEARLY ITIS CRITICAL TO UNDERSTAND THE DISTANCE TO THESE OBJECTS IN ORDER TO BEGIN TO UNDERSTAND THEUNDERLYING PROCESS%VEN BEFORE THE #'2/ WAS RELEASED BY THE 3PACE 3HUTTLEAtlantisON !PRIL  MOST ASTRONOMERS AGREED THAT THE GAMMARAY BURST MECHANISM INVOLVED THE PRESENCE OF ANEUTRONSTAR4HESHORTRISETIMESOFTHEBURSTSWHENMULTIPLIEDBYTHESPEEDOFLIGHTRESULTINACHARACTERISTICLENGTHCOMPARABLETOTHESIZEOFANEUTRONSTARctRISEASSMALLASKM	/BSERVATIONS OF EMISSION LINES CORRESPONDING TO PHOTONS WITH ENERGIES OF ROUGHLY  TO KE6 ARE THOUGHT TO BE DUE TO THE KE6 PHOTONS THAT ARE CREATED WHEN AN ELECTRONAND A POSITRON ANNIHILATE EACH OTHER AND PRODUCE TWO GAMMARAY PHOTONS NEAR THE SURFACEOF A NEUTRON STAR 4HE ENERGY OF THE PHOTONS IS REDUCED BY AS MUCH AS  AS THEY CLIMBOUT OF THE SEVERE POTENTIAL WELL OF THE NEUTRON STAR /THER SPECTRAL FEATURES WITH PHOTONS INTHE RANGE OF n KE6 HAVE BEEN IDENTIlED AS CYCLOTRON LINES DUE TO A 4 MAGNETIClELD TYPICAL OF THE lELDS OF PULSARS 4HE CONSENSUS WAS THAT THE GAMMARAY BURSTS WEREPRODUCED BY NEUTRON STARS IN THE THICK DISK OF THE 'ALAXY AT DISTANCES OF A FEW HUNDREDPARSECSTHE'2"SOCCURREDEITHERBYTAPPINGTHEIRINTERNALENERGYASINAPULSARGLITCH	ORTHROUGH ACCRETION IN A CLOSE BINARY SYSTEMThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 612>>>


nn "!43% 'AMMA2AY "URSTS
FIGURE 184HE ISOTROPIC ANGULAR DISTRIBUTION OF  GAMMARAY BURSTS SEEN BY THE "!43%DETECTOR ONBOARD THE #'2/ #OURTESY OF THE "!43%4EAM n .!3!	4HERE WERE PROBLEMS WITH THIS SCENARIO )F THE BURSTS WERE DUE TO ACCRETION IN A BINARYSYSTEM WHY DIDNT THEY REPEAT &URTHERMORE THE BURSTS WERE DISTRIBUTED UNIFORMLY OVERTHECELESTIALSPHEREINSTEADOFBEINGCONCENTRATEDINTHEPLANEOFTHE-ILKY7AYLIKEMOSTPULSARSAND8RAYBINARIES)TWASTHOUGHTTHATTHISCOULDBEDUETOTHERELATIVEINSENSITIVITYOFTHEGAMMARAYDETECTORSEMPLOYEDINTHEPRE#OMPTONERA4HESEINSTRUMENTSWEREUNABLETO SEE SOURCES BEYOND THE DISK OF STARS IN OUR PART OF THE 'ALAXY AND SO THE DISTRIBUTION OFBURSTSAPPEAREDTOBEISOTROPIC)NTHESAMEMANNERIFWECOULDSEEONLYTHENEARESTSTARSTHEY WOULD BE UNIFORMLY SCATTERED OVER THE NIGHT SKY INSTEAD OF BEING CONCENTRATED ALONGTHE-ILKY7AY	)TWASTHOUGHTTHATTHISSITUATIONWOULDSURELYCHANGEWITHTHELAUNCHOFTHEMUCH MORE SENSITIVE #OMPTON 'AMMA 2AY /BSERVATORY SATELLITE /N AVERAGE ONE BURSTWASOBSERVEDEVERYHOURSBYTHESPACECRAFT&IGURE  SHOWSTHEDISTRIBUTIONOFGAMMARAY BURSTS OBSERVED BY "!43% THERE IS NO STATISTICALLY SIGNIlCANT DEVIATION FROMAN ISOTROPIC DISTRIBUTION%QUALLY INTERESTING WAS THE lNDING THAT ALTHOUGH THE SOURCES ARE SPREAD EVENLY ACROSSTHE SKY THEY DO NOT APPEAR TO BE DISTRIBUTED HOMOGENEOUSLY THROUGHOUT SPACE !CLASSICARGUMENTWASEMPLOYEDTODETERMINEWHETHERTHEREISANEDGETOTHEDISTRIBUTION,ETEBETHE ENERGY OF A GAMMARAY BURST LOCATED AT A DISTANCErFROM %ARTH4HEN THE mUENCE ISS=Eπr,	ASSUMING AN ISOTROPIC BURST 3OLVING THIS EXPRESSION FORr WE HAVEr(S)=/parenleftbiggEπS/parenrightbigg/.!HOMOGENEOUSDISTRIBUTIONWOULDHAVETHESAMENUMBERDENSITYOFSOURCESEVERYWHEREINDEPENDENTOFDISTANCEOR DIRECTION
The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 613>>>


.UMBER OF BURSTSCMAXCMINn
"URSTS YRn FULL SKY	
FIGURE 196IOLATION OF THE PROPORTIONALITYN∝S−/ INDICATING AN EDGE TO THE DISTRIBUTIONOF GAMMARAY BURST SOURCES 4HE MAXIMUM GAMMARAY COUNT RATECMAX IS PLOTTED INSTEAD OF THEmUENCESCMINISTHEWEAKESTBURSTTHE#'2/CANCONlDENTLYDETECT&IGUREADAPTEDFROM-EEGANET ALNature355  	!SSUMINGTHATALLBURSTSOURCESHAVETHESAMEINTRINSICENERGYETHENFORASPECIlCVALUEOFSSAYS	 ALL OF THE SOURCES WITHIN A SPHERE OF RADIUSr(S)WILL BE OBSERVED TO HAVE AmUENCES≥S)F THERE AREnBURST SOURCES PER UNIT VOLUME THEN THE NUMBER OF SOURCESWITH A mUENCE EQUAL TO OR GREATER THANSISN(S)=πnr(S)=πn/parenleftbiggEπS/parenrightbigg/,	WHERE THE hv SUBSCRIPT HAS BEEN DROPPED 4HUS IF THE SOURCES OF THE GAMMARAY BURSTSARE DISTRIBUTED UNIFORMLY THROUGHOUT SPACE THE NUMBER OF BURSTS OBSERVED WITH A mUENCEGREATER THAN SOME VALUESWOULD BE PROPORTIONAL TOS−/4HE #OMPTON RESULTS SHOW THATTHISPROPORTIONALITYISVIOLATEDWHENSISSMALLENOUGHTOINCLUDETHEMOREDISTANTFAINTERSOURCES SEE &IG 4HIS IMPLIES THAT THERE IS AN EDGE TO THE DISTRIBUTION THE BURSTSOURCES DO NOT EXTEND OUTWARD WITHOUT LIMIT BUT OF COURSE THE LIMIT COULD BE THE EDGE OFTHE OBSERVABLE UNIVERSE	 7HEN THIS RESULT IS COMBINED WITH THE FACT THAT THE DISTRIBUTIONIS ISOTROPIC THE IMPLICATION IS THAT %ARTH IS NEAR THE CENTER OF A SPHERICALLY SYMMETRICDISTRIBUTION OF GAMMARAY BURST SOURCES4HE RESOLUTION TO THE DISTANCE QUESTION lNALLY CAME WITH THE DETECTION OF '2" ON &EBRUARY   BY THE "EPPO3!8 SPACECRAFT "EPPO3!8 IS THE PRODUCT OF A COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE )TALIAN 3PACE !GENCY AND THE .ETHERLANDS !GENCY FOR !EROSPACE0ROGRAMS	4HE'AMMA2AY"URST-ONITORON"EPPO3!8lRSTNOTICEDTHEEVENTALLOWING)TMAYBETHATTHEREAREDIFFERENTPOPULATIONSOFBURSTSOURCESWITHDIFFERENTCHARACTERISTICVALUESOFE(OWEVERTHE FOLLOWING ARGUMENT IS STILL VALID IF EACH POPULATION IS HOMOGENEOUSLY DISTRIBUTED.OTE THAT IN &IG  THE MAXIMUM COUNT RATE IS PLOTTED INSTEAD OF THE mUENCE )T IS THE MAXIMUM COUNT RATETHAT DETERMINES WHETHER A BURST IS DETECTED MAKING IT MORE APPROPRIATE TO USE IN THE STATISTICS OF BURST COUNTSThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 614>>>

ITS WIDElELD 8RAY CAMERA TO LOCALIZE THE REGION OF THE SKY TO WITHIN ′ 7ITHIN A FEWHOURS THE OBSERVATORYS NARROWlELD 8RAY TELESCOPES WERE ABLE TO FURTHER LOCALIZE THESOURCE 7ITH RAPID KNOWLEDGE OF THE POSITION OF THE '2" IT BECAME POSSIBLE FOR OTHERGROUNDBASED AND ORBITING OBSERVATORIES TO INVESTIGATE THAT AREA OF THE SKY AS WELL %VENAFTER THE GAMMARAY SIGNATURE HAD VANISHED FADING 8RAY AND OPTICAL COUNTERPARTS WEREDETECTED$EEPIMAGESOFTHEREGIONOBTAINEDUSINGTHE+ECK/BSERVATORYANDTHE(UBBLE3PACE 4ELESCOPE REVEALED THAT THE '2" HAD OCCURRED IN A DISTANT GALAXY INDICATING THAT'2"  ORIGINATED AT A COSMOLOGICAL EXTRAGALACTIC	 DISTANCE!DDITIONALCOSMOLOGICALDISCOVERIESOF'2"SFROM"EPPO3!8ANDOTHERRAPIDRESPONSEGAMMARAY TELESCOPES ;INCLUDING .!3!S (IGH %NERGY4RANSIENT %XPLORER (%4%	 AND3WIFT MISSIONS= WERE QUICKLY FOLLOWED UP WITH OPTICAL IDENTIlCATIONS THAT HAVE VERIlEDTHE COSMOLOGICAL DISTANCES INVOLVED IN '2" EVENTS .UMEROUS '2"S HAVE SINCE BEENASSOCIATEDWITHFADING8RAYOPTICALANDRADIOCOUNTERPARTSINDISTANTGALAXIES4HISIMPLIESTHAT '2"S ARE AMONG THE MOST ENERGETIC PHENOMENA IN THE UNIVERSE COMPARABLE TO THESTAGGERING ENERGY RELEASE OF CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVAETwo Classes of GRBs.OW THAT THE TRUE DISTANCES TO GAMMARAY BURSTS CAN BE DETERMINED AND THE SCALE OF THEENERGY OUTPUT CONlRMED IT BECOMES POSSIBLE TO EVALUATE PROPOSED MECHANISMS FOR GENERATING '2"S !FTER THE STUDY OF THOUSANDS OF EVENTS IT IS CLEAR THAT THERE ARE TWO BASICCLASSESOFGAMMARAYBURSTS4HOSEEVENTSTHATLASTLONGERTHANSECONDSAREREFERREDTOASlong–soft'2"SWHILETHOSETHATARESHORTERTHANSECONDSAREshort–hardEVENTSh3OFTvAND hHARDv REFER TO HAVING MORE OF THE EVENT ENERGY AT LOWER ENERGIES OR HIGHER ENERGIESRESPECTIVELY*UST AS THERE ARE TWO FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUPERNOVAE 4YPE )A AND CORECOLLAPSE	ITAPPEARSTHATTHEREARETWOFUNDAMENTALLYDIFFERENTTYPESOFGAMMARAYBURSTS4HE SHORTnHARD BURSTS SEEM TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH NEUTRON STARnNEUTRON STAR OR NEUTRONSTARnBLACK HOLE MERGERS WHEREAS LONGnSOFT BURSTS MAY BE CONNECTED WITH SUPERNOVAECore-Collapse Supernovae and Long–Soft GRBs!DIRECTLINKBETWEENASUPERNOVAANDALONGnSOFT'2"WASESTABLISHEDWITHTHEDETECTIONOF '2" !T A DISTANCE OF  -PC '2"  WAS DETERMINED TO BE ABOUT lVEORDERSOFMAGNITUDELESSENERGETIC×*	THANATYPICAL'2"7HATWASPARTICULARLYIMPORTANT HOWEVER WAS THE DETECTION OF A SUPERNOVA 3. BW AT THE SAME LOCATION)T SEEMS THAT 3. BW WAS A PARTICULARLY ENERGETIC4YPE )B OR )C SUPERNOVA WITH A TOTALENERGYOUTPUTOFBETWEENAND×*ABOUTTIMESGREATERTHANATYPICAL4YPE)BC	)T IS LIKELY THAT THE REMNANT CORE THAT COLLAPSED WAS  -⊙ RESULTING IN A BLACK HOLE! SECOND '2"nSUPERNOVA CONNECTION HAS ALSO BEEN IDENTIlED THIS ONE BETWEEN'2"  AND 3. DH )N THIS CASE THE ENERGY OF THE GAMMARAY BURST IS MORETYPICAL OF OTHER '2"SThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 615>>>

Models of Long–Soft GRBs3EVERALMODELSHAVEBEENPROPOSEDTOEXPLAINLONGnSOFTGAMMARAYBURSTSBUTONECOMMONINGREDIENTINTHEMODELSINVOLVESTHEbeaming of highly relativistic matter4HEPRODIGIOUSAMOUNT OF ENERGY THAT IS APPARENTLY PRODUCED IN A '2" MAY BE REDUCED BY REPLACING THEASSUMPTION OF ISOTROPIC EMISSION RECALL %XAMPLE 	 WITHrelativistic jets ILLUSTRATEDSCHEMATICALLY IN &IG ADIATION IS EMITTED IN A CONE HAVINGAN OPENING ANGLE OF HALFWIDTHθ∼/γFORγ≫ WHEREγ≡/radicalbig−u/cTHANITACTUALLYIS-ODELSSUGGESTTHAT,ORENTZFACTORSOFUPTOORMOREMAYBEPOSSIBLEIN GAMMARAY BURSTS IMPLYING THAT THE ACTUAL ENERGY PRODUCED AND EMITTED INTO THE SOLIDANGLE OF THE JET MAY BE SMALLER BY A FACTOR OFγPERHAPS  TIMES LESS THAN THEISOTROPIC ASSUMPTION WOULD SUGGEST/NECHALLENGEWITHTHECONCEPTOFAHIGHLYRELATIVISTICJETISTHATEXPANDINGMATERIALCOULDENCOUNTER BARYONRICH MATERIAL CAUSING THE JET TO SLOW DOWN4HIS WOULD HAPPEN AFTER THEJETMATERIALHADSWEPTUPMATTERWITHATOTALRESTMASSENERGYONTHEORDEROFγ mcWHEREmIS THE MASS OF THE JETS MATERIAL4HElRSTVIABLEMODELPROPOSEDTOEXPLAINLONGnSOFTBURSTSISTHEcollapsarMODELOF3TANρ∼KGM−	⊙
/H9253$EBRIS DISKFIGURE 20!RELATIVISTIC JET OF MATERIAL WILL APPEAR TO THE OBSERVER AS HAVING A CONE OPENINGOF HALFWIDTHθ∼/γ2The Fate of Massive Stars
IS THE ,ORENTZ FACTOR )F THE EMITTED RADIATION IS BEAMED FORWARD RATHER THAN ISOTROPICALLY	 AS THE JET OF MATERIAL ADVANCES AT SPEEDS NEAR THE SPEED OF LIGHT AND IF %ARTH LIES WITHIN THE BEAM THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY PRODUCED BY THE '2" WILL SEEM TO BE GREATER
Woosley (sometimes also referred to as a hypernova model). Neutron stars have an upper mass limit based on the ability of neutron degeneracy to support the extremely compact star (similar to electron degeneracy pressure). Using sophisticated equations of state for neutrons at very high densities , investigators have estimated that the maximum mass of a nonrotating neutron star is about 2.2 M  . When a core-collapse  supernova occurs, either a neutron star or a black hole will form, depending on the mass, metallicity, and rotation of the progenitor star. Woosley’s models have suggested that for a progenitor star with sufﬁciently great mass (possibly a Wolf–Rayet star), the central object to form will be a black hole with a debris disk surrounding it. The collimating effect of the debris disk and associated magnetic ﬁelds would lead to a jet emanating from the center of the supernova. Since the jet material will be highly relativistic, it will appear to be further collimated. The jet will plow its way through the overlying material of the infalling stellar envelope producing bursts of gamma-rays. One version of Woosley’s collapsar model is shown in Fig. 21.


<<<PAGE 616>>>

-1000-50005001000-1000-50005001000
t = 20 s   Lorentz Factor
-4-2024123451.0014.0827.1640.2453.3266.4079.48
B	(km)(km)
A	
r (109m)z (109m)
FIGURE 21! COLLAPSAR MODEL OF THE FORMATION OF A GAMMARAY BURST EVENT A	 4HE CENTRALREGIONOFTHESTARFOLLOWINGTHEFORMATIONOFABLACKHOLEANDDEBRISDISKB	4HEEMERGINGRELATIVISTICJET &IGURES COURTESY OF7EIQUN :HANG AND 3TAN7OOSLEY	!N ALTERNATIVE TO THE COLLAPSAR MODEL IS THEsupranovaMODEL 2ATHER THAN THE BLACKHOLE FORMING IMMEDIATELY DURING THE CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA A DELAY IN THE MECHANISMOCCURS!LTHOUGH THE UPPER MASS LIMIT OF A STATIC NEUTRON STAR IS BELIEVED TO BE .-⊙ARAPIDLY ROTATING NEUTRON STAR CAN BE SUPPORTED WITH A MASS OF UP TO .-⊙ .EUTRON STARSARE ALSO LIKELY TO HAVE VERY STRONG MAGNETIC lELDS ASSOCIATED WITH THEM THAT COULD LEAD TOA SLOWING OF THE ROTATION RATEThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 617>>>

4HESUPRANOVAMODELSUGGESTSTHATASUPERMASSIVEROTATINGNEUTRONSTARMAYFORMWITHM>.-⊙FROM A CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA THAT WOULD THEN SLOW DOWN OVER THE COURSEOF WEEKS OR MONTHS UNTIL IT WAS NO LONGER STABLE AGAINST FURTHER GRAVITATIONAL COLLAPSE !CATASTROPHICCOLLAPSETOABLACKHOLEWOULDTHENRESULT)FADEBRISDISKWERETOFORMAROUNDTHEBLACKHOLETHEDISKINCOMBINATIONWITHTHEMAGNETIClELDCOULDPRODUCEARELATIVISTICJET AND A GAMMARAY BURST /NE ADVANTAGE OF THIS MODEL IS THAT IT WOULD NATURALLY EXPLAINTHE ABSENCE OF BARYONS THAT WOULD SLOW THE JET SINCE THE ENVELOPE OF THE STAR WOULD HAVEBEEN SWEPT UP IN THE SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION THAT HAPPENED EARLIER5COSMIC RAYS/N!UGUST  6ICTOR & (ESS n	 AND TWO COLLEAGUES ASCENDED IN A BALLOONTO AN ALTITUDE OF  KM $URING THAT SIXHOUR mIGHT (ESS MADE CAREFUL READINGS FROM THREEELECTROSCOPES THAT HE USED TO MEASURE THE INTENSITY OF RADIATION!S THE BALLOON ROSE(ESSDETERMINEDTHATTHELEVELOFRADIATIONINCREASEDWITHALTITUDE&ROMHISEXPERIMENTHECONCLUDED h4HE RESULTS OF THESE OBSERVATIONS SEEM BEST EXPLAINED BY A RADIATION OF GREATPENETRATING POWER ENTERING OUR ATMOSPHERE FROM ABOVExv4HIS EVENT MARKED THE BIRTH OFTHE STUDY OFcosmic raysCharged Particles from Space!LTHOUGH REFERRED TO AS hRAYSv THIS PENETRATING RADIATION IS ACTUALLY COMPOSED OF CHARGEDPARTICLES ! WIDE RANGE OF MASSES AND CLASSES OF PARTICLES HAVE BEEN IDENTIlED IN COSMICRAYS FROM ELECTRONS POSITRONS PROTONS AND MUONS TO A HOST OF NUCLEI INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO CARBON OXYGEN NEON MAGNESIUM SILICON IRON AND NICKEL PRODUCTS OF STELLARNUCLEOSYNTHESIS	0ARTICULARLY STRIKING IS THE WIDE RANGE OF ENERGIES INVOLVED FROM LESS THAN E6 TOAT LEAST ×E6 .EAR THE LOW END OF THE ENERGY SPECTRUM COSMIC RAYS IMPINGE ONTHE ATMOSPHERE WITH mUXES OF MORE THAN  PARTICLE M−S− WHEREAS THE HIGHESTENERGYCOSMICRAYSHAVEmUXESTHATAREVERYLOWLESSTHANPARTICLE KM−CENTURY−4HEmUXASA FUNCTION OF ENERGY IS SHOWN IN &IG Sources of Cosmic Rays4HE QUESTION NATURALLY ARISES AS TO WHAT THE SOURCE OR SOURCES	 OF THESE PARTICLES MAY BEENERGY PARTICLES AS COSMIC RAYS GO 2ECALL THAT THE FAST SOLAR WIND HAS ION SPEEDS ON THEORDER OF  KM S− &OR PROTONS THIS CORRESPONDS TO AN ENERGY OFE∼ KE6 %VEN IN!N ELECTROSCOPE IS A DEVICE USED TO DETECT ELECTRIC CHARGES 3IMPLE ELECTROSCOPES ARE OFTEN USED AS LECTUREDEMONSTRATIONS IN INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS COURSES(ESS WAS A RECIPIENT OF THE .OBEL 0RIZE IN  FOR HIS DISCOVERY OF COSMIC RAYS (ESS SHARED THE PRIZE WITH#ARL $AVID!NDERSON WHO DISCOVERED POSITRONS HE IDENTIlED THEM AMID THE MYRIAD OF COSMICRAY PARTICLES
The Fate of Massive Stars
/NE OBVIOUS ANSWER IS OUR 3UN 4HE SOLAR WIND ﬂARES AND CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS EMIT CHARGED PARTICLES INTO SPACE ON A ROUTINE BASIS !LTHOUGH ABUNDANT THESE  solar cosmic rays ALSO KNOWN AS solar energetic particles	 ARE RELATIVELY LOW


<<<PAGE 618>>>

nnnnnnnnnn&LUX M SR S 'E6	n
3WORDY n5#HICAGO	%NERGY E6	!NKLE PARTICLE PER KMYEAR	+NEE PARTICLE PER MYEAR	 PARTICLE PER MSECOND	&LUXES OF #OSMIC 2AYS
FIGURE 224HEmUXOFCOSMICRAYSASAFUNCTIONOFENERGY2EF*#RONIN4+'AISSERAND3 0 3WORDYSci. Amer.276  	ENERGETIC CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS WHEN PROTONS MAY TRAVEL ATv∼.c THE ENERGIES AREONLY ON THE ORDER OF  -E6 CORRESPONDING TO THE LOWESTENERGY PARTICLES SHOWN IN THENEARLY mAT PORTION OF THE CURVE IN &IG 4HE SOURCES OF HIGHERENERGY COSMIC RAYS HAVE BEEN IDENTIlED WITH SUPERNOVAE E/lessorsimilarE6 NOTICE THE hKNEEv IN &IG  AT BETWEEN AND E6	 !T SUCH HIGHENERGIES THE SPEED OF THE PARTICLE IS ESSENTIALLYcAND THE REST ENERGY IS NEGLIGIBLE FOR APROTONmc≃ -E6∼ 'E6	The Fate of Massive Stars
#ONSIDER THE RADIUS OF THE hORBITv OF COSMICRAY PARTICLES ABOUT THE MAGNETIC ﬁELD LINES IN THE REGION OF SPACE IN WHICH THEY ﬁND THEMSELVES &ROM THE ,ORENTZ FORCE EQUATION IF WE NEGLECT ANY CONTRIBUTION FROM ELECTRIC ﬁELDS THE FORCE ON A CHARGED PARTICLE


<<<PAGE 619>>>

IN A MAGNETIC lELD IS GIVEN BYFB=qvBFORTHESPECIALCASEWHENTHEVELOCITYOFTHEPARTICLEISPERPENDICULARTOTHEMAGNETIClELD3INCE THE ,ORENTZ FORCE IS ALWAYS PERPENDICULAR TO THE DIRECTION OF MOTION THE FORCE ISCENTRIPETAL AND RESULTS IN A CIRCULAR PATH OF THE PARTICLE AROUND THE MAGNETIC lELD 4HISIMPLIES THATγ mvr=qvB,WHEREγISTHE,ORENTZFACTOR3OLVINGFORrTHELarmor radiusORTHEgyroradius	OFTHEORBIT IS GIVEN BYr=γ mvqB.	4AKINGv∼c WElNDr=γ mcqcB=EqcB.	Example 5.1.)FTHE,ARMORRADIUSOFTHEhORBITvSIGNIlCANTLYEXCEEDSTHESIZESCALEFORTHE MAGNETIC lELD THE PARTICLE CANNOT BE CONSIDERED TO BE BOUND TO THE ASSOCIATED SYSTEM)N INTERSTELLAR SPACE MAGNETIC lELD STRENGTHS OF −4 ARE TYPICAL &OR A PROTON WITH ANENERGY OF E6 THE ,ARMOR RADIUS ISr=×M= PC.4HISRADIUSISCHARACTERISTICOFTHESIZEOFASUPERNOVAREMNANTSUGGESTINGTHATFORENERGIESMUCH LARGER THAN E6 COSMICRAY PARTICLES ARE NOT LIKELY TO BE BOUND TO A SUPERNOVAREMNANT%XAMPLE  INDICATES THAT COSMICRAY PARTICLES WITH ENERGIES BELOW ABOUT E6AREPOSSIBLYASSOCIATEDWITHSUPERNOVAREMNANTSBUTONCETHEIRENERGIESEXCEEDTHATLIMITTHEY ESCAPE FROM THE REMNANT )T HAS LONG BEEN SUGGESTED THAT THE SHOCK WAVES ASSOCIATEDWITH SUPERNOVAE COULD BE SITES OF ACCELERATION OF COSMICRAY PARTICLES %NRICO &ERMI WASTHE lRST TO PROPOSE A MECHANISM BY WHICH SUPERNOVAE COULD ACCELERATE CHARGED PARTICLESTOULTRARELATIVISTICENERGIES(ESUGGESTEDTHATCHARGEDPARTICLESTRAPPEDINMAGNETIClELDSCAN BE ACCELERATED TO VERY HIGH ENERGIES THROUGH SUCCESSIVE COLLISIONS WITH THE ADVANCINGSHOCKWAVE!FTERABSORBINGENERGYFROMTHESHOCKAPARTICLEISACCELERATEDFORWARDINTHEDIRECTION OF THE SHOCK MOTION THINK OF AN ELASTIC COLLISION OF A PARTICLE WITH AN ADVANCINGWALL	(OWEVERBEINGTIEDTOTHEMAGNETIClELDINTHESHOCKSVICINITYTHEPARTICLEISFORCEDTO RETURN ONLY TO COLLIDE WITH THE SHOCK AGAIN RECEIVING ADDITIONAL ENERGY 4HE PROCESS ISREPEATEDMANYTIMESUNTILTHEPARTICLEPOSSESSESSUFlCIENTENERGYTOESCAPETHEBONDSOFTHEThe Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 620>>>

FIGURE 23!N8RAYIMAGEOF3.OBTAINEDBY!3#!0HOTO#REDIT$R%RIC6'OTTHELF#OLUMBIA 5NIVERSITY	SUPERNOVAS MAGNETIC lELD4HE POWERLAW NATURE OF THE COSMICRAY SPECTRUM F∝E−α	IN &IG  IS CHARACTERISTIC OF THIS NONTHERMAL SOURCE OF ENERGY FOR THESE PARTICLES!N 8RAY IMAGE OF 3.  &IG 	 OBTAINED BY *APANS !DVANCED 3ATELLITE FOR#OSMOLOGY AND !STROPHYSICS !3#!	 SUGGESTS STRONGLY THAT SUPERNOVA REMNANT SHOCKFRONTS ARE INDEED THE SOURCE OF ACCELERATION OF COSMICRAY PARTICLES WITH ENERGIES BELOWABOUT E6)TREMAINSUNCLEARWHERETHEHIGHESTENERGYCOSMICRAYSCOMEFROM&ROMTHEEXISTENCEOFTHEhKNEEvABOVEE6INTHECOSMICRAYSPECTRUMITAPPEARSTHATTHESOURCEOFHIGHERENERGYCOSMICRAYSISFUNDAMENTALLYDIFFERENTFROMTHESUPERNOVASOURCEBELOWE6)NADDITIONTHEhANKLEvNEARE6SUGGESTSYETANOTHERSOURCEFORTHEMOSTEXTREMECOSMICRAYS )T HAS BEEN PROPOSED THAT THE COSMIC RAYS WITH ENERGIES BETWEEN THE hKNEEv AND THEhANKLEv MAY BE DUE TO ACCELERATION IN THE VICINITY OF NEUTRON STARS OR BLACK HOLES /N THEOTHERHANDTHEMOSTENERGETICCOSMICRAYSMAYORIGINATEFROMOUTSIDEOUR'ALAXYPOSSIBLEFROM COLLISIONS INVOLVING INTERGALACTIC SHOCKS OR PERHAPS FROM THE ACTIVE REGIONS IN THECENTERS OF MOST GALAXIES WHERE SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES ARE BELIEVED TO RESIDESUGGESTED READINGGeneral#RONIN*AMES7'AISSER4HOMAS+AND3WORDY3IMON0h#OSMIC2AYSATTHE%NERGY&RONTIERvScientiﬁc American276  &RIEDLANDER -ICHAEL 7A Thin Cosmic Rain: Particles from Outer Space (ARVARD 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE -! (URLEY +EVIN h0ROBING THE 'AMMA2AY 3KYvSky and Telescope $ECEMBER ,ATTIMER * AND "URROWS ! h.EUTRINOS FROM 3UPERNOVA !vSky and Telescope/CTOBER The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 621>>>

-ARSCHALL,AURENCE!The Supernova Story0RINCETON5NIVERSITY0RESS0RINCETON7HEELER*#RAIGCosmic Catastrophes: Supernovae, Gamma-Ray Bursts, and Adventuresin Hyperspace #AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE 7OOSLEY3AND7EAVER4h4HE'REAT3UPERNOVAOFvScientiﬁc American!UGUSTTechnical!RNETT$AVIDSupernovae and Nucleosynthesis: An Investigation of the History of Matter,from the Big Bang to the Present 0RINCETON 5NIVERSITY 0RESS 0RINCETON !RNETT7$AVID"AHCALL*OHN.+IRSHNER2OBERT0AND7OOSLEY3TANFORD%h3UPERNOVA !vAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics27  "LAES/MER-h4HEORIESOF'AMMA2AY"URSTSvThe Astrophysical Journal Supplement92  $AVIDSON +RIS AND (UMPHREYS 2OBERTA - h%TA #ARINAE AND )TS %NVIRONMENTvAnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics35  &ENIMORE % % AND 'ALASSI - EDS	Gamma-Ray Bursts: 30 Years of Discovery!)0#ONFERENCE 0ROCEEDINGS727 'ALAMA4ETALh4HE$ECAYOF/PTICAL%MISSIONFROMTHE'AMMA2AY"URST'2"vNature387  (ANSEN #ARL * +AWALER 3TEVEN $ AND 4RIMBLE 6IRGINIAStellar Interiors: PhysicalPrinciples, Structure, and Evolution3ECOND%DITION3PRINGER6ERLAG.EW9ORK(EGER ! ET AL h(OW -ASSIVE 3TARS %ND 4HEIR ,IFEvThe Astrophysical Journal591 (UMPHREYS2OBERTA-AND$AVIDSON+RISh4HE,UMINOUS"LUE6ARIABLES!STROPHYSICAL'EYSERSvPublications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc106  -ASSEY 0HILIP h-ASSIVE 3TARS IN THE ,OCAL 'ROUP )MPLICATIONS FOR 3TELLAR %VOLUTION AND3TAR &ORMATIONvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics41  -£SZÖROS 0 h4HEORIES OF 'AMMA2AY "URSTSvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astro-physics40  -EYNET ' AND -AEDER! h3TELLAR %VOLUTION WITH 2OTATION 87OLFn2AYET 3TAR 0OPULATIONS AT 3OLAR -ETALLICITYvAstronomy and Astrophysics404  0ETSCHEK!LBERT ' ED	Supernovae 3PRINGER6ERLAG .EW9ORK 0IRAN 4SVI h4HE 0HYSICS OF 'AMMA2AY "URSTSvReviews of Modern Physics76 3CHLICKEISER 2EINHARDCosmic Ray Astrophysics 3PRINGER6ERLAG "ERLIN 3HORE3TEVEN.The Tapestry of Modern Astrophysics*OHN7ILEY3ONS)NC(OBOKEN3TAHL / ET AL h!3PECTROSCOPIC %VENT OFη#AR 6IEWED FROM $IFFERENT $IRECTIONS 4HE$ATA AND &IRST 2ESULTSvAstronomy and Astrophysics435  7OOSLEY 3 % :HANG 7EIQUN AND (EGER ! h4HE #ENTRAL %NGINES OF 'AMMA2AY"URSTSvGamma-Ray Burst and Afterglow Astronomy 2001: A Workshop Celebratingthe First Year of the HETE Mission!)0#ONFERENCE 0ROCEEDINGS662  The Fate of Massive Stars


<<<PAGE 622>>>

PROBLEM SET1Estimate the Eddington limit forηCar and compare your answer with the luminosity of thatstar. Is your answer consistent with its behavior? Why or why not?2During the Great Eruption ofηCar, the apparent visual magnitude reached a characteristicvalue ofmV∼0. Assume that the interstellar extinction toηCar is 1.7 magnitudes and thatthe bolometric correction is essentially zero.(a)Estimate the luminosity ofηCar during the Great Eruption.(b)Determine the total amount of photon energy liberated during the twenty years of the GreatEruption.(c)If 3 M⊙of material was ejected at a speed of 650 km s−1, how much energy went into thekinetic energy of the ejecta?3The angular extent of one of the lobes ofηCar is approximately 8.5′′. Assuming a constantexpansion of the lobes of 650 km s−1, estimate how long it has been since the Great Eruptionthat produced the lobes. Is this likely to be an overestimate or an underestimate? Justify youranswer.4 (a)Show that the amount of radioactive material remaining in an initially pure sample is givenby Eq. (10).N(t)=N0e−λt,(b)Prove thatλ=ln 2τ1/2.5Assume that the 1 M⊙core of a 10 M⊙star collapses to produce a Type II supernova. Assumefurther that 100% of the energy released by the collapsing core is converted to neutrinos andthat 1% of the neutrinos are absorbed by the overlying envelope to power the ejection ofthe supernova remnant. Estimate theﬁnal radius of the stellar remnant if sufﬁcient energyis to be liberated to just barely eject the remaining 9 M⊙to inﬁnity. Be sure to state clearlyany additional assumptions you make in determining your estimate of theﬁnal radius of theremnant.6 (a)The angular size of the Crab SNR is 4′×2′and its distance from Earth is approximately2000 pc (see Fig. 4). Estimate the linear dimensions of the nebula.The Fate of Massive Stars
(10)
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.15,

<<<PAGE 623>>>

FIGURE 4The Crab supernova remnant, located 2000 pc away in the constellation of Taurus.The remnant is the result of a Type II supernova that was observed for the ﬁrst time on July 4, 1054.[Courtesy of NASA, ESA, J. Hester and A. Loll (Arizona State University).](b)Using the measured expansion rate of the Crab and ignoring any accelerations since thetime of the supernova explosion, estimate the age of the nebula.7Taking the distance to the Crab to be 2000 pc, and assuming that the absolute bolometricmagnitude at maximum brightness was characteristic of a Type II supernova, estimate its peakapparent magnitude. Compare this to the maximum brightness of the planet Venus (m≃−4),which is sometimes visible in the daytime.8Usingq ,make a crude estimate of the amount of time required for the homologouscollapse of theinner portion of the iron core of a massive star, marking the beginningof acore-collapse supernova.thebeloweuation  -tff=/parenleftbigg3π321Gρ0/parenrightbigg1/2.9 (a)Assuming that the light curve of a supernova is dominated by the energy released in theradioactive decay of an isotope that has a decay constant ofλ, show that the slope of thelight curve is given by Eq. (11).(b)Prove that Eq. (12) follows from Eq. (11).dlog10Ldt=−0.434λordMboldt=1.086λ.10If the linear decline of a supernova light curve is powered by the radioactive decay of theejecta,ﬁnd the rate of decline (in mag d−1) produced by the decay of5627Co→5626Fe, with ahalf-life of 77.7 days.The Fate of Massive Stars: Problem Set
(1 ) 1(1 ) 2

<<<PAGE 624>>>

11The energy released during the decay of one5627Co atom is 3.72 MeV . If 0.075 M⊙of cobaltwas produced by the decay of5628Ni in SN 1987A, estimate the amount of energy released persecond through the radioactive decay of cobalt:(a)just after the formation of the cobalt.(b)one year after the explosion.(c)Compare your answers with the light curve of SN 1987A given in Fig. 12.
29313335Log10 L (W)
050010001500Days since outburst22Na44Ti5 × 57Co56Co
FIGURE 12The bolometric light curve of SN 1987A through theﬁrst 1444 days after theexplosion. The dashed lines show the contributions expected from the radioactive isotopes producedby the shock wave. The initial masses are estimated to be5628Ni (and later5627Co), 0.075 M⊙;5727Co,0.009 M⊙(ﬁve times the solar abundance);4422Ti, 1×10−4M⊙; and2211Na, 2×10−6M⊙. (Figureadapted from Suntzeff et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,384, L33, 1992.)12The neutrinoﬂux from SN 1987A was estimated to be 1.3×1014m−2at the location of Earth.If the average energy per neutrino was approximately 4.2 MeV , estimate the amount of energyreleased via neutrinos during the supernova explosion.13Using, estimate the gravitational binding energy of a neutron star with1.4M⊙and a radius of 10 km. Compare your answer with the amount of energy releasedneutrinos during the collapse of the iron core of Sk−69 202 (the progenitor of SN 1987A).qthe below e uation  amassinUg∼−16π215Gρ2R5∼−35GM2R.14It is estimated that there are approximately 100,000 neutron stars in the Milky Way Galaxy.Show that if the observed gamma-ray bursts are associated with neutron stars in our Galaxy,then each sourcemustrepeat. If you make the extreme assumption that each neutron starproduces bursts, what would be the average time between bursts?15Consider an electron and positron that annihilate each other at the surface of a neutron star(M=1.4M⊙,R=10 km), producing two gamma-ray photons of the same energy. Show thateach gamma ray has an energy of at least 511 keV .16Suppose there are two populations of gamma-ray burst sources with energiesE1andE2.Show that if the sources are distributed homogeneously throughout the universe with numberdensitiesn1andn2, respectively, then the total number of bursts observed to have aﬂuence≥Sis proportional toS−3/2.The Fate of Massive Stars: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 625>>>

17The highest-energy cosmic-ray particle that had been recorded at the time this text was writtenwas measured by the Fly’s Eye HiRes experiment in the Utah desert in 1991. The energy ofthe particle was 3×1020eV.(a)Convert the energy of the particle to joules.(b)If the particle was a baseball of mass 0.143 kg, calculate the speed of the ball.(c)Convert your answer to miles per hour and compare your answer to the speed of a fast ballof the fastest major league pitchers (approximately 100 mph, or 45 m s−1).18Using Eq. ( 16), show that cosmic-ray particles with energies of greater than 1019eV arenot likely to be bound to the Milky Way Galaxy. (A characteristic size scale for the Galaxy isabout 30 kpc.) What about particles with energies in the range of 1016eV to 1019eV?r=γ mc2qcB=EqcB.19Nonthermal spectra are often represented by power laws of the formF=CE−α.Figure 22 shows a power-law spectrum for cosmic rays. Determine the value ofαin theregion 1011eV to the“knee,”and from the“knee”to the“ankle.”
10–2810910101011101210131014101510161017101810191020102110–2510–2210–1910–1610–1310–1010–710–410–1102104Flux (m2 sr s GeV)–1
(Swordy –U.Chicago)Energy (eV)Ankle(1 particle per km2-year)Knee(1 particle per m2-year)(1 particle per m2-second)Fluxes of Cosmic Rays
FIGURE 22Theﬂux of cosmic rays as a function of energy. (Ref: J. Cronin, T. K. Gaisser, andS. P. Swordy,Sci. Amer.,276, 44, 1997.)20Calculate the Lorentz factor for a proton with an energy of 1020eV.The Fate of Massive Stars: Problem Set
(1 ) 6


<<<PAGE 626>>>

The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
1 The Discovery of Sirius B
2 White Dwarfs
3 The Physics of Degenerate Matter
4 The Chandrasekhar Limit
5 The Cooling of White Dwarfs
6 Neutron Stars
7 Pulsars
1 THE DISCOVERY OF SIRIUS B
)N  &RIEDRICH 7ILHELM "ESSEL n	 USED THE TECHNIQUE OF STELLAR PARALLAX TO
lND THE DISTANCE TO THE STAR  #YGNI &OLLOWING THIS lRST SUCCESSFUL MEASUREMENT OF A
STELLAR DISTANCE "ESSEL APPLIED HIS TALENTS TO ANOTHER LIKELY CANDIDATE 3IRIUS THE BRIGHTEST
APPEARING STAR IN THE SKY )TS PARALLAX ANGLE OF p′′=.′′CORRESPONDS TO A DISTANCE OF
ONLY  PC OR  LY 3IRIUSS BRILLIANCE IN THE NIGHT SKY IS DUE IN PART TOITSPROXIMITY
4HE TELESCOPES OF "ESSELS TIME WERE INCAPABLE OF lNDING THE 0UP SO CLOSE TO THE GLARE
OFITSBRIGHTCOUNTERPARTANDFOLLOWING"ESSELSDEATHINTHEENTHUSIASMFORTHEQUEST
WANED&INALLYIN!LVAN'RAHAM#LARKn	SONOFTHEPROMINENT!MERICAN
LENSMAKER !LVAN #LARK n	 TESTED HIS FATHERS NEW INCH REFRACTOR  INCHES
LARGER THAN ANY PREVIOUS INSTRUMENT	 ON 3IRIUS AND HE PROMPTLY DISCOVERED THE 0UP AT
ITS PREDICTED POSITION 4HE DOMINANT 3IRIUS ! WAS FOUND TO BE NEARLY ONE THOUSAND TIMES
BRIGHTER THAN THE 0UP NOW CALLED 3IRIUS " SEE &IG  4HE DETAILS OF THEIR ORBITS ABOUT
THEIR CENTER OF MASS SEE &IG 	 REVEALED THAT 3IRIUS ! AND 3IRIUS " HAVE MASSES OF
ABOUT  - ⊙AND  - ⊙ RESPECTIVELY !MORE RECENT DETERMINATION FOR THE MASS OF
3IRIUS " IS  .±. - ⊙ AND IT IS THIS VALUE THAT WE WILL USE
#LARKS DISCOVERY OF 3IRIUS " WAS MADE NEAR THE OPPORTUNE TIME OF APASTRON WHEN THE
TWOSTARSWEREMOSTWIDELYSEPARATEDBYJUST′′	4HEGREATDIFFERENCEINTHEIRLUMINOSITIES
LA=.,⊙ANDLB=.,⊙	MAKESOBSERVATIONSATOTHERTIMESMUCHMOREDIFlCULT
&ROM #HAPTER   OF  An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics 3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT Ú 
0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDBY  TO %ARTH !S HE FOLLOWED THE STARS PATH THROUGH THE HEAVENS "ESSEL FOUND THAT IT DEVIATED 
SLIGHTLY FROM A STRAIGHT LINE !FTER TEN YEARS OF PRECISE OBSERVATIONS "ESSEL CONCLUDED IN 
 THAT 3IRIUS IS ACTUALLY A BINARY STAR SYSTEM !LTHOUGH UNABLE TO DETECT THE COMPANION 
OF THE BRIGHTER STAR HE DEDUCED THAT ITS ORBITAL PERIOD WAS ABOUT  YEARS THE MODERN VALUE 
IS  YEARS	 AND PREDICTED ITS POSITION 4HE SEARCH WAS ON FOR THE UNSEEN h0UPv THE FAINT 
COMPANION OF THE LUMINOUS h$OG 3TARv


<<<PAGE 627>>>

FIGURE 14HE WHITE DWARF 3IRIUS " BESIDE THE OVEREXPOSED IMAGE OF 3IRIUS! #OURTESY OF,ICK /BSERVATORY	
!"0ERIASTRONn n     $ISTANCE !5	$ISTANCE !5	nn
FIGURE 24HEORBITSOF3IRIUS!AND3IRIUS"4HECENTEROFMASSOFTHESYSTEMISMARKEDWITHAN h×v7HEN THE NEXT APASTRON ARRIVED  YEARS LATER SPECTROSCOPISTS HAD DEVELOPED THE TOOLSTO MEASURE THE STARSSURFACE TEMPERATURES &ROM THE 0UPS FAINT APPEARANCE ASTRONOMERSEXPECTEDITTOBECOOLANDRED4HEYWERESTARTLEDWHEN7ALTER!DAMSn	WORKINGAT-T7ILSON/BSERVATORYINDISCOVEREDTHATTOTHECONTRARY3IRIUS"ISAHOTBLUEWHITESTARTHATEMITSMUCHOFITSENERGYINTHEULTRAVIOLET!MODERNVALUEOFTHETEMPERATUREOF 3IRIUS " IS  + MUCH HOTTER THAN 3IRIUS!S  +4HE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE STARS PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS WERE ASTOUNDING 5SING THE3TEFANn"OLTZMANN LAWTO CALCULATE THE SIZE OF 3IRIUS " RESULTS IN A RADIUS OFONLY .×M≈. 2⊙ 3IRIUS " HAS THE MASS OF THE 3UN CONlNED WITHIN A VOLUMESMALLER THAN %ARTH 4HE AVERAGE DENSITY OF 3IRIUS " IS .×KG M− AND THE ACCELERThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 628>>>

ATION DUE TO GRAVITY AT ITS SURFACE IS ABOUT .×MS− /N %ARTH THE PULL OF GRAVITYON A TEASPOON OF WHITEDWARF MATERIAL WOULD BE .×. OVER  TONS	 AND ON THESURFACE OF THE WHITE DWARF IT WOULD WEIGH  TIMES MORE4HIS lERCE GRAVITY REVEALSITSELF IN THE SPECTRUM OF 3IRIUS " IT PRODUCES AN IMMENSE PRESSURE NEAR THE SURFACE THATRESULTS IN VERY BROAD HYDROGEN ABSORPTION LINES!PART FROM THESE LINES ITSSPECTRUM IS AFEATURELESS CONTINUUM!STRONOMERS lRST REACTED TO THE DISCOVERY OF 3IRIUS " BY DISMISSING THE RESULTS CALLINGTHEMhABSURDv(OWEVERTHECALCULATIONSARESOSIMPLEANDSTRAIGHTFORWARDTHATTHISATTITUDESOON CHANGED TO THE ONE EXPRESSED BY %DDINGTON IN  h3TRANGE OBJECTS WHICH PERSISTINSHOWINGATYPEOFSPECTRUMENTIRELYOUTOFKEEPINGWITHTHEIRLUMINOSITYMAYULTIMATELYTEACH US MORE THAN A HOST WHICH RADIATE ACCORDING TO RULEv ,IKE ALL SCIENCES ASTRONOMYADVANCES MOST RAPIDLY WHEN CONFRONTED WITH EXCEPTIONS TO ITS THEORIES2WHITE DWARFS/BVIOUSLY 3IRIUS " IS NOT A NORMAL STAR )T IS Awhite dwarf A CLASS OF STARS THAT HAVEAPPROXIMATELYTHEMASSOFTHE3UNANDTHESIZEOF%ARTH!LTHOUGHASMANYASONEQUARTEROF THE STARS IN THE VICINITY OF THE 3UN MAY BE WHITE DWARFS THE AVERAGE CHARACTERISTICSOF THESE FAINT STARS HAVE BEEN DIFlCULT TO DETERMINE BECAUSE A COMPLETE SAMPLE HAS BEENOBTAINED ONLY WITHIN  PC OF THE 3UNClasses of White Dwarf StarsHE WHITE DWARFS OCCUPY A NARROW SLIVER OF THE (n2DIAGRAM THAT IS ROUGHLY PARALLEL TO AND BELOW THE MAIN SEQUENCE !LTHOUGH WHITE DWARFSARE TYPICALLY WHITER THAN NORMAL STARS THE NAME ITSELF IS SOMETHING OF A MISNOMER SINCETHEY COME IN ALL COLORS WITH SURFACE TEMPERATURES RANGING FROM LESS THAN  + TO MORETHAN  + 4HEIR SPECTRAL TYPE $ FOR hDWARFv	 HAS SEVERAL SUBDIVISIONS 4HE LARGESTGROUPABOUTTWOTHIRDSOFTHETOTALNUMBERINCLUDING3IRIUS"	CALLEDDA white dwarfsDISPLAYONLYPRESSUREBROADENEDHYDROGENABSORPTIONLINESINTHEIRSPECTRA(YDROGENLINESAREABSENTFROMTHEDB white dwarfs	WHICHSHOWONLYHELIUMABSORPTIONLINESANDTHEDC white dwarfs	SHOWNOLINESATALLONLYACONTINUUMDEVOIDOFFEATURES4HEREMAINING TYPES INCLUDEDQ white dwarfs WHICH EXHIBIT CARBON FEATURES IN THEIR SPECTRAANDDZ white dwarfsWITH EVIDENCE OF METAL LINESCentral Conditions in White Dwarfs)T IS INSTRUCTIVE TO ESTIMATE THE CONDITIONS AT THE CENTER OF A WHITE DWARF OF MASSMWDANDRADIUSRWDU S I N GT H EV A L U E SF O R3 I R I U S"G I V E NI NT H EP R E C E D I N GS E C T I O N WITHr= SHOWS THAT THE CENTRAL PRESSURE IS ROUGHLYPc≈πG ρRWD≈.×.M−,	4
4HE EQUATIONThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 629>>>

ABOUT  MILLION TIMES LARGER THAN THE PRESSURE AT THE CENTER OF THE 3UN!CRUDE ESTIMATEOF THE CENTRAL TEMPERATURE MAY BE OBTAINED FOR THE RADIATIVE TEMPERATUREGRADIENTdTdr=−acκρTLrπrORTWD−TcRWD−=−acκρTCLWDπRWD.!SSUMING THAT THE SURFACE TEMPERATURETWD IS MUCH SMALLER THAN THE CENTRAL TEMPERATUREAND USINGκ=. MKG−FOR ELECTRON SCATTERING X=	 GIVETc≈/bracketleftbiggκρacLWDπRWD/bracketrightbigg/≈.×+.4HUS THE CENTRAL TEMPERATURE OF A WHITE DWARF IS SEVERAL TIMES +4HESE ESTIMATED VALUES FOR A WHITE DWARF LEAD DIRECTLY TO A SURPRISING CONCLUSION !LTHOUGH HYDROGEN MAKES UP ROUGHLY  OF THE VISIBLE MASS OF THE UNIVERSE IT CANNOT BEPRESENT IN APPRECIABLE AMOUNTS BELOW THE SURFACE LAYERS OF A WHITE DWARF /THERWISE THEHITEDWARFSAREMANUFACTUREDINTHECORESOFLOWANDINTERMEDIATEMASSSTARSTHOSEWITHANINITIALMASSBELOWOR-⊙ONTHEMAINSEQUENCE	NEAR THE END OF THEIR LIVES ON THE ASYMPTOTIC GIANT BRANCH OF THE (n2 DIAGRAM "ECAUSEANYSTARWITHAHELIUMCOREMASSEXCEEDINGABOUT-⊙WILLUNDERGOFUSIONMOSTWHITEDWARFS CONSIST PRIMARILY OF COMPLETELY IONIZED CARBON AND OXYGEN NUCLEI !S THE AGINGGIANT EXPELS ITS SURFACE LAYERS AS A PLANETARY NEBULA THE CORE IS EXPOSED AS A WHITE DWARFPROGENITOR4HEDISTRIBUTIONOF$!WHITEDWARFMASSESISSHARPLYPEAKEDAT-⊙WITHSOME  LYING BETWEEN  -⊙AND  -⊙ SEE &IG  4HE MUCH LARGER MAINSEQUENCEMASSESQUOTEDEARLIERIMPLYTHATSIGNIlCANTAMOUNTSOFMASSLOSSOCCURREDWHILEON THE ASYMPTOTIC GIANT BRANCH INVOLVING THERMAL PULSES AND A SUPERWINDSpectra and Surface Composition4HEEXCEPTIONALLYSTRONGPULLOFTHEWHITEDWARFSGRAVITYISRESPONSIBLEFORTHECHARACTERISTICHYDROGENSPECTRUMOF$!WHITEDWARFS(EAVIERNUCLEIAREPULLEDBELOWTHESURFACEWHILE!S WE WILL DISCUSS LATER IN 3ECTION  THE ASSUMPTION OF A RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE GRADIENT IS INCORRECT BECAUSETHE ENERGY IS ACTUALLY CARRIED OUTWARD BY ELECTRON CONDUCTION (OWEVERIS SUFlCIENT FOR THEPURPOSEOF THIS ESTIMATION,OWMASS HELIUM WHITE DWARFS MAY ALSO EXIST AND RARE OXYGENnNEONnMAGNESIUM WHITE DWARFS HAVE BEENDETECTED IN A FEW NOVAE
7
 THIS EQUATIONThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars
DEPENDENCE OF THE NUCLEAR ENERGY GENERATION RATES ON DENSITY AND TEMPERATURE WOULD PRODUCE WHITE DWARF LUMINOSITIES SEVERAL ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE LARGER THAN THOSE ACTUALLY OBSERVED 3IMILAR REASONING APPLIED TO OTHER REACTION SEQUENCES IMPLIES THAT THERMONUCLEAR REACTIONS ARE NOT INVOLVED IN PRODUCING THE ENERGY RADIATED BY WHITE DWARFS AND THAT THEIR CENTERS MUST THEREFORE CONSIST OF PARTICLES THAT ARE INCAPABLE OF FUSION AT THESE DENSITIES AND TEMPERATURES


<<<PAGE 630>>>

nnn"""!
,OG LL  	 - 2
Te +	FIGURE 3$! WHITE DWARFS ON AN (n2 DIAGRAM ! LINE MARKS THE LOCATION OF THE  -⊙WHITE DWARFS AND A PORTION OF THE MAIN SEQUENCE IS AT THE UPPER RIGHT $ATA FROM "ERGERON 3AFFERAND ,IEBERTAp. J.394  	THE LIGHTER HYDROGEN RISES TO THE TOP RESULTING IN A THIN OUTER LAYER OF HYDROGEN COVERINGA LAYER OF HELIUM ON TOP OF THE CARBONnOXYGEN CORE 4HIS VERTICAL STRATIlCATION OF NUCLEIACCORDING TO THEIR MASS TAKES ONLY  YEARS OR SO IN THE HOT ATMOSPHERE OF THE STAR 4HEORIGINOFTHENON$!EG$"AND$#	WHITEDWARFSISNOTYETCLEAR%FlCIENTMASSLOSSMAYOCCURONTHEASYMPTOTICGIANTBRANCHASSOCIATEDWITHTHETHERMALPULSEORSUPERWINDPHASESSTRIPPING THE WHITE DWARF OF NEARLY ALL OF ITS HYDROGEN!LTERNATIVELY A SINGLE WHITE DWARFMAY BE TRANSFORMED BETWEEN THE $! AND NON$! SPECTRAL TYPES BY CONVECTIVE MIXINGIN ITS SURFACE LAYERS &OR EXAMPLE THE HELIUM CONVECTION ZONES PENETRATION INTO A THINHYDROGEN LAYER ABOVE COULD CHANGE A $!INTO A $" WHITE DWARF BY DILUTING THE HYDROGENWITH ADDITIONAL HELIUMPulsating White Dwarfs7HITE DWARFS WITH SURFACE TEMPERATURES OFTe≈ + LIE WITHIN THE INSTABILITY STRIPOF THE (n2 DIAGRAM AND PULSATE WITH PERIODS BETWEEN  AND  S4HESEZZ CetiVARIABLES NAMED AFTER THE PROTOTYPE DISCOVERED IN  BY!RLO ,ANDOLT AREVARIABLE$! WHITE DWARFS HENCE THEY ARE ALSO KNOWN ASDAV stars 4HEPULSATION PERIODSCORRESPOND TO NONRADIAL GMODES THAT RESONATE WITHIN THE WHITE DWARFSSURFACE LAYERSOFHYDROGENANDHELIUM"ECAUSETHESEGMODESINVOLVEALMOSTPERFECTLY%STIMATES OF THE RELATIVE MASSES OF THE HYDROGEN AND HELIUM LAYERS RANGE FROMm(()/m((E)≈−TO −FOR $!WHITE DWARFS!SWEWILLSEEIN3ECTION STEEPTEMPERATUREGRADIENTSPRODUCECONVECTIONZONESINTHEWHITEDWARFSSURFACELAYERS5NLIKE THE GMODES OF NORMAL STARSTHE GMODES OF WHITE DWARFS ARE CONlNED TO THEIR SURFACE LAYERS
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 631>>>

HORIZONTALDISPLACEMENTSTHERADIIOFTHESECOMPACTPULSATORSHARDLYCHANGE4HEIRBRIGHTNESSVARIATIONSTYPICALLYAFEWTENTHSOFAMAGNITUDE	AREDUETOTEMPERATUREVARIATIONSONTHE STARSSURFACES 3INCE MOST STARS WILL END THEIR LIVES AS WHITE DWARFS THESE MUST BE THEMOST COMMON TYPE OF VARIABLE STAR IN THE UNIVERSE ALTHOUGH ONLY ABOUT SEVENTY HAD BEENDETECTED AT THE TIME THIS TEXT WAS WRITTEN3UCCESSFUL NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS OF PULSATING WHITE DWARF MODELS WERE CARRIED OUTBY !MERICAN ASTRONOMER $ON 7INGET AND OTHERS 4HEY WERE ABLE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT ITIS THEhydrogenPARTIAL IONIZATION ZONE THAT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR DRIVING THE OSCILLATIONS OFTHE lRSTDBVSTAR Te≈ +	 WAS DISCOVERED BY 7INGET AND HIS COLLABORATORS 4HELOCATION OF THE $!6AND $"6STARS ON THE (n2 DIAGRAM IS SHOWN IN &IG  ALONG WITHTHE VERY HOT $/6 AND 0..6 Te≈+	 VARIABLES THAT ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THE BIRTH OFWHITEDWARFSh0..vSTANDSFORPLANETARYNEBULANUCLEIANDTHE$/SPECTRALTYPEMARKSTHE
nnn - - - -
:!-322 ,YRAEVARIABLES#LASSICAL#EPHEIDS/H9252#EPHEIDS0..6$/6$"6$!6  ,OG LL  	  
,OG TEFF-IRAVARIABLES
FIGURE 4#OMPACTPULSATORSONTHE(n2DIAGRAM&IGUREADAPTEDFROM7INGETAdvances inHelio- and Asteroseismology#HRISTENSEN$ALSGAARDAND&RANDSENEDS	2EIDEL$ORDRECHT	2EADERSINTERESTEDINTHISUNIQUEPREDICTIONANDINTHESUBSEQUENTDISCOVERYOFANEWTYPEOFSTARAREREFERREDTO7INGET ET AL AB	
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
THE  ::  #ETI  STARS  4HESE  COMPUTATIONS  ALSO conﬁrmed THE  ELEMENTAL stratiﬁca-TION OF WHITE DWARF ENVELOPES 7INGET AND HIS COLLEAGUES WENT ON TO PREDICT THAT HOTTER  $"  WHITE  DWARFS  SHOULD  ALSO  EXHIBIT  GMODE  OSCILLATIONS  DRIVEN  BY  THE   helium PARTIAL  IONIZATION  ZONE  7ITHIN  A  YEARS  TIME  THIS  PREDICTION  WAS conﬁrmed WHEN


<<<PAGE 632>>>

TRANSITIONTOTHEWHITEDWARFSTAGE	!LLOFTHESESTARSHAVEMULTIPLEPERIODSSIMULTANEOUSLYDISPLAYINGATLEASTANDASMANYASDIFFERENTFREQUENCIES!STRONOMERSAREDECIPHERINGTHE DATA TO OBTAIN A DETAILED LOOK AT THE STRUCTURE OF WHITE DWARFS3THE PHYSICS OF DEGENERATE MATTER
The Pauli Exclusion Principle and Electron Degeneracy!NY SYSTEMWHETHER AN ATOM OF HYDROGEN AN OVEN lLLED WITH BLACKBODY PHOTONS ORA BOX lLLED WITH GAS PARTICLESCONSISTS OF QUANTUM STATES THAT ARE IDENTIlED BY A SETOF QUANTUM NUMBERS *UST AS THE OVEN IS lLLED WITH STANDING WAVES OF ELECTROMAGNETICRADIATION THAT ARE DESCRIBED BY THREE QUANTUM NUMBERS SPECIFYING THE NUMBER OF PHOTONSOFWAVELENGTHλTRAVELINGINTHExyANDzDIRECTIONS	ABOXOFGASPARTICLESISlLLEDWITHSTANDING DE "ROGLIE WAVES THAT ARE ALSO DESCRIBED BY THREE QUANTUM NUMBERS SPECIFYINGTHE PARTICLES COMPONENT OF MOMENTUM IN EACH OF THREE DIRECTIONS	 )F THE GAS PARTICLESARE FERMIONS SUCH AS ELECTRONS OR NEUTRONS	 THEN THE 0AULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE ALLOWS ATMOSTONEFERMIONINEACHQUANTUMSTATEBECAUSENOTWOFERMIONSCANHAVETHESAMESETOFQUANTUM NUMBERS)NANEVERYDAYGASATSTANDARDTEMPERATUREANDPRESSUREONLYONEOFEVERYQUANTUMSTATES IS OCCUPIED BY A GAS PARTICLE AND THE LIMITATIONS IMPOSED BY THE 0AULI EXCLUSIONPRINCIPLE BECOME INSIGNIlCANT /RDINARY GAS HAS AthermalPRESSURE THAT IS RELATED TO ITSTEMPERATURE BY THE IDEAL GAS LAW (OWEVER AS ENERGY IS REMOVED FROM THE GAS AND ITSTEMPERATURE FALLS AN INCREASINGLY LARGE FRACTION OF THE PARTICLES ARE FORCED INTO THE LOWERENERGYSTATES)FTHEGASPARTICLESAREFERMIONSONLYONEPARTICLEISALLOWEDINEACHSTATETHUSALLTHEPARTICLESCANNOTCROWDINTOTHEGROUNDSTATE)NSTEADASTHETEMPERATUREOFTHEGASISLOWERED THE FERMIONS WILL lLL UP THE LOWEST AVAILABLE UNOCCUPIED STATES STARTING WITH THEGROUNDSTATEANDTHENSUCCESSIVELYOCCUPYTHEEXCITEDSTATESWITHTHELOWESTENERGY%VENINTHELIMITT→+THEVIGOROUSMOTIONOFTHEFERMIONSINEXCITEDSTATESPRODUCESAPRESSUREINTHEFERMIONGAS!TZEROTEMPERATUREallOFTHELOWERENERGYSTATESANDnoneOFTHEHIGHERENERGY STATES ARE OCCUPIED 3UCH A FERMION GAS IS SAID TO BE COMPLETELYdegenerateThe Fermi Energy4HE MAXIMUM ENERGY εF	 OF ANY ELECTRON IN A COMPLETELY DEGENERATE GAS ATT=+I SKNOWN AS THEFermi energy SEE &IG  4O DETERMINE THIS LIMITING ENERGY IMAGINE ATHREEDIMENSIONALBOXOFLENGTHLONEACHSIDE4HINKINGOFTHEELECTRONSASBEINGSTANDINGThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars
7E NOW DELVE BELOW THE SURFACE TO ASK 7HAT CAN SUPPORT A WHITE DWARF AGAINST THE RELENTLESS PULL OF ITS GRAVITY )T IS EASY TO SHOW THAT NORMAL GAS AND RADIATION PRESSURE ARE COMPLETELY INADEQUATE4HE ANSWER WAS DISCOVERED IN  BY THE "RITISH PHYSICIST 3IR 2ALPH (OWARD &OWLER n	 WHO APPLIED THE NEW IDEA OF THE 0AULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE TO THE ELECTRONS WITHIN THE WHITE DWARF 4HE QUALITATIVE ARGUMENT THAT FOLLOWS ELUCIDATES THE FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS OF THE electron degeneracy pressure DESCRIBED BY &OWLER


<<<PAGE 633>>>

T  
T            %NERGY /H9255/H9255F	&RACTION OF STATES OCCUPIEDFIGURE 5&RACTION OF STATES OF ENERGYεOCCUPIED BY FERMIONS &ORT= ALL FERMIONS HAVEε≤εF BUT FORT> SOME FERMIONS HAVE ENERGIES IN EXCESS OF THE &ERMI ENERGYWAVES IN THE BOX WE NOTE THAT THEIR WAVELENGTHS IN EACH DIMENSION ARE GIVEN BYλx=LNx,λy=LNy,λz=LNz,WHERENxNy ANDNzARE INTEGER QUANTUM NUMBERS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH DIMENSION 2ECALLING THAT THE DE "ROGLIE WAVELENGTH IS RELATED TO MOMENTUMpx=hNxL,py=hNyL,py=hNxL..OW THE TOTAL KINETIC ENERGY OF A PARTICLE CAN BE WRITTEN ASε=pm,WHEREp=px+py+pz4HUSε=hmL(Nx+Ny+Nz)=hNmL,	WHEREN≡Nx+Ny+Nz ANALOGOUS TO THE hDISTANCEv FROM THE ORIGIN IN hNSPACEv TOTHE POINT(Nx,Ny,Nz)4HETOTALNUMBEROFELECTRONSINTHEGASCORRESPONDSTOTHETOTALNUMBEROFUNIQUEQUANTUMNUMBERSNxNyANDNzTIMESTWO4HEFACTOROFTWOARISESFROMTHEFACTTHATELECTRONSARESPINPARTICLESSOms=±/IMPLIESTHATTWOELECTRONSCANHAVETHESAMECOMBINATION OFNxNy ANDNzAND STILL POSSES A UNIQUE SET OFfourQUANTUM NUMBERS INCLUDINGThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 634>>>

SPIN	.OWEACHINTEGERCOORDINATEINNSPACEEGNx=Ny=Nz=	CORRESPONDSTOTHEQUANTUMSTATEOFTWOELECTRONS7ITHALARGEENOUGHSAMPLEOFELECTRONSTHEYCANBETHOUGHT OF AS OCCUPYING EACH INTEGER COORDINATE OUT TO A RADIUS OFN=/radicalbigNx+Ny+NzBUTONLYFORTHEPOSITIVEOCTANTOFNSPACEWHERENx>Ny>ANDNz>4HISMEANSTHAT THE TOTAL NUMBER OF ELECTRONS WILL BENe=/parenleftbigg/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggπN/parenrightbigg.3OLVING FORNYIELDSN=/parenleftbiggNeπ/parenrightbigg/.3UBSTITUTING INTO %Q  	 AND SIMPLIFYING WE lND THAT THE &ERMI ENERGY IS GIVEN BYεF=/planckover2pi1m/parenleftbigπn/parenrightbig/,	WHEREmISTHEMASSOFTHEELECTRONANDn≡Ne/LISTHENUMBEROFELECTRONSPERUNITVOLUME4HEAVERAGEENERGYPERELECTRONATZEROTEMPERATUREISεF/FCOURSETHEDERIVATIONABOVE APPLIES FOR ANY FERMION NOT JUST ELECTRONS	The Condition for Degeneracy!TANYTEMPERATUREABOVEABSOLUTEZEROSOMEOFTHESTATESWITHANENERGYLESSTHANεFWILLBECOMEVACANTASFERMIONSUSETHEIRTHERMALENERGYTOOCCUPYOTHERMOREENERGETICSTATES!LTHOUGHTHEDEGENERACYWILLNOTBEPRECISELYCOMPLETEWHENT>+THEASSUMPTIONOFCOMPLETEDEGENERACYISAGOODAPPROXIMATIONATTHEDENSITIESENCOUNTEREDINTHEINTERIOROFA WHITE DWARF!LL BUT THE MOST ENERGETIC PARTICLES WILL HAVE AN ENERGY LESS THAN THE &ERMIENERGY4OUNDERSTANDHOWTHEDEGREEOFDEGENERACYDEPENDSONBOTHTHETEMPERATUREANDTHEDENSITYOFTHEWHITEDWARFWElRSTEXPRESSTHE&ERMIENERGYINTERMSOFTHEDENSITYOFTHE ELECTRON GAS &OR FULL IONIZATION THE NUMBER OF ELECTRONS PER UNIT VOLUME ISne=/parenleftbigg ELECTRONSNUCLEON/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg NUCLEONSVOLUME/parenrightbigg=/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH,	WHEREZANDAARE THE NUMBER OF PROTONS AND NUCLEONS RESPECTIVELY IN THE WHITE DWARFSNUCLEI ANDmHIS THE MASS OF A HYDROGEN ATOM 4HUS THE &ERMI ENERGY IS PROPORTIONAL TOTHE / POWER OF THE DENSITYεF=/planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbiggπ/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.	4HE HYDROGEN MASS IS ADOPTED AS A REPRESENTATIVE MASS OF THE PROTON AND NEUTRON
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 635>>>

.OWCOMPARETHE&ERMIENERGYWITHTHEAVERAGETHERMALENERGYOFANELECTRONkTWHEREkIS "OLTZMANNS CONSTANT	 )N ROUGH TERMS IFkT < εFT H E NA NA V E R A G EELECTRONWILLBE UNABLE TO MAKE A TRANSITION TO AN UNOCCUPIED STATE AND THE ELECTRON GAS WILLBEDEGENERATE4HAT IS FOR A DEGENERATE GASkT </planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbiggπ/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/,ORTρ/</planckover2pi1mek/bracketleftbiggπmH/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg/= + MKG−/FORZ/A=. $ElNINGD≡ + MKG−/,THE CONDITION FOR DEGENERACY MAY BE WRITTEN ASTρ/<D.	4HE SMALLER THE VALUE OFT /ρ/ THE MORE DEGENERATE THE GASExample 3.1.(OW IMPORTANT IS ELECTRON DEGENERACY AT THE CENTERS OF THE 3UN AND3IRIUS "!T THE CENTER OF THE STANDARD SOLAR MODELTc=.×+ ANDρc=.×KG M−4HENTcρ/c= + MKG−/>D.)N THE 3UN ELECTRON DEGENERACY IS QUITE WEAK AND PLAYS A VERY MINOR ROLE SUPPLYINGONLY A FEW TENTHS OF A PERCENT OF THE CENTRAL PRESSURE (OWEVER AS THE 3UN CONTINUES TO&OR 3IRIUS " THE VALUES OF THE DENSITY AND CENTRAL TEMPERATURE ESTIMATED ABOVE LEAD TOTcρ/c= + MKG−/≪D,SO COMPLETE DEGENERACY IS A VALID ASSUMPTION FOR 3IRIUS "The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
evolve, electron degeneracy will become increasingly important (Fig. 6). The Sun will develop a degenerate helium core while on the red giant branch of the H–R diagram, leading eventually to a core helium flash. Later, on the asymptotic giant branch, the progenitor of a carbon–oxygen white dwarf will form in the core to be revealed when the Sun’s surface layers are ejected as a planetary nebula. 


<<<PAGE 636>>>

-33'"2'"(E COREFLASH40!'"(E COREBURNING%!'".ONDEGENERATE$EGENERATE
,OG Tc +	
  ,OG /H9267c KG Mn	FIGURE 6$EGENERACY IN THE 3UNS CENTER AS IT EVOLVES $ATA FROM -AZZITELLI AND $!NTONAAp. J.311  	Electron Degeneracy Pressure7ENOWESTIMATETHEELECTRONDEGENERACYPRESSUREBYCOMBININGTWOKEYIDEASOFQUANTUMMECHANICS 4HE 0AULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE WHICH ALLOWS AT MOST ONE ELECTRON IN EACH QUANTUMSTATE AND (EISENBERGS UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE IN THE FORM OFδDeltaℓx δDeltaℓpx≈/planckover2pi1,WHICH REQUIRES THAT AN ELECTRON CONlNED TO A SMALL VOLUME OF SPACE HAVE A CORRESPONDINGLY HIGH UNCERTAINTY IN ITS MOMENTUM "ECAUSE THE MINIMUM VALUE OF THEELECTRONS MOMENTUMpMIN IS APPROXIMATELYδDeltaℓp MORE CLOSELY CONlNED ELECTRONSWILL HAVE GREATER MOMENTA7HENWEMAKETHEUNREALISTICASSUMPTIONTHATALLOFTHEELECTRONSHAVETHESAMEMOMENTUMp  FOR THE PRESSURE INTEGRAL BECOMESP≈nepv,	WHEREneIS THE TOTAL ELECTRON NUMBER DENSITY)N A COMPLETELY DEGENERATE ELECTRON GAS THE ELECTRONS ARE PACKED AS TIGHTLY AS POSSIBLEAND FOR A UNIFORM NUMBER DENSITY OFne THE SEPARATION BETWEEN NEIGHBORING ELECTRONS ISThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 637>>>

ABOUTn−/e(OWEVERTOSATISFYTHE0AULIEXCLUSIONPRINCIPLETHEELECTRONSMUSTMAINTAINTHEIRIDENTITIESASDIFFERENTPARTICLES4HATISTHEUNCERTAINTYINTHEIRPOSITIONSCANNOTBELARGERTHAN THEIR PHYSICAL SEPARATION )DENTIFYINGδDeltaℓx≈n−/eFOR THE LIMITING CASE OF COMPLETEDEGENERACYWECANUSE(EISENBERGSUNCERTAINTYRELATIONTOESTIMATETHEMOMENTUMOFANELECTRON )N ONE COORDINATE DIRECTIONpx≈δDeltaℓpx≈/planckover2pi1δDeltaℓx≈/planckover2pi1n/e	(OWEVERINATHREEDIMENSIONALGASEACHOFTHEDIRECTIONSISEQUALLYLIKELY IMPLYING THATpx=py=pz,WHICHISJUSTASTATEMENTOFTHEEQUIPARTITIONOFENERGYAMONGALLTHECOORDINATEDIRECTIONS4HEREFOREp=px+py+pz=px,ORp=√px.5SING %Q 	 FOR THE ELECTRON NUMBER DENSITY WITH FULL IONIZATION GIVESp≈√/planckover2pi1/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.&OR NONRELATIVISTIC ELECTRONS THE SPEED ISv=pme≈√/planckover2pi1men/e	≈√/planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.	)NSERTING%QS 	 	AND 	INTO%Q 	FORTHEELECTRONDEGENERACYPRESSURERESULTS INP≈/planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.	4HIS IS ROUGHLY A FACTOR OF TWO SMALLER THAN THE EXACT EXPRESSION FOR THE PRESSURE DUE TO ACOMPLETELY DEGENERATE NONRELATIVISTIC ELECTRON GASPP=/parenleftbigπ/parenrightbig//planckover2pi1men/e,The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 638>>>

ORP=/parenleftbigπ/parenrightbig//planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.	5SINGZ/A=. FOR A CARBONnOXYGEN WHITE DWARF %Q  	 SHOWS THAT THE ELECTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT A WHITE DWARF SUCH AS 3IRIUS " IS ABOUT.×.M−WITHINAFACTOROFTWOOFTHEESTIMATEOFTHECENTRALPRESSUREMADEPREVIOUSLY %Q 	Electron degeneracy pressure is responsible for maintaining hydrostaticequilibrium in a white dwarf.9OU MAY HAVE NOTICED THAT %Q  	 IS THE POLYTROPIC EQUATION OF STATEP=Kρ/CORRESPONDING TOn=. 4HIS IMPLIES THAT THE EXTENSIVE TOOLS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ,ANEn4THE CHANDRASEKHAR LIMIT4HE REQUIREMENT THAT DEGENERATE ELECTRON PRESSURE MUST SUPPORT A WHITE DWARF STAR HASPROFOUNDIMPLICATIONS)NATTHEAGEOFTHE)NDIANPHYSICIST3UBRAHMANYAN#HANDRASEKHAR ANNOUNCED HIS DISCOVERY THATthere is a maximum mass for white dwarfs )N THISSECTION WE WILL CONSIDER THE PHYSICS THAT LEADS TO THIS AMAZING CONCLUSIONThe Mass–Volume Relation4HE RELATION BETWEEN THE RADIUSRWD OF A WHITE DWARF AND ITS MASSMWD MAY BE FOUNDBYSETTINGTHEESTIMATEOFTHECENTRALPRESSURE%Q 	EQUALTOTHEELECTRONDEGENERACYPRESSURE %Q 	πG ρRWD=/parenleftbigπ/parenrightbig//planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.5SINGρ=MWD/πRWDASSUMINGCONSTANTDENSITY	THISLEADSTOANESTIMATEOFTHERADIUSOF THE WHITE DWARFRWD≈(π)//planckover2pi1GmeM/WD/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggmH/bracketrightbigg/.	&ORA-⊙CARBONnOXYGENWHITEDWARFR≈.×MTOOSMALLBYROUGHLYAFACTOROFTWOBUTANACCEPTABLEESTIMATE-OREIMPORTANTISTHESURPRISINGIMPLICATIONTHATMWDRWD=CONSTANT ORMWDVWD=CONSTANT.	The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
%MDEN EQUATION CAN BE USED TO STUDY THESE OBJECTS /F COURSE TO UNDERSTAND THEM IN DETAIL REQUIRES CAREFUL NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS INVOLVING THE DETAILS OF THE COMPLEX EQUATION OF STATE OF PARTIALLY DEGENERATE GASES NONZERO TEMPERATURES AND CHANGING COMPOSITIONS


<<<PAGE 639>>>

4HE VOLUME OF A WHITE DWARF IS INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO ITS MASS SO MORE MASSIVE WHITEDWARFS ARE ACTUALLYsmaller4HISmass–volume relationIS A RESULT OF THE STAR DERIVING ITSSUPPORT FROM ELECTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE 4HE ELECTRONS MUST BE MORE CLOSELY CONlNEDTOGENERATETHELARGERDEGENERACYPRESSUREREQUIREDTOSUPPORTAMOREMASSIVESTAR)NFACTTHE MASSnVOLUME RELATION IMPLIES THATρ∝MWD!CCORDINGTOTHEMASSnVOLUMERELATIONPILINGMOREANDMOREMASSONTOAWHITEDWARFWOULD EVENTUALLY RESULT IN SHRINKING THE STAR DOWN TO ZERO VOLUME AS ITS MASS BECOMESINlNITE (OWEVER IF THE DENSITY EXCEEDS ABOUT KG M− THERE IS A DEPARTURE FROM THISRELATION 4O SEE WHY THIS IS SO USE %Q  	 TO ESTIMATE THE SPEED OF THE ELECTRONS IN3IRIUS "v≈/planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/=.×MS−,OVER ONETHIRD THE SPEED OF LIGHT )F THE MASSnVOLUME RELATION WERE CORRECT WHITE DWARFSA BIT MORE MASSIVE THAN 3IRIUS " WOULD BE SO SMALL AND DENSE THAT THEIR ELECTRONS WOULDEXCEED THE LIMITING VALUE OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT 4HIS IMPOSSIBILITY POINTS OUT THE DANGERSOF IGNORING THE EFFECTS OF RELATIVITY IN OUR EXPRESSIONS FOR THE ELECTRON SPEED %Q 	ANDPRESSURE%Q 	 "ECAUSETHEELECTRONSAREMOVINGMORESLOWLYTHANTHENONRELATIVISTIC %Q  	 WOULD INDICATE THERE IS LESS ELECTRON PRESSURE AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT THESTAR 4HUS A MASSIVE WHITE DWARF ISsmallerTHAN PREDICTED BY THE MASSnVOLUME RELATION)NDEEDZEROVOLUMEOCCURSFORAlNITEVALUEOFTHEMASSINOTHERWORDSTHEREISALIMITTOTHE AMOUNT OF MATTER THAT CAN BE SUPPORTED BY ELECTRON DEGENERACY PRESSUREDynamical Instability4OAPPRECIATETHEEFFECTOFRELATIVITYONTHESTABILITYOFAWHITEDWARFRECALLTHAT%Q 	WHICH IS VALID ONLY FOR APPROXIMATELYρ<KG M−	 IS OF THE POLYTROPIC FORMP=Kρ/WHEREKISACONSTANT HEVALUEOF THERATIO OFSPECIlC HEATS ISγ=/INTHE
P=/parenleftbigπ/parenrightbig//planckover2pi1c/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/	)N THIS LIMITγ=/ WHICH CORRESPONDS TOdynamicalinstability4HESMALLESTDEPARTUREFROMEQUILIBRIUMWILLCAUSETHEWHITEDWARFTOCOLLAPSEASELECTRONDEGENERACY)T IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE TO SHOW THAT RELATIVISTIC EFFECTS MUST BE INCLUDED FOR DENSITIES GREATER THAN KG M−)N FACT THE STRONG GRAVITY OF THE WHITE DWARF AS DESCRIBED BY %INSTEINS GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITYACTS TORAISE THE CRITICAL VALUE OFγFOR DYNAMICAL INSTABILITY SLIGHTLY ABOVE /
4
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
nonrelativistic limit. As we discussed in Section 14.3, this means that the white dwarf is dynamically stable. If it suffers a small perturbation, it will return to its equilibrium structure instead of collapsing. However, in the extreme relativistic limit, the electron speed v = c must be used instead of Eq. (  10) to find the electron degeneracy pressure. The result is
LIMITINGCASELEADSTOTHECOLLAPSEOFTHEDEGENERATECOREINPRESSUREFAILSPPROACHINGTHIS!


<<<PAGE 640>>>

AN AGING SUPERGIANTRESULTINGINACORECOLLAPSESUPERNOVA.OTETHAT%Q ISAPOLYTROPICEQUATIONOFSTATEP=Kρ/WITH A POLYTROPIC INDEX OFn=	Estimating the Chandrasekhar Limit!N APPROXIMATE VALUE FOR THE MAXIMUM WHITEDWARF MASS MAY BE OBTAINED BY SETTING THEESTIMATE OF THE CENTRAL PRESSURE %Q  	 WITHρ=MWD/πRWD EQUAL TO %Q  	WITHZ/A=.4HE RADIUS OF THE WHITE DWARF CANCELS LEAVINGM#H∼√π/parenleftbigg/planckover2pi1cG/parenrightbigg//bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggmH/bracketrightbigg=. -⊙	FORTHEGREATESTPOSSIBLEMASS.OTETHAT%Q 	CONTAINSTHREEFUNDAMENTALCONSTANTS/planckover2pi1c ANDGREPRESENTING THE COMBINED EFFECTS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS RELATIVITY AND.EWTONIANGRAVITATIONONTHESTRUCTUREOFAWHITEDWARF!PRECISEDERIVATIONWITHZ/A=. RESULTS IN A VALUE OFM#H=. -⊙ CALLED THEChandrasekhar limit &IGURE SHOWS THE MASSnRADIUS RELATION FOR WHITE DWARFS.O WHITE DWARF HAS BEEN DISCOVEREDWITH A MASS EXCEEDING THE #HANDRASEKHAR LIMIT)T IS IMPORTANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT NEITHER THE NONRELATIVISTIC NOR THE RELATIVISTIC FORMULAFOR THE ELECTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE DEVELOPED HERE %QS  AND  RESPECTIVELY	CONTAINSTHETEMPERATURE5NLIKETHEGASPRESSUREOFTHEIDEALGASLAWANDTHEEXPRESSIONFOR
3IRIUS "
       
-ASS MM  	2ADIUS  M	
FIGURE 72ADII OF WHITE DWARFS OFMWD≤M#HATT= +&IGURE DOESNOTINCLUDECOMPLICATIONSSUCHASTHEELECTROSTATICATTRACTIONBETWEENTHENUCLEIANDELECTRONSIN A WHITE DWARF THUS TENDING TO REDUCE THE RADIUS SLIGHTLY)T IS NATURAL TO WONDER ABOUT THE OUTCOME OF SNEAKING UP ON THE #HANDRASEKHAR LIMIT BY ADDING JUST A BIT MOREMASSTOWHITEDWARFWITHVERYNEARLY-⊙
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 641>>>

RADIATION PRESSURE THE PRESSURE OF A COMPLETELY DEGENERATE ELECTRON GAS IS INDEPENDENT OFITSTEMPERATURE4HISHASTHEEFFECTOFDECOUPLINGTHEMECHANICALSTRUCTUREOFTHESTARFROMITS THERMAL PROPERTIES (OWEVER THE DECOUPLING IS NEVER PERFECT SINCET>!S A RESULTTHECORRECTEXPRESSIONFORTHEPRESSUREINVOLVESTREATINGTHEGASASPARTIALLYDEGENERATEANDRELATIVISTIC BUT WITHv<c4HIS IS A CHALLENGING EQUATION OF STATE TO DEAL WITH PROPERLY7HEN HELIUM BURNINGBEGINS IN THE CORE IT PROCEEDS WITHOUT AN ACCOMPANYING INCREASE IN PRESSURE THAT WOULDNORMALLYEXPANDTHECOREANDTHEREFORERESTRAINTHERISINGTEMPERATURE4HERESULTINGRAPIDRISE IN TEMPERATURE LEADS TO A RUNAWAY PRODUCTION OF NUCLEAR ENERGYTHE HELIUM mASHWHICH LASTS UNTIL THE TEMPERATURE BECOMES SUFlCIENTLY HIGH TO REMOVE THE DEGENERACY OFTHE CORE ALLOWING IT TO EXPAND /N THE OTHER HAND A STAR MAY HAVE SO LITTLE MASS THAT ITSCORE TEMPERATURE NEVER BECOMES HIGH ENOUGH TO INITIATE HELIUM BURNING4HE RESULT IN THISCASE IS THE FORMATION OF A HELIUM WHITE DWARF5THE COOLING OF WHITE DWARFS-OSTSTARSENDTHEIRLIVESASWHITEDWARFS4HESEGLOWINGEMBERSSCATTEREDTHROUGHOUTSPACEARE A GALAXYS MEMORY OF ITS PAST GLORY "ECAUSE NO FUSION OCCURS IN THEIR INTERIORS WHITEDWARFSSIMPLYCOOLOFFATANESSENTIALLYCONSTANTRADIUSASTHEYSLOWLYDEPLETETHEIRSUPPLYOF THERMAL ENERGY RECALL &IG 	 -UCH EFFORT HAS BEEN DIRECTED AT UNDERSTANDING THERATEATWHICHAWHITEDWARFCOOLSSOITSLIFETIMEANDTHETIMEOFITSBIRTHMAYBECALCULATED*UST AS PALEONTOLOGISTS CAN READ THE HISTORY OF %ARTHS LIFE IN THE FOSSIL RECORD ASTRONOMERSMAYBEABLETORECOVERTHEHISTORYOFSTARFORMATIONINOUR'ALAXYBYSTUDYINGTHESTATISTICSOFWHITEDWARFTEMPERATURES4HISSECTIONWILLBEDEVOTEDTOADISCUSSIONOFTHEPRINCIPLESINVOLVED IN THIS STELLAR ARCHAEOLOGYEnergy Transport&IRST WE MUST ASK HOW ENERGY IS TRANSPORTED OUTWARD FROM THE INTERIOR OF A WHITE DWARF)N AN ORDINARY STAR PHOTONS TRAVEL MUCH FARTHER THAN ATOMS DO BEFORE SUFFERING A COLLISION
9OU ARE REFERRED TO #LAYTON 	 OR (ANSEN +AWALER AND4RIMBLE 	 FOR A DISCUSSION OF PARTIAL ELECTRONDEGENERACY
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
that robs them of energy. As a result, photons are normally more efficient carriers of energy to the stellar surface. In a white dwarf, however, the degenerate electrons can travel long distances before losing energy in a collision with a nucleus, since the vast majority of the lower-energy electron states are already occupied. Thus, in a white dwarf, energy is carried by electron conduction rather than by radiation. This is so efficient that the interior of a white dwarf is nearly isothermal, with the temperature dropping significantly only in the nondegenerate surface layers. Figure 8 shows that a white dwarf consists of a nearly constant-temperature interior surrounded by a thin non-degenerate envelope that transfers heat less efficiently, causing the energy to leak out


<<<PAGE 642>>>

,OGT/H9267n     n	
,OG T +	
.ONDEGENERATE$EGENERATE     rRWDnnn
FIGURE 84EMPERATURE AND DEGREE OF DEGENERACY IN THE INTERIOR OF A WHITE DWARF MODEL 4HEHORIZONTAL DOTTED LINE MARKS THE BOUNDARY BETWEEN DEGENERACY AND NONDEGENERACY AS DESCRIBED BY%Q 	SLOWLY4HE STEEP TEMPERATURE GRADIENT NEAR THE SURFACE CREATES CONVECTION ZONES THAT MAYALTERTHEAPPEARANCEOFTHEWHITEDWARFSSPECTRUMASITCOOLSASDESCRIBEDIN3ECTION	&OR A WHITE DWARF OF SURFACE LUMINOSITYLWDAND MASSMWD %Q ,	 FORTHE PRESSUREPAS A FUNCTION OF THE TEMPERATURETIN THE ENVELOPE ISP=/parenleftbiggπacGMWDLWDkκµmH/parenrightbigg/T/,	WHEREκCALLED hAv IN %Q ,	 IS THE COEFlCIENT OF THE BOUNDnFREE+RAMERSOPACITYLAWκ=.×Z(+X)MKG−.5SINGTHEIDEALGASLAW TOREPLACETHEPRESSURERESULTSINARELATIONBETWEENTHEDENSITYANDTHE TEMPERATUREρ=/parenleftbiggπacGMWDLWDµmHκk/parenrightbigg/T/.	4HE TRANSITION BETWEEN THE NONDEGENERATE SURFACE LAYERS OF THE STAR AND ITS ISOTHERMALDEGENERATEINTERIOROFTEMPERATURETcISDESCRIBEDBYSETTINGTHETWOSIDESOF%Q 	EQUAL%QUATION  	 ASSUMES THAT THE ENVELOPE IS IN RADIATIVE EQUILIBRIUM WITH THE ENERGY CARRIED OUTWARD BYPHOTONS %VEN WHEN CONVECTION OCCURS IN THE SURFACE LAYERS OF A WHITE DWARF IT IS NOT EXPECTED TO HAVE A LARGEEFFECT ON THE COOLING
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 643>>>

TO EACH OTHER 5SING THIS TO REPLACE THE DENSITY RESULTS IN AN EXPRESSION FOR THE LUMINOSITYAT THE WHITE DWARFS SURFACE IN TERMS OF ITS INTERIOR TEMPERATURELWD=DπacGmHκkµMWDT/c=CT/c,	WHEREC≡DπacGmHκkµMWD=.×−/parenleftbiggMWDM⊙/parenrightbiggµZ(+X)..OTETHATTHELUMINOSITYISPROPORTIONALTOT/cTHEinteriorTEMPERATURE	ANDTHATITVARIESAS THE FOURTH POWER OF THEeffectiveTEMPERATURE ACCORDING TO THE 3TEFANn"OLTZMANN LAW4HUSTHESURFACEOFAWHITEDWARFCOOLSMORESLOWLYTHANITSISOTHERMALINTERIORAS THE STARS THERMAL ENERGY LEAKS INTO SPACEExample 5.%QUATION  	 CAN BE USED TO ESTIMATE THE INTERIOR TEMPERATURE OF A-⊙WHITE DWARF WITHLWD=. ,⊙ !RBITRARILY ASSUMING VALUES OFX=Y=.Z=. FOR THE NONDEGENERATE ENVELOPE SOµ≃.	 RESULTS INTc=/bracketleftbiggLWD.×−/parenleftbiggM⊙MWD/parenrightbiggZ(+X)µ/bracketrightbigg/=.×+.%QUATING THE TWO SIDES OF THE DEGENERACY CONDITION %Q  	 SHOWS THAT THE DENSITY ATTHE BASE OF THE NONDEGENERATE ENVELOPE IS ABOUTρ=/parenleftbiggTcD/parenrightbigg/=.×KG M−.4HIS RESULT IS SEVERAL ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE LESS THAN THE AVERAGE DENSITY OFA-⊙WHITEDWARFSUCHAS3IRIUS"ANDCONlRMSTHATTHEENVELOPEISINDEEDTHINCONTRIBUTINGVERYLITTLETO THE STARS TOTAL MASSThe Cooling Timescale! WHITE DWARFS THERMAL ENERGY RESIDES PRIMARILY IN THE KINETIC ENERGY OF ITS NUCLEI THEDEGENERATEELECTRONSCANNOTGIVEUPASIGNIlCANTAMOUNTOFENERGYBECAUSENEARLYALLOFTHELOWERENERGYSTATESAREALREADYOCCUPIED)FWEASSUMEFORSIMPLICITYTHATTHECOMPOSITIONISUNIFORMTHENTHETOTALNUMBEROFNUCLEIINTHEWHITEDWARFISEQUALTOTHESTARSMASSMWD"ECAUSE THE AMOUNT OF HYDROGEN IS QUITE SMALL EVEN IN A $! WHITE DWARF THIS COMPOSITION IS A REASONABLECHOICE FOR BOTH TYPE $!AND TYPE $"
1.The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 644>>>

DIVIDED BY THE MASS OF A NUCLEUSAmH &URTHERMORE SINCE THE AVERAGE THERMAL ENERGY OFA NUCLEUS ISkT THE THERMAL ENERGY AVAILABLE FOR RADIATION ISU=MWDAmHkTc.	)F WE USE THE VALUE OFTcFROM %XAMPLE  ANDA= FOR CARBON %Q  	 GIVESAPPROXIMATELY .×* ! CRUDE ESTIMATE OF THE CHARACTERISTIC TIMESCALE FOR COOLINGτCOOL CAN BE OBTAINED SIMPLY BY DIVIDING THE THERMAL ENERGY BY THE LUMINOSITY4HUSτCOOL=ULWD=MWDkAmHCT/c,	WHICH IS ABOUT .×S≈ MILLION YEARS 4HIS IS AN UNDERESTIMATE BECAUSE THECOOLING TIMESCALE INCREASES ASTcDECREASES 4HE MORE DETAILED CALCULATION THAT FOLLOWSSHOWSTHATAWHITEDWARFSPENDSMOSTOFITSLIFECOOLINGSLOWLYWITHALOWTEMPERATUREANDLUMINOSITYThe Change in Luminosity with Time4HE DEPLETION OF THE INTERNAL ENERGY PROVIDES THE LUMINOSITY SO %QS  	 AND  	GIVE−dUdt=LWDOR−ddt/parenleftbiggMWDAmHkTc/parenrightbigg=CT/c.)F THE INITIAL TEMPERATURE OF THE INTERIOR ISTWHENt= THEN THIS EXPRESSION MAY BEINTEGRATED TO OBTAIN THE CORE TEMPERATURE AS A FUNCTION OF TIMETc(t)=T/parenleftBigg+AmHCT/MWDkt/parenrightBigg−/=T/parenleftbigg+tτ/parenrightbigg−/,	WHEREτIS THE TIMESCALE FOR COOLING AT THE INITIAL TEMPERATURE OFT THAT ISτ=τCOOLATTIMEt )NSERTING THIS INTO %Q  	 SHOWS THAT THE LUMINOSITY OF THE WHITE DWARF lRSTDECLINES SHARPLY FROM ITS INITIAL VALUE OFL=CT/AND THEN DIMS MUCH MORE GRADUALLYAS TIME PASSESLWD=L/parenleftBigg+AmHC/L/MWDkt/parenrightBigg−/=L/parenleftbigg+tτ/parenrightbigg−/.	4HE SOLID LINE IN &IG  SHOWS THE DECLINE IN THE LUMINOSITY OF A PURE CARBON  -⊙WHITEDWARFCALCULATEDFROM%Q 	4HEDASHEDLINEISACURVEOBTAINEDFORASEQUENCEThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 645>>>

#RYSTALLIZATION,OG LL  	 -7INGET ET AL 	4EXT COOLING CURVE
nnnnn
 4IME  YR	FIGURE 94HEORETICAL COOLING CURVES FOR  -⊙WHITEDWARF MODELS ;4HE SOLID LINE IS FROM%Q 	 AND THE DASHED LINE IS FROM7INGET ET ALAp. J. Lett.315 , =OF MORE REALISTIC WHITEDWARF MODELSTHAT INCLUDE THIN SURFACE LAYERS OF HYDROGEN ANDHELIUM OVERLYING THE CARBON CORE 4HE INSULATING EFFECT OF THESE LAYERS SLOWS THE COOLINGBYABOUT!LSOINCLUDEDARESOMEOFTHEINTRIGUINGPHENOMENATHATOCCURASTHEWHITEDWARFS INTERNAL TEMPERATURE DROPSCrystallization!SAWHITEDWARFCOOLSITCRYSTALLIZESINAGRADUALPROCESSTHATSTARTSATTHECENTERANDMOVESOUTWARD 4HE UPTURNED hKNEEv IN THE DASHED CURVE IN &IG  AT ABOUTLWD/L⊙≈−OCCURS WHEN THE COOLING NUCLEI BEGIN SETTLING INTO A CRYSTALLINE LATTICE 4HE REGULAR CRYSTALSTRUCTURE IS MAINTAINED BY THE MUTUAL ELECTROSTATIC REPULSION OF THE NUCLEI IT MINIMIZESTHEIRENERGYASTHEYVIBRATEABOUTTHEIRAVERAGEPOSITIONINTHELATTICE!STHENUCLEIUNDERGOTHIS PHASE CHANGE THEY RELEASE THEIR LATENT HEAT ABOUTkTPER NUCLEUS	 SLOWING THE STARSCOOLINGANDPRODUCINGTHEKNEEINTHECOOLINGCURVE,ATERASTHEWHITEDWARFSTEMPERATURECONTINUES TO DROP THE CRYSTALLINE LATTICE ACTUALLY ACCELERATES THE COOLING AS THE COHERENTVIBRATION OF THE REGULARLY SPACED NUCLEI PROMOTES FURTHER ENERGY LOSS 4HIS IS REmECTED INTHE SUBSEQUENT DOWNTURN IN THE COOLING CURVE4HUS THE ULTIMATE MONUMENT TO THE LIVES OFMOST STARS WILL BE A hDIAMOND IN THE SKYv A COLD DARK %ARTHSIZE SPHERE OF CRYSTALLIZEDCARBON AND OXYGEN mOATING THROUGH THE DEPTHS OF SPACE9OU ARE REFERRED TO7INGET ET AL 	 FOR DETAILS OF THIS AND OTHER COOLING CURVES5NLIKE A TERRESTRIAL DIAMOND THE WHITE DWARFS NUCLEI ARE ARRAYED IN A BODYCENTERED CUBIC LATTICE LIKE THAT OFMETALLIC SODIUM
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 646>>>

Comparing Theory with Observations$ESPITE THE LARGE UNCERTAINTIES IN THE MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE TEMPERATURES RESULTING FROMHIGHSURFACEGRAVITIESANDBROADSPECTRALFEATURESITISPOSSIBLETOOBSERVETHECOOLINGOFA PULSATING WHITE DWARF !S THE STARS TEMPERATURE DECLINES ITS PERIODPSLOWLY CHANGESACCORDINGTOdP/dt∝T−APPROXIMATELY	%XTREMELYPRECISEMEASUREMENTSOFARAPIDLYCOOLING $/6 STAR YIELD A PERIOD DERIVATIVE OFP/|dP/dt|=.×YEARS IN EXCELLENTAGREEMENTWITHTHETHEORETICALVALUE-EASURINGPERIODCHANGESFORTHEMORESLOWLYCOOLING$"6AND $!6STARS ARE EVEN MORE DIFlCULT4HIS INTEREST IN AN ACCURATE CALCULATION OF THE DECLINE IN A WHITE DWARFS TEMPERATUREREmECTS THE HOPE OF USING THESE FOSSIL STARS AS A TOOL FOR UNCOVERING THE HISTORY OF STARFORMATION IN OUR 'ALAXY &IGURE  FROM 7INGET ET AL 	 ILLUSTRATES HOW THISMIGHT BE ACCOMPLISHED %ACH CIRCLE BOTH OPEN AND lLLED	 IN THE lGURE IS THE OBSERVEDNUMBER OF WHITE DWARFS PER CUBIC PARSEC WITH THE ABSOLUTE VISUAL MAGNITUDE GIVEN AT THETOP OF THE lGURE 4HE DRAMATICALLY SUDDEN DROP IN THE POPULATION OF WHITE DWARFS WITHLWD/L⊙<−. IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE ASSUMPTION THAT STARS HAVE BEEN FORMING IN OUR'ALAXY THROUGHOUT THE INlNITE PAST )NSTEAD THIS DECLINE CAN BEST BE EXPLAINED IF THE lRSTWHITEDWARFSWEREFORMEDANDBEGANCOOLING.±.BILLIONYEARSAGO&IGURE SHOWSTHE THEORETICALLY EXPECTED DISTRIBUTION OF WHITE DWARF LUMINOSITIES BASED ON THIS COOLINGTIME CALCULATED USING THEORETICAL COOLING CURVES SIMILAR TO THE ONE SHOWN IN &IG 
nnnnn,OG N PCn MBOLn	                MV
 n n n n n,OG LL  	FIGURE 10/BSERVEDANDTHEORETICALDISTRIBUTIONOFWHITEDWARFLUMINOSITIES&IGUREADAPTEDFROM7INGET ET ALAp. J. Lett.315 , 	&OR 3IRIUS " EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURES RANGING FROM  + TO  + ARE OFTEN QUOTED
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 647>>>

TOGETHER WITH THE OBSERVED DISTRIBUTION OF WHITEDWARF MASSES &URTHERMORE ADDING THETIME SPENT IN THE PREWHITEDWARF STAGES OF STELLAR EVOLUTION IMPLIES THAT STAR FORMATION INTHEDISKOFOUR'ALAXYBEGANABOUT.±.BILLIONYEARSAGO 4HISTIMEISABOUTBILLIONYEARSSHORTERTHANTHEAGEDETERMINEDFORTHE-ILKY7AYSGLOBULARCLUSTERSWHICHFORMEDAT AN EARLIER EPOCH6NEUTRON STARS4WO YEARS AFTER *AMES #HADWICK n	 DISCOVERED THE NEUTRON IN  A 'ERMANASTRONOMERANDA3WISSASTROPHYSICIST7ALTER"AADEn	AND&RITZ:WICKYn	 OF -OUNT 7ILSON /BSERVATORY PROPOSED THE EXISTENCE OFneutron stars 4HESE TWOASTRONOMERS WHO ALSO COINED THE TERMsupernova WENT ON TO SUGGEST THAT hSUPERNOVAEREPRESENT THE TRANSITIONS FROM ORDINARY STARS INTO NEUTRON STARS WHICH IN THEIR lNAL STAGESCONSIST OF EXTREMELY CLOSELY PACKED NEUTRONSvNeutron Degeneracy"ECAUSE NEUTRON STARS ARE FORMED WHEN THE DEGENERATE CORE OF AN AGING SUPERGIANT STARNEARS THE #HANDRASEKHAR LIMIT AND COLLAPSES WE TAKEM#HROUNDED TO TWO lGURES	 FOR ATYPICALNEUTRONSTARMASS!SOLARMASSNEUTRONSTARWOULDCONSISTOF.-⊙/mn≈NEUTRONSIN EFFECT A HUGE NUCLEUS WITH A MASS NUMBER OFA≈THAT IS HELD TOGETHERBY GRAVITY AND SUPPORTED BYneutron degeneracy pressure )T IS LEFT AS AN EXERCISE TOSHOW THATRNS≈(π)//planckover2pi1GM/NS/parenleftbiggmH/parenrightbigg/	ISTHEEXPRESSIONFORTHEESTIMATEDNEUTRONSTARRADIUSANALOGOUSTO%Q 	FORAWHITEDWARF&ORMNS=.-⊙THISYIELDSAVALUEOFM!SWEFOUNDWITH%Q 	FORWHITE DWARFS THIS ESTIMATE IS TOO SMALL BY A FACTOR OF ABOUT 4HAT IS THE ACTUAL RADIUS OFA.-⊙NEUTRON STAR LIES ROUGHLY BETWEEN  AND  KM WE WILL ADOPT A VALUE OF  KMFORTHERADIUS!SWILLBESEENTHEREAREMANYUNCERTAINTIESINVOLVEDINTHECONSTRUCTIONOFA MODEL NEUTRON STARThe Density of a Neutron Star4HIS INCREDIBLY COMPACT STELLAR REMNANT WOULD HAVE AN AVERAGE DENSITY OF .×KG M− GREATER THAN THE TYPICAL DENSITY OF AN ATOMIC NUCLEUSρNUC≈.×KG M−)NSOMESENSETHENEUTRONSINANEUTRONSTARMUSTBEhTOUCHINGvONEANOTHER!TTHEDENSITYOF A NEUTRON STAR ALL OF %ARTHS HUMAN INHABITANTS COULD BE CROWDED INTO A CUBE  CM ONEACH SIDE/THER MORE RECENT STUDIES HAVE OBTAINED SIMILAR RESULTS FOR THE AGE OF THEthin diskOF OUR 'ALAXY BASED ONWHITEDWARF COOLING TIMES AGE ESTIMATES RANGE FROM  'YR TO  'YR,IKE ELECTRONS NEUTRONS ARE FERMIONS AND SO ARE SUBJECT TO THE 0AULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE!STRONOMER &RANK 3HU HAS COMMENTED THAT THIS SHOWS hHOW MUCH OF HUMANITY IS EMPTY SPACEv

The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 648>>>

4HEPULLOFGRAVITYATTHESURFACEOFANEUTRONSTARISlERCE&ORA.-⊙NEUTRONSTARWITHARADIUSOFKMg=.×MS−BILLIONTIMESSTRONGERTHANTHEACCELERATIONOFGRAVITYAT%ARTHSSURFACE!NOBJECTDROPPEDFROMAHEIGHTOFONEMETERWOULDARRIVEATTHE STARS SURFACE WITH A SPEED OF .×MS−ABOUT  MILLION MPH	Example 6.1.4HEINADEQUACYOFUSING.EWTONIANMECHANICSTODESCRIBENEUTRONSTARSCANBEDEMONSTRATEDBYCALCULATINGTHEESCAPEVELOCITYATTHESURFACE ElNDvESC=/radicalbigGMNS/RNS=.×MS−=.c.4HIS CAN ALSO BE SEEN BY CONSIDERING THE RATIO OF THE .EWTONIAN GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIALENERGY TO THE REST ENERGY OF AN OBJECT OF MASSmAT THE STARS SURFACEGMNSm/RNSmc=..#LEARLYTHEEFFECTSOFRELATIVITYMUSTBEINCLUDEDFORANACCURATEDESCRIPTIONOFANEUTRONSTAR4HIS APPLIES NOT ONLY TO %INSTEINS THEORY OF SPECIAL RELATIVITYBUTALSO TO HIS THEORY OFThe Equation of State4OAPPRECIATETHEEXOTICNATUREOFTHEMATERIALCONSTITUTINGANEUTRONSTARANDTHEDIFlCULTIESINVOLVED IN CALCULATING THE EQUATION OF STATE IMAGINE COMPRESSING THE MIXTURE OF IRONNUCLEIANDDEGENERATEELECTRONSTHATMAKEUPANIRONWHITEDWARFATTHECENTEROFAMASSIVESUPERGIANT STAR3PECIlCALLY WE ARE INTERESTED IN THE EQUILIBRIUM CONlGURATION OF NUCLEONS PROTONS AND NEUTRONS	 TOGETHER WITH ENOUGH FREE ELECTRONS TO PROVIDE ZERO NETCHARGE4HE EQUILIBRIUM ARRANGEMENT IS THE ONE THAT INVOLVES THE LEAST ENERGY)NITIALLY AT LOW DENSITIES THE NUCLEONS ARE FOUND IN IRON NUCLEI 4HIS IS THE OUTCOMEOF THE MINIMUMENERGY COMPROMISE BETWEEN THE REPULSIVE #OULOMB FORCE BETWEEN THEPROTONSANDTHEATTRACTIVENUCLEARFORCEBETWEENALLOFTHENUCLEONS(OWEVERASMENTIONEDIN THE DISCUSSION OF THE #HANDRASEKHAR LIMIT 3ECTION 	 WHENρ≈KG M−THEELECTRONSBECOMERELATIVISTIC3OONTHEREAFTERTHEMINIMUMENERGYARRANGEMENTOFPROTONSANDNEUTRONSCHANGESBECAUSETHEENERGETICELECTRONSCANCONVERTPROTONSINTHEIRONNUCLEIINTO NEUTRONS BY THE PROCESS OF ELECTRON CAPTUREp++e−→n+νe."ECAUSETHENEUTRONMASSISSLIGHTLYGREATERTHANTHESUMOFTHEPROTONANDELECTRONMASSESANDTHENEUTRINOSRESTMASSENERGYISNEGLIGIBLETHEELECTRONMUSTSUPPLYTHEKINETICENERGYTO MAKE UP THE DIFFERENCE IN ENERGYmnc−mpc−mec=. -E6"ECAUSE THE MECHANICAL AND THERMAL PROPERTIES OF DEGENERATE MATTER ARE INDEPENDENT OF ONE ANOTHER WE WILLASSUME FOR CONVENIENCE THATT= +4HE IRON NUCLEI ARE THEN ARRANGED IN A CRYSTALLINE LATTICE7

The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
gravity, called the general theory of relativity. Nevertheless, we will use both relativ-istic formulas and the more familiar Newtonian physics to reach qualitatively correct conclusions about neutron stars.


<<<PAGE 649>>>

Example 6.2.7EWILLOBTAINANESTIMATEOFTHEDENSITYATWHICHTHEPROCESSOFELECTRONCAPTUREBEGINSFORASIMPLEMIXTUREOFHYDROGENNUCLEIPROTONS	ANDRELATIVISTICDEGENERATEELECTRONSp++e−→n+νe.)NTHELIMITINGCASEWHENTHENEUTRINOCARRIESAWAYNOENERGYWECANEQUATETHERELATIVISTICEXPRESSIONFORTHEELECTRONKINETICENERGY TOTHEDIFFERENCEBETWEENTHENEUTRONREST ENERGYAND COMBINED PROTON AND ELECTRON REST ENERGIES AND WRITEmec/parenleftBigg/radicalbig−v/c−/parenrightBigg=(mn−mp−me)c,OR/parenleftbiggmemn−mp/parenrightbigg=−vc.!LTHOUGH%Q 	FORTHEELECTRONSPEEDISSTRICTLYVALIDONLYFORNONRELATIVISTICELECTRONSIT IS ACCURATE ENOUGH TO BE USED IN THIS ESTIMATE )NSERTING THIS EXPRESSION FORvLEADS TO/parenleftbiggmemn−mp/parenrightbigg≈−/planckover2pi1mec/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg/.3OLVING FORρSHOWS THAT THE DENSITY AT WHICH ELECTRON CAPTURE BEGINS IS APPROXIMATELYρ≈AmHZ/parenleftBigmec/planckover2pi1/parenrightBig/bracketleftBigg−/parenleftbiggmemn−mp/parenrightbigg/bracketrightBigg/≈.×KG M−,USINGA/Z= FOR HYDROGEN 4HIS IS IN REASONABLE AGREEMENT WITH THE ACTUAL VALUE OFρ=.×KG M−7ECONSIDEREDFREEPROTONSIN%XAMPLE TOAVOIDTHECOMPLICATIONSTHATARISEWHENTHEYAREBOUNDINHEAVYNUCLEI!CAREFULCALCULATIONTHATTAKESINTOACCOUNTTHESURROUNDINGNUCLEIANDRELATIVISTICDEGENERATEELECTRONSASWELLASTHECOMPLEXITIESOFNUCLEARPHYSICSREVEALS THAT THE DENSITY MUST EXCEED KG M−FOR THE PROTONS IN&E NUCLEI TO CAPTUREELECTRONS!T STILL HIGHER DENSITIES THE MOST STABLE ARRANGEMENT OF NUCLEONS IS ONE WHERETHE NEUTRONS AND PROTONS ARE FOUND IN A LATTICE OF INCREASINGLY NEUTRONRICH NUCLEI SO ASTO DECREASE THE ENERGY DUE TO THE #OULOMB REPULSION BETWEEN PROTONS 4HIS PROCESS ISKNOWNASneutronizationANDPRODUCESASEQUENCEOFNUCLEISUCHAS&E.I.I.I+R,...,+R /RDINARILY THESE SUPERNUMERARY NEUTRONS WOULD REVERT TO PROTONS VIA THESTANDARDβDECAY PROCESSn→p++e−+νe.     The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 650>>>

(OWEVERUNDERTHECONDITIONSOFCOMPLETEELECTRONDEGENERACYTHEREARENOVACANTSTATESAVAILABLEFORANEMITTEDELECTRONTOOCCUPYSOTHENEUTRONSCANNOTDECAYBACKINTOPROTONS7HEN THE DENSITY REACHES ABOUT ×KG M− THE MINIMUMENERGY ARRANGEMENT ISONE IN WHICH SOME OF THE NEUTRONS ARE FOUNDoutsideTHE NUCLEI 4HE APPEARANCE OF THESEFREE NEUTRONS IS CALLEDneutron dripAND MARKS THE START OF A THREECOMPONENT MIXTUREOF A LATTICE OF NEUTRONRICH NUCLEI NONRELATIVISTIC DEGENERATE FREE NEUTRONS AND RELATIVISTICDEGENERATE ELECTRONS4HE mUID OF FREE NEUTRONS HAS THE STRIKING PROPERTY THAT IT HAS NO VISCOSITY 4HIS OCCURSBECAUSE A SPONTANEOUS PAIRING OF THE DEGENERATE NEUTRONS HAS TAKEN PLACE 4HE RESULTING!S THE DENSITY INCREASES FURTHER THE NUMBER OF FREE NEUTRONS INCREASES AS THE NUMBEROF ELECTRONS DECLINES 4HE NEUTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE EXCEEDS THE ELECTRON DEGENERACYPRESSURE WHEN THE DENSITY REACHES ROUGHLY ×KG M− !S THE DENSITY APPROACHESρNUC THE NUCLEI EFFECTIVELY DISSOLVE AS THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN NEUTRONS INSIDE AND OUTSIDEOF NUCLEI BECOMES MEANINGLESS 4HIS RESULTS IN A mUID MIXTURE OF FREE NEUTRONS PROTONSAND ELECTRONS DOMINATED BY NEUTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE WITH BOTH THE NEUTRONS AND PROTONS PAIRED TO FORM SUPERmUIDS 4HE mUID OF PAIRS OF POSITIVELY CHARGED PROTONS IS ALSOsuperconductingWITHZEROELECTRICALRESISTANCE!STHEDENSITYINCREASESFURTHERTHERATIOOF NEUTRONSPROTONSELECTRONS APPROACHES A LIMITING VALUE OF  AS DETERMINED BY THEBALANCEBETWEENTHECOMPETINGPROCESSESOFELECTRONCAPTUREANDβDECAYINHIBITEDBYTHEPRESENCE OF DEGENERATE ELECTRONS4HE PROPERTIES OF THE NEUTRON STAR MATERIAL WHENρ>ρNUCARE STILL POORLY UNDERSTOOD!COMPLETE THEORETICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE BEHAVIOR OF A SEA OF FREE NEUTRONS INTERACTING VIATHE STRONG NUCLEAR FORCE IN THE PRESENCE OF PROTONS AND ELECTRONS IS NOT YET AVAILABLE ANDTHERE IS LITTLE EXPERIMENTAL DATA ON THE BEHAVIOR OF MATTER IN THIS DENSITY RANGE ! FURTHERCOMPLICATION IS THE APPEARANCE OF SUBNUCLEAR PARTICLES SUCH ASpionsπ	 PRODUCED BY THEDECAY OF A NEUTRON INTO A PROTON AND A NEGATIVELY CHARGED PIONn→p++π− WHICHOCCURSSPONTANEOUSLYINNEUTRONSTARSWHENρ>ρNUC.EVERTHELESSTHESEARETHEVALUESOF THE DENSITY ENCOUNTERED IN THE INTERIORS OF NEUTRON STARS AND THE DIFlCULTIES MENTIONEDARE THE PRIMARY REASONS FOR THE UNCERTAINTY IN THE STRUCTURE CALCULATED FOR MODEL NEUTRONSTARSNeutron Star Models4ABLE  SUMMARIZES THE COMPOSITION OF THE NEUTRON STAR MATERIAL AT VARIOUS DENSITIES!FTER AN EQUATION OF STATE THAT RELATES THE DENSITY AND PRESSURE HAS BEEN OBTAINED A MODELOF THE STAR CAN BE CALCULATED BY NUMERICALLY INTEGRATING GENERALRELATIVISTIC VERSIONS OF THE!NisolatedNEUTRON DECAYS INTO A PROTON IN ABOUT  MINUTES THE HALFLIFE FOR THAT PROCESS4HEπ−IS A NEGATIVELY CHARGED PARTICLE THAT IS  TIMES MORE MASSIVE THAN THE ELECTRON )T MEDIATES THESTRONG NUCLEAR FORCE THAT HOLDS AN ATOMIC NUCLEUS TOGETHER0IONS HAVE BEEN PRODUCED AND STUDIED IN HIGHENERGYACCELERATOR LABORATORIES

The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
combination of two fermions (the neutrons) is a boson and so is not subject to the restrictions of the Pauli exclusion principle. Because degenerate bosons can all crowd into the lowest energy state, the fluid of paired neutrons can lose no energy. It is a superfluid that flows without resistance. Any whirlpools or vortices in the fluid will continue to spin forever without stopping.


<<<PAGE 651>>>

TABLE 1#OMPOSITION OF .EUTRON 3TAR -ATERIAL4RANSITION DENSITY$EGENERACY/parenleftbigKG M−/parenrightbig#OMPOSITIONPRESSUREIRON NUCLEINONRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSELECTRON≈×ELECTRONS BECOME RELATIVISTICIRON NUCLEIRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSELECTRON≈×NEUTRONIZATIONNEUTRONRICH NUCLEIRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSELECTRON≈×NEUTRON DRIPNEUTRONRICH NUCLEIFREE NEUTRONSRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSELECTRON≈×NEUTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE DOMINATESNEUTRONRICH NUCLEISUPERmUID FREE NEUTRONSRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSNEUTRON≈×NUCLEI DISSOLVESUPERmUID FREE NEUTRONSSUPERCONDUCTING FREE PROTONSRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSNEUTRON≈×PION PRODUCTIONSUPERmUID FREE NEUTRONSSUPERCONDUCTING FREE PROTONSRELATIVISTIC FREE ELECTRONSOTHER ELEMENTARY PARTICLES PIONS x	 NEUTRON
⊙ 4HE OUTER CRUST CONSISTS OF HEAVY NUCLEI IN THE FORM OF EITHER A mUID hOCEANv ORA SOLID LATTICE AND RELATIVISTIC DEGENERATE ELECTRONS .EAREST THE SURFACE THE NUCLEIARE PROBABLY&E !T GREATER DEPTH AND DENSITY INCREASINGLY NEUTRONRICH NUCLEIARE ENCOUNTERED UNTIL NEUTRON DRIP BEGINS AT THE BOTTOM OF THE OUTER CRUST WHEREρ≈×KG M−	 4HE INNER CRUST CONSISTS OF A THREEPART MIXTURE OF A LATTICE OF NUCLEI SUCH AS+R ASUPERmUID OF FREE NEUTRONS AND RELATIVISTIC DEGENERATE ELECTRONS 4HE BOTTOM OF THEINNER CRUST OCCURS WHEREρ≈ρNUC AND THE NUCLEI DISSOLVEThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars
stellar structure equations. The first quantitative model of a neutron star was calculated by J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904–1967) and G. M. Volkoff (1914–2000) at Berkeley in 1939. Figure 11 shows the result of a recent calculation of a 1.4 M   neutron star model. Although the details are sensitive to the equation of state used, this model displays some typical features.


<<<PAGE 652>>>

 KM    KM    KM    KM
#ORE)NTERIOR)NNER CRUST/UTER CRUST
FIGURE 11!.-⊙NEUTRON STAR MODEL 4HEINTERIOROFTHENEUTRONSTARCONSISTSPRIMARILYOFSUPERmUIDNEUTRONSWITHASMALLERNUMBEROFSUPERmUIDSUPERCONDUCTINGPROTONSANDRELATIVISTICDEGENERATEELECTRONS 4HEREMAYORMAYNOTBEASOLIDCORECONSISTINGOFPIONSOROTHERSUBNUCLEARPARTICLES4HE DENSITY AT THE CENTER OF A .-⊙NEUTRON STAR IS ABOUT KG M−The Chandrasekhar Limit for Neutron Stars,IKE WHITE DWARFS NEUTRON STARS OBEY A MASSnVOLUME RELATIONMNSVNS=CONSTANT,	SONEUTRONSTARSBECOMESMALLERANDMOREDENSEWITHINCREASINGMASS(OWEVERTHISMASSnVOLUMERELATIONFAILSFORMOREMASSIVENEUTRONSTARSBECAUSETHEREISAPOINTBEYONDWHICHNEUTRON DEGENERACY PRESSURE CAN NO LONGER SUPPORT THE STAR (ENCE THERE IS A MAXIMUMMASSFORNEUTRONSTARSANALOGOUSTOTHE#HANDRASEKHARMASSFORWHITEDWARFS!SMIGHTBEEXPECTEDTHEVALUEOFTHISMAXIMUMMASSISDIFFERENTFORDIFFERENTCHOICESOFTHEEQUATIONOF STATE (OWEVER DETAILED COMPUTER MODELING OF NEUTRON STARS ALONG WITH A VERY GENERALARGUMENTINVOLVINGTHEGENERALTHEORYOFRELATIVITYSHOWSTHATTHEMAXIMUMMASSPOSSIBLEFOR A NEUTRON STAR CANNOT EXCEED ABOUT .-⊙IF IT IS STATIC AND .-⊙IF IT IS ROTATINGRAPIDLY)F A NEUTRON STAR IS TO REMAIN DYNAMICALLY STABLE AND RESIST COLLAPSING IT MUSTBE ABLE TO RESPOND TO A SMALL DISTURBANCE IN ITS STRUCTURE BY RAPIDLY ADJUSTING ITS PRESSURETO COMPENSATE (OWEVER THERE IS A LIMIT TO HOW QUICKLY SUCH AN ADJUSTMENT CAN BE MADEBECAUSE THESE CHANGES ARE CONVEYED BY SOUND WAVES THAT MUST MOVE MORE SLOWLY THANLIGHT )F A NEUTRON STARS MASS EXCEEDS .-⊙IN THE STATIC CASE OR .-⊙IN THE RAPIDLYROTATING CASE IT CANNOT GENERATE PRESSURE QUICKLY ENOUGH TO AVOID COLLAPSING4HE RESULT ISA BLACK HOLEENTRIFUGAL EFFECTS PROVIDE ADDITIONAL SUPPORT TO A RAPIDLY ROTATING NEUTRON STAR
#The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 653>>>

Rapid Rotation and Conservation of Angular Momentum3EVERALPROPERTIESOFNEUTRONSTARSWEREANTICIPATEDBEFORETHEYWEREOBSERVED&OREXAMPLENEUTRON STARS MUST ROTATE VERY RAPIDLY )F THE IRON CORE OF THE PRESUPERNOVA SUPERGIANT STARWEREROTATINGEVENSLOWLYTHEDECREASEINRADIUSWOULDBESOGREATTHATTHECONSERVATIONOFANGULAR MOMENTUM WOULD GUARANTEE THE FORMATION OF A RAPIDLY ROTATING NEUTRON STAR4HESCALEOFTHECOLLAPSECANBEFOUNDFROM%QS 	AND 	FORTHEESTIMATEDRADIIOFAWHITEDWARFANDNEUTRONSTARIFWEASSUMETHATTHEPROGENITORCOREISCHARACTERISTICOFAWHITEDWARFCOMPOSEDENTIRELYOFIRON!LTHOUGHTHELEADINGCONSTANTSINBOTHEXPRESSIONSARE SPURIOUS A BYPRODUCT OF THE APPROXIMATIONS MADE	 THEratioOF THE RADII IS MOREACCURATERCORERNS≈mnme/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbigg/=,WHEREZ/A=/ FOR IRON HAS BEEN USED .OW APPLY THE CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM TO THE COLLAPSING CORE WHICH IS ASSUMED HERE FOR SIMPLICITY TO LOSE NO MASS SOMCORE=MWD=MNS	 4REATING EACH STAR AS A SPHERE WITH A MOMENT OF INERTIA OF THE FORMI=CMR WE HAVEIiωi=IfωfCMiRiωi=CMfRfωfωf=ωi/parenleftbiggRiRf/parenrightbigg.)N TERMS OF THE ROTATION PERIODP THIS ISPf=Pi/parenleftbiggRfRi/parenrightbigg.	&ORTHESPECIlCCASEOFANIRONCORECOLLAPSINGTOFORMANEUTRONSTAR%Q	SHOWSTHATPNS≈.×−PCORE.	4HEQUESTIONOFHOWFASTTHEPROGENITORCOREMAYBEROTATINGISDIFlCULTTOANSWER!SASTAREVOLVESITSCONTRACTINGCOREISNOTCOMPLETELYISOLATEDFROMTHESURROUNDINGENVELOPESOONECANNOT USE THE SIMPLE APPROACH TO CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM DESCRIBED ABOVE&OR PURPOSES OF ESTIMATION WE WILL TAKEPCORE= S THE ROTATION PERIOD OBSERVED FORTHEWHITEDWARF%RIDANI" )NSERTINGTHIS INTO %Q 	RESULTSINAROTATIONPERIODOFABOUT×−S4HUSNEUTRONSTARSWILLBE ROTATING VERY RAPIDLY WHEN THEY ARE FORMEDWITH ROTATION PERIODS ON THE ORDER OF A FEWMILLISECONDS4HE CONSTANTCIS DETERMINED BY THE DISTRIBUTION OF MASS INSIDE THE STAR &OR EXAMPLEC=/ FOR A UNIFORMSPHERE7E ASSUME THAT THE PROGENITOR CORE AND NEUTRON STAR HAVE ABOUT THE SAME VALUE OFC4HE CORE AND ENVELOPE MAY EXCHANGE ANGULAR MOMENTUM BY MAGNETIC lELDS OR ROTATIONAL MIXING VIA THE VERYSLOWmeridional currentsTHAT GENERALLY CIRCULATE UPWARD AT THE POLES AND DOWNWARD AT THE EQUATOR OF A ROTATINGSTAR

The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 654>>>

“Freezing In” Magnetic Field Lines!NOTHER PROPERTY PREDICTED FOR NEUTRON STARS IS THAT THEY SHOULD HAVE EXTREMELY STRONGMAGNETIC lELDS 4HE hFREEZING INv OF MAGNETIC lELD LINES IN A CONDUCTING mUID OR GASδPhiℓ≡/integraldisplaySB·dA,WHEREBISTHEMAGNETIClELDVECTORSEE&IG 	)NAPPROXIMATETERMSIFWEIGNORETHEGEOMETRY OF THE MAGNETIC lELD THIS MEANS THAT THE PRODUCT OF THE MAGNETIC lELD STRENGTHAND THE AREA OF THE STARS SURFACE REMAINS CONSTANT4HUSBiπRi=BfπRf.	)NORDERTOUSE%Q 	TOESTIMATETHEMAGNETIClELDOFANEUTRONSTARWEMUSTlRSTKNOW WHAT THE STRENGTH OF THE MAGNETIC lELD IS FOR THE IRON CORE OF A PRESUPERNOVA STAR!LTHOUGHTHISISNOTATALLCLEARWECANUSETHELARGESTOBSERVEDWHITEDWARFMAGNETIClELDOFB≈×4 AS AN EXTREME CASE WHICH IS LARGE COMPARED TO A TYPICAL WHITEDWARFMAGNETIC lELD OF PERHAPS  4 AND HUGE COMPARED WITH THE 3UNS GLOBAL lELD OF ABOUT×−44HEN USING %Q  	 THE MAGNETIC lELD OF THE NEUTRON STAR WOULD BEBNS≈BWD/parenleftbiggRWDRNS/parenrightbigg=.×4.4HIS SHOWS THAT NEUTRON STARS COULD BE FORMED WITH EXTREMELY STRONG MAGNETIC lELDS ALTHOUGH SMALLER VALUES SUCH AS 4 OR LESS ARE MORE TYPICAL
  BdA
dAFIGURE 12-AGNETIC mUXdδPhiℓ=B·dA THROUGH AN ELEMENT OF SURFACE AREAdAThe Degenerate Remnants of Starsimplies that the magnetic flux through the surface of a white dwarf will be conserved as it collapses to form a neutron star. The flux of a magnetic field through a surface S is defined as the surface integral


<<<PAGE 655>>>

Neutron Star Temperatures4HElNALPROPERTYOFNEUTRONSTARSISTHEMOSTOBVIOUS4HEYWEREEXTREMELYHOTWHENTHEYWEREFORGEDINTHEhlRESvOFASUPERNOVAWITHT∼+$URINGTHElRSTDAYTHENEUTRONSTAR COOLS BY EMITTING NEUTRINOS VIA THE SOCALLEDURCA processn→p++e−+νep++e−→n+νe.!S THE NUCLEONS SHUTTLE BETWEEN BEING NEUTRONS AND BEING PROTONS LARGE NUMBERS OF NEUTRINOSANDANTINEUTRINOSAREPRODUCEDTHATmYUNHINDEREDINTOSPACECARRYINGAWAYENERGYAND THUS COOLING THE NEUTRON STAR 4HIS PROCESS CAN CONTINUE ONLY AS LONG AS THE NUCLEONSARENOTDEGENERATEANDITISSUPPRESSEDAFTERTHEPROTONSANDNEUTRONSSETTLEINTOTHELOWESTUNOCCUPIEDENERGYSTATES4HISDEGENERACYOCCURSABOUTONEDAYAFTERTHEFORMATIONOFTHENEUTRON STAR WHEN ITS INTERNAL TEMPERATURE HAS DROPPED TO ABOUT + /THER NEUTRINOEMITTING PROCESSES CONTINUE TO DOMINATE THE COOLING FOR APPROXIMATELY THE lRST THOUSANDYEARS AFTER WHICH PHOTONS EMITTED FROM THE STARS SURFACE TAKE OVER 4HE NEUTRON STAR IS AFEW HUNDRED YEARS OLD WHEN ITS INTERNAL TEMPERATURE HAS DECLINED TO + WITH A SURFACETEMPERATURE OF SEVERAL MILLION + "Y NOW THE COOLING HAS SLOWED CONSIDERABLY AND THESURFACE TEMPERATURE WILL HOVER AROUND + FOR THE NEXT TEN THOUSAND YEARS OR SO AS THENEUTRON STAR COOLS AT AN ESSENTIALLY CONSTANT RADIUS)T IS INTERESTING TO CALCULATE THE BLACKBODY LUMINOSITY OF A  -⊙NEUTRON STAR WITH ASURFACE TEMPERATURE OFT=+ &ROM THE 3TEFANn"OLTZMANN LAWL=πRσTe=.×7.!LTHOUGH THIS IS COMPARABLE TO THE LUMINOSITY OF THE 3UN THE RADIATION IS PRIMARILY IN THEFORM OF 8RAYS SINCE ACCORDING TO7IENS DISPLACEMENT LAWλMAX=( NM)( +)T=. NM.0RIORTOTHEADVENTOF8RAYOBSERVATORIESSUCHAS2/3!4!3#!AND#HANDRAASTRONOMERSHELD LITTLE HOPE OF EVER OBSERVING SUCH AN EXOTIC OBJECT BARELY THE SIZE OF 3AN $IEGO#ALIFORNIA7PULSARS*OCELYN "ELL SPENT TWO YEARS SETTING UP A FOREST OF  RADIO DIPOLE ANTENNAE OVER FOURANDAHALFACRESOF%NGLISHCOUNTRYSIDE3HEANDHER0H$THESISADVISOR!NTHONY(EWISHWEREUSINGTHISRADIOTELESCOPETUNEDTOAFREQUENCYOF-(ZTOSTUDYTHESCINTILLATIONhmICKERINGv	THATISOBSERVEDWHENTHERADIOWAVESFROMDISTANTSOURCESKNOWNASQUASARS4HE52#!PROCESSWHICHEFlCIENTLYREMOVESENERGYFROMAHOTNEUTRONSTARISNAMEDFORTHE#ASINODE52#!IN2IODE*ANEIROINREMEMBRANCEOFTHEEFlCIENCYWITHWHICHITREMOVEDMONEYFROMANUNLUCKYPHYSICIST4HECASINO WAS CLOSED BY "RAZIL IN 
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 656>>>

FIGURE 13$ISCOVERY OF THE lRST PULSAR 032  h#0v STANDS FOR #AMBRIDGE 0ULSAR	&IGUREFROM,YNEAND'RAHAM3MITHPulsar AstronomyÚ#AMBRIDGE5NIVERSITY0RESS.EW9ORK 2EPRINTED WITH THE PERMISSION OF #AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS	PASS THROUGH THE SOLAR WIND )N *ULY  "ELL WAS PUZZLED TO lND A BIT OF hSCRUFFv THATREAPPEARED EVERY  FEET OR SO ON THE ROLLS OF HER STRIP CHART RECORDER SEE &IG #AREFUL MEASUREMENTS SHOWED THAT THIS QUARTER INCH OF INK REAPPEARED EVERY  HOURS AND MINUTES INDICATING THAT ITS SOURCE PASSED OVER HER lXED ARRAY OF ANTENNAE ONCE EVERYSIDEREALDAY"ELLCONCLUDEDTHATTHESOURCEWASOUTAMONGTHESTARSRATHERTHANWITHINTHE3OLAR 3YSTEM 4O BETTER RESOLVE THE SIGNAL SHE USED A FASTER RECORDER AND DISCOVERED THATTHE SCRUFF CONSISTED OF A SERIES OF REGULARLY SPACED RADIO PULSES  S APART THE PULSEperiodP	3UCHAPRECISECELESTIALCLOCKWASUNHEARDOFAND"ELLAND(EWISHCONSIDEREDTHE POSSIBILITY THAT THESE MIGHT BE SIGNALS FROM AN EXTRATERRESTRIAL CIVILIZATION )F THIS WERETRUESHEFELTANNOYEDTHATTHEALIENSHADCHOSENSUCHANINCONVENIENTTIMETOMAKECONTACT3HE RECALLED h) WAS NOW TWO AND A HALF YEARS THROUGH A THREE YEAR STUDENTSHIP AND HEREWAS SOME SILLY LOT OF ,ITTLE 'REEN -EN USINGmyTELESCOPE ANDmyFREQUENCY TO SIGNAL TOPLANET %ARTHv7HEN "ELL FOUND ANOTHER BIT OF SCRUFF COMING FROM ANOTHER PART OF THE SKYHER RELIEF WAS PALPABLE 3HE WROTE h)T WAS HIGHLY UNLIKELY THAT TWO LOTS OF ,ITTLE 'REEN-ENCOULDCHOOSETHESAMEUNUSUALFREQUENCYANDUNLIKELYTECHNIQUETOSIGNALTOTHESAMEINCONSPICUOUS PLANET %ARTHv(EWISH "ELL AND THEIR COLLEAGUES ANNOUNCED THE DISCOVERY OF THESE MYSTERIOUSpul-sars AND SEVERAL MORE WERE QUICKLY FOUND BY OTHER RADIO OBSERVATORIES!T THE TIME THISTEXT WAS WRITTEN MORE THAN  PULSARS WERE KNOWN AND EACH IS DESIGNATED BY A h032v4HE TERMpulsarWAS COINED BY THE SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT FOR THE ,ONDONDaily Telegraph 3EE (EWISH ET AL	FORDETAILSOFTHEDISCOVERYOFPULSARS)N(EWISHWASAWARDEDASHAREOFTHE.OBEL0RIZEALONGWITH-ARTIN 2YLE n	 FOR THEIR WORK IN RADIO ASTRONOMY &RED (OYLE n	 AND OTHERS HAVE ARGUEDTHAT *OCELYN "ELL SHOULD HAVE SHARED THE PRIZE AS WELL (EWISH HAD DESIGNED THE RADIO ARRAY AND OBSERVATIONALTECHNIQUEBUT"ELLWASTHElRSTTONOTICETHEPULSARSIGNAL4HISCONTROVERSIALOMISSIONHASINSPIREDREFERENCESTOTHE AWARD AS THE hNO"ELLv PRIZEThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 657>>>

n n n n n   ,OG P SEC	 0ULSARS
.UMBER OF PULSARS
FIGURE 144HE DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODS FOR  PULSARS 4HE MILLISECOND PULSARS ARE CLEARLYEVIDENTONTHELEFT4HEAVERAGEPERIODISABOUTS$ATAFROM-ANCHESTER2.(OBBS'"4EOH! AND (OBBS -A. J.129   $ATA AVAILABLE AThttp://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat	PRElX FORPULSATINGSOURCE OFRADIO	 FOLLOWED BY ITS RIGHT ASCENSION α	 AND DECLINATIONδ	 &OR EXAMPLE THE SOURCE OF "ELLS SCRUFF IS 032  IDENTIFYING ITS POSITION ASα=HMANDδ=+◦General Characteristics!LLKNOWNPULSARSSHARETHEFOLLOWINGCHARACTERISTICSWHICHARECRUCIALCLUESTOTHEIRPHYSICAL NATUREs -OST PULSARS HAVE PERIODS BETWEEN  S AND  S WITH AN AVERAGE TIME BETWEENPULSESOFABOUTSSEE&IG 	4HEPULSARWITHTHELONGESTKNOWNPERIODIS032  P=. S	4ERZAN AD 032 *AD	 IS THE FASTEST KNOWNPULSAR P=. S	s 0ULSARS HAVE EXTREMELY WELLDElNED PULSE PERIODS AND WOULD MAKE EXCEPTIONALLYACCURATE CLOCKS &OR EXAMPLE THE PERIOD OF 032  HAS BEEN DETERMINEDTO BEP=. S A MEASUREMENT THAT CHALLENGES THE ACCURACYOF THE BEST ATOMIC CLOCKS 3UCH PRECISE DETERMINATIONS ARE POSSIBLE BECAUSE OF THEENORMOUS NUMBER OF PULSAR MEASUREMENTS THAT CAN BE MADE GIVEN THEIR VERY SHORTPERIODS	s 4HEPERIODSOFALLPULSARSINCREASEVERYGRADUALLYASTHEPULSESSLOWDOWNTHERATEOFINCREASE BEING GIVEN BY THE PERIOD DERIVATIVE˙P≡dP/dt 4YPICALLY˙P≈−.OTE THAT˙PIS MEASURED IN TERMS OF SECONDS OF PERIOD CHANGE PER SECOND AND SO IS UNITLESSThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 658>>>

AND THEcharacteristic lifetimeTHE TIME IT WOULD TAKE THE PULSES TO CEASE IF˙PWERECONSTANT	 ISP/˙P≈A FEW YEARS 4HE VALUE OF˙PFOR 032  IS UNUSUALLY SMALL˙P=.×− 4HIS CORRESPONDS TO A CHARACTERISTIC LIFETIME OFP/˙P=.×S OR ABOUT  MILLION YEARSPossible Pulsar Models4HESE CHARACTERISTICS ENABLED ASTRONOMERS TO DEDUCE THE BASIC COMPONENTS OF PULSARS )NTHEPAPERANNOUNCINGTHEIRDISCOVERY(EWISH"ELLANDTHEIRCOAUTHORSSUGGESTEDTHATANOSCILLATINGNEUTRONSTARMIGHTBEINVOLVEDBUT!MERICANASTRONOMER4HOMAS'OLDn	 QUICKLY AND CONVINCINGLY ARGUED INSTEAD THAT PULSARS ARE RAPIDLY ROTATING NEUTRONSTARS4HERE ARE THREE OBVIOUS WAYS OF OBTAINING RAPID REGULAR PULSES IN ASTRONOMYBinary stars )FTHEORBITALPERIODSOFABINARYSTARSYSTEMARETOFALLINTHERANGEOFTHE OBSERVED PULSAR PERIODS THEN EXTREMELY COMPACT STARS MUST BE INVOLVEDEITHERWHITE DWARFS OR NEUTRON STARS 4HE GENERAL FORM OF +EPLERS THIRD LAWSHOWSTHATIFTWO-⊙STARSWERETOORBITEACHOTHEREVERYSTHEAVERAGEPULSARPERIOD	THENTHEIRSEPARATIONWOULDBEONLY.×M4HISISMUCHLESSTHANTHE.×M RADIUS OF 3IRIUS " AND THE SEPARATION WOULD BE EVEN SMALLER FOR MORERAPID PULSARS 4HIS ELIMINATES EVEN THE SMALLEST MOST MASSIVE WHITE DWARFS FROMCONSIDERATION.EUTRONSTARSARESOSMALLTHATTWOOFTHEMCOULDORBITEACHOTHERWITHAPERIODINAGREEMENT WITH THOSE OBSERVED FOR PULSARS (OWEVER THIS POSSIBILITY IS RULED OUT BY%INSTEINSGENERALTHEORYOFRELATIVITY!STHETWONEUTRONSTARSRAPIDLYMOVETHROUGHSPACE AND TIME GRAVITATIONAL WAVES ARE GENERATED THAT CARRY ENERGY AWAY FROM THEBINARY SYSTEM!S THE NEUTRON STARS SLOWLY SPIRAL CLOSER TOGETHER THEIR ORBITAL PERIODdecreasesACCORDINGTO+EPLERSTHIRDLAW4HISCONTRADICTSTHEOBSERVEDincreaseINTHE PERIODS OF THE PULSARS AND SO ELIMINATES BINARY NEUTRON STARS AS A SOURCE OF THERADIO PULSES!SIMILAR ARGUMENT ELIMINATES NEUTRON STAR OSCILLATIONS .EUTRON STARS ARE ABOUTTIMESMOREDENSETHANWHITEDWARFS!CCORDINGTOTHEPERIODnMEANDENSITYRELATIONFORSTELLARPULSATIONTHEPERIODOFOSCILLATIONISPROPORTIONALTO/√ρ4HISIMPLIESTHATNEUTRONSTARSSHOULDVIBRATEAPPROXIMATELYTIMES MORERAPIDLYTHANWHITEDWARFSWITHARADIALFUNDAMENTALMODE PERIOD AROUND −S ANDNONRADIALGMODESBETWEEN−SAND−S4HESE PERIODS ARE MUCH TOO SHORT FORTHESLOWER PULSARS'RAVITATIONAL WAVES WILL BE DESCRIBED IN MORE DETAIL IN 3ECTION  AS WILL THE BINARY SYSTEM OF TWO NEUTRONSTARS IN WHICH THESE WAVES HAVE BEEN INDIRECTLY DETECTED
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
Pulsating stars. White dwarfs oscillate with periods between 100 and 1000 s. The periods of these nonradial g-modes are much longer than the observed pul-sar periods. Of course, it might be imagined that a radial oscillation is involved with the pulsars. However, the period for the radial fundamental mode is a few seconds, too long to explain the faster pulses.


<<<PAGE 659>>>

Rotating stars 4HE ENORMOUS ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A RAPIDLY ROTATING COMPACTSTARWOULDGUARANTEEITSPRECISECLOCKLIKEBEHAVIOR"UTHOWFASTCANASTARSPIN)TSANGULARVELOCITYωISLIMITEDBYTHEABILITYOFGRAVITYTOSUPPLYTHECENTRIPETALFORCETHATKEEPSTHESTARFROMmYINGAPART4HISCONSTRAINTISMOSTSEVEREATTHESTARSEQUATORWHERETHESTELLARMATERIALMOVESMOSTRAPIDLY)GNORETHEINEVITABLEEQUATORIALBULGINGCAUSED BY ROTATION AND ASSUME THAT THE STAR REMAINS CIRCULAR WITH RADIUSRAND MASSM 4HEN THE MAXIMUM ANGULAR VELOCITY MAY BE FOUND BY EQUATING THE CENTRIPETALAND GRAVITATIONAL ACCELERATIONS AT THE EQUATORωMAXR=GMR,SO THAT THE MINIMUM ROTATION PERIOD ISPMIN=π/ωMAX ORPMIN=π/radicalbiggRGM.	&OR3IRIUS"PMIN≈SWHICHISMUCHTOOLONG(OWEVERFORA-⊙NEUTRONSTARPMIN≈×−S"ECAUSETHISISAminimumROTATIONTIMEITCANACCOMMODATETHECOMPLETE RANGE OF PERIODS OBSERVED FOR PULSARSPulsars as Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars/NLYONEALTERNATIVEHASEMERGEDUNSCATHEDFROMTHISPROCESSOFELIMINATIONNAMELYTHATPULSARSARERAPIDLYROTATINGNEUTRONSTARS4HISCONCLUSIONWASSTRENGTHENEDBYTHEDISCOVERYINOFPULSARSASSOCIATEDWITHTHE6ELAAND#RABSUPERNOVAEREMNANTS4ODAYDOZENSOF PULSARS ARE KNOWN TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH SUPERNOVA REMNANTS	 )N ADDITION THE #RABPULSAR 032  HAS A VERY SHORT PULSE PERIOD OF ONLY  S .O WHITE DWARF COULDROTATE  TIMES PER SECOND WITHOUT DISINTEGRATING AND THE LAST DOUBTS ABOUT THE IDENTITY OFPULSARSWERELAIDTOREST5NTILTHEDISCOVERYOFTHEmillisecond pulsarsP≈MSORLESS	IN  THE #RAB PULSAR HELD THE TITLE OF THE FASTEST KNOWN PULSAR SEE &IG 	4HE6ELA AND #RAB PULSARS NOT ONLY PRODUCE RADIO BURSTS BUT ALSO PULSE IN OTHER REGIONS OF THEELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM RANGING FROM RADIO TO GAMMA RAYS INCLUDING VISIBLE mASHES ASSHOWNIN&IG 4HESEYOUNGPULSARSANDAFEWOTHERS	ALSODISPLAYglitchesWHENTHEIRPERIODS ABRUPTLYdecreaseBY A TINY AMOUNT |δDeltaℓP|/P≈−TO −	 SEE &IG 4HESE SUDDEN SPINUPS ARE SEPARATED BY UNEVEN INTERVALS OF SEVERAL YEARSGeminga4HE NEAREST PULSAR YET DETECTED IS ONLY SOME  PC AWAY 032  NICKNAMED'EMINGAWASWELLKNOWNASASTRONGSOURCEOFGAMMARAYSFORYEARSBEFOREITSIDENTITYAS A PULSAR WAS ESTABLISHED IN 7ITH A PERIOD OF  S 'EMINGA PULSES IN BOTH)T IS LIKELY THAT THE MILLISECOND PULSARS HAVE RAPID ROTATION PERIODS THAT ARE A CONSEQUENCE OF THEIR MEMBERSHIPIN CLOSE BINARY SYSTEMS MORE THAN HALF OF THE KNOWN MILLISECOND PULSARS BELONG TO BINARIES3EEFOR A DISCUSSION OF POSSIBLE GLITCH MECHANISMSGemingaMEANS hDOES NOT EXISTv IN -ILANESE DIALECT ACCURATELY REmECTING ITS LONGMYSTERIOUS NATURE

THE END OF THE CHAPTER The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 660>>>

FIGURE 15! SEQUENCE OF IMAGES SHOWING THE mASHES AT VISIBLE WAVELENGTHS FROM THE #RABPULSAR LOCATED AT THE CENTER OF THE #RAB .EBULA LEFT	!FOREGROUND STAR CAN BE SEEN AS THE CONSTANTPOINT OF LIGHT ABOVE AND TO THE LEFT OF THE #RAB PULSAR #OURTESY OF .ATIONAL /PTICAL !STRONOMY/BSERVATORIES	
0ERIOD MS	
        4IME DAYS	 AFTER *$  FIGURE 6!GLITCH IN THE6ELA PULSAR &IGURE ADAPTED FROM -C#ULLOCH ET ALAust. J. Phys.40  	1The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 661>>>

GAMMAAND8RAYSBUTNOTATRADIOWAVELENGTHS	ANDMAYDISPLAYGLITCHES)NVISIBLELIGHTITS ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDE IS FAINTER THAN+Evidence for a Core-Collapse Supernova Origin!LTHOUGH AT LEAST ONEHALF OF ALL STARS IN THE SKY ARE KNOWN TO BE MEMBERS OF MULTIPLESTARSYSTEMSONLYAFEWPERCENTOFPULSARSAREKNOWNTOBELONGTOBINARYSYSTEMS0ULSARSALSOMOVEMUCHFASTERTHROUGHSPACETHANDONORMALSTARSSOMETIMESWITHSPEEDSINEXCESSOFKM S−"OTHOFTHESEOBSERVATIONSARECONSISTENTWITHASUPERNOVAORIGINFORPULSARS4HIS IS BECAUSE IT IS HIGHLY LIKELY THAT A CORECOLLAPSE SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION IS NOT PERFECTLYSPHERICALLYSYMMETRICSOTHEFORMINGPULSARCOULDRECEIVEAKICKPOSSIBLYEJECTINGITFROMANYBINARYSYSTEMTHATITMAYHAVEBEENAPARTOFINITIALLY/NEHYPOTHESISISTHATTHEPULSARIS FORMED WITH AN ASSOCIATED ASYMMETRIC JET AND THAT LIKE A JET ENGINE THE PULSAR JET COULDLAUNCH THE PULSAR AT HIGH SPEED AWAY FROM ITS FORMATION POINTSynchrotron and Curvature Radiation/BSERVATIONS OF THE #RAB .EBULA THE REMNANT OF THEa.d. SUPERNOVA CLEARLY REVEALITSINTIMATECONNECTIONWITHTHEPULSARATITSCENTER!SSHOWNIN&IG THEEXPANDINGNEBULA PRODUCES A GHOSTLY GLOW SURROUNDING GASEOUS lLAMENTS THAT WIND THROUGHOUT IT)NTERESTINGLY IF THE PRESENT RATE OF EXPANSION IS EXTRAPOLATED BACKWARD IN TIME THE NEBULACONVERGESTOAPOINTABOUTYEARSafterTHESUPERNOVAEXPLOSIONWASOBSERVED/BVIOUSLYTHENEBULAMUSTHAVEBEENEXPANDINGMORESLOWLYINTHEPASTTHANITISNOWWHICHIMPLIESTHAT THE EXPANSION IS ACTUALLY ACCELERATING)NTHE2USSIANASTRONOMER)3HKLOVSKYn	PROPOSEDTHATTHEWHITELIGHTISsynchrotron radiationPRODUCED WHEN RELATIVISTIC ELECTRONS SPIRAL ALONG MAGNETIC lELDLINES &ROM THE EQUATION FOR THE MAGNETIC FORCE ON A MOVING CHARGEqFm=q(v×B),THECOMPONENTOFANELECTRONSVELOCITYvPERPENDICULARTOTHElELDLINESPRODUCESACIRCULARMOTIONAROUNDTHELINESWHILETHECOMPONENTOFTHEVELOCITYALONGTHELINESISNOTAFFECTEDSEE &IG  !S THEY FOLLOW THE CURVED lELD LINES THE RELATIVISTIC ELECTRONS ACCELERATEANDEMITELECTROMAGNETICRADIATION)TISCALLEDSYNCHROTRONRADIATIONIFTHECIRCULARMOTIONAROUND THE lELD LINES DOMINATES ORcurvature radiationIF THE MOTION IS PRIMARILY ALONGTHE lELD LINES )N BOTH CASES THE SHAPE OF THE CONTINUOUS SPECTRUM PRODUCED DEPENDS ONTHE ENERGY DISTRIBUTION OF THE EMITTING ELECTRONS AND SO IS EASILY DISTINGUISHED FROM THESPECTRUMOFBLACKBODYRADIATION4HERADIATIONISSTRONGLYLINEARLYPOLARIZEDINTHEPLANEOFTHECIRCULARMOTIONFORSYNCHROTRONRADIATIONANDISSTRONGLYLINEARLYPOLARIZEDINTHEPLANEOFTHECURVINGMAGNETIClELDLINEFORCURVATURERADIATION!SATESTOFHISTHEORY3HKLOVSKYPREDICTEDTHATTHEWHITELIGHTFROMTHE#RAB.EBULAWOULDBEFOUNDTOBESTRONGLYLINEARLY"OTHSYNCHROTRONANDCURVATURERADIATIONARESOMETIMESCALLEDnonthermalTODISTINGUISHTHEMFROMTHETHERMALORIGIN OF BLACKBODY RADIATIONThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 662>>>

%LECTRON-AGNETIC FIELD LINE
0OLARIZATION OFSYNCHROTRONRADIATIONBE
FIGURE 173YNCHROTRONRADIATIONEMITTEDBYARELATIVISTICELECTRONASITSPIRALSAROUNDAMAGNETIC lELD LINEPOLARIZED (IS PREDICTION WAS SUBSEQUENTLY CONlRMED AS THE LIGHT FROM SOME EMITTINGREGIONS OF THE NEBULA WAS MEASURED TO BE  LINEARLY POLARIZEDThe Energy Source for the Crab’s Synchrotron Radiation4HE IDENTIlCATION OF THE WHITE GLOW AS SYNCHROTRON RADIATION RAISED NEW QUESTIONS )T IMPLIED THAT MAGNETIC lELDS OF −4 MUST PERMEATE THE #RAB .EBULA 4HIS WAS PUZZLINGBECAUSE ACCORDING TO THEORETICAL ESTIMATES LONG AGO THE EXPANSION OF THE NEBULA SHOULDHAVE WEAKENED THE MAGNETIC lELD FAR BELOW THIS VALUE &URTHERMORE THE ELECTRONS SHOULDHAVE RADIATED AWAY ALL OF THEIR ENERGY AFTER ONLY  YEARS )T IS CLEAR THAT THE PRODUCTIONOF SYNCHROTRON RADIATION TODAY REQUIRES BOTH A REPLENISHMENT OF THE MAGNETIC lELD AND ACONTINUOUSINJECTIONOFNEWENERGETICELECTRONS4HETOTALPOWERNEEDEDFORTHEACCELERATINGEXPANSIONOFTHENEBULATHERELATIVISTICELECTRONSANDTHEMAGNETIClELDISCALCULATEDTOBEABOUT ×7 OR MORE THAN ,⊙4HEENERGYSOURCEISTHEROTATINGNEUTRONSTARATTHEHEARTOFTHE#RAB.EBULA)TACTSASAHUGEmYWHEELANDSTORESANIMMENSEAMOUNTOFROTATIONALKINETICENERGY!STHESTARSLOWSDOWN ITS ENERGY SUPPLY DECREASES4O CALCULATE THE RATE OF ENERGY LOSS WRITE THE ROTATIONAL KINETIC ENERGY IN TERMS OF THEPERIOD AND MOMENT OF INERTIA OF THE NEUTRON STARK=Iω=πIP.4HEN THE RATE AT WHICH THE ROTATING NEUTRON STAR IS LOSING ENERGY ISdKdt=−πI˙PP.	The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 663>>>

Example 7.1.!SSUMINGTHATTHENEUTRONSTARISAUNIFORMSPHEREWITHR=KMANDM=.-⊙ ITS MOMENT OF INERTIA IS APPROXIMATELYI=MR=.×KG M.)NSERTINGP=. S AND˙P=.×−FOR THE #RAB PULSAR GIVESdK/dt≈.×7 2EMARKABLY THIS IS EXACTLY THE ENERGY REQUIRED TO POWER THE #RAB .EBULA 4HESLOWING DOWN OF THE NEUTRON STAR mYWHEEL HAS ENABLED THE NEBULA TO CONTINUE SHINING ANDEXPANDING FOR NEARLY  YEARS)T IS IMPORTANT TO REALIZE THAT THIS ENERGY IS NOT TRANSPORTED TO THE NEBULA BY THE PULSEITSELF4HE RADIO LUMINOSITY OF THE #RABS PULSE IS ABOUT 7  MILLION TIMES SMALLERTHAN THE RATE AT WHICH ENERGY IS DELIVERED TO THE NEBULA &OR OLDER PULSARS THE RADIO PULSELUMINOSITY IS TYPICALLY −OF THE SPINDOWN RATE OF ENERGY LOSS	4HUS THE PULSE PROCESSWHATEVER IT MAY BE IS A MINOR COMPONENT OF THE TOTAL ENERGYLOSS MECHANISM&IGURE SHOWSAN(34VIEWOFTHEIMMEDIATEENVIRONMENTOFTHE#RABPULSAR4HERINGLIKE HALO SEEN ON THE WEST SIDE OF THE PULSAR IS A GLOWING TORUS OF GAS IT MAY BE THERESULT OF A POLAR JET FROM THE PULSAR FORCING ITS WAY THROUGH THE SURROUNDING NEBULA *USTTO THE EAST OF THE PULSAR ABOUT !5 AWAY IS A BRIGHT KNOT OF EMISSION FROM SHOCKEDMATERIAL IN THE JET PERHAPS DUE TO AN INSTABILITY IN THE JET ITSELF !NOTHER KNOT IS SEEN AT
FIGURE 18!N (34 IMAGE OF THE IMMEDIATE SURROUNDINGS OF THE #RAB PULSAR &IGURE FROM(ESTER ET ALAp. J.448  	The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 664>>>

A DISTANCE OF  !5 ,OW TIMERESOLUTION hMOVIESv OF THE CENTRAL REGION OF THE #RABSUPERNOVA REMNANT OBTAINED BY LONGTERM OBSERVATIONS BY (34 AND #HANDRA ARE ACTUALLYABLE TO SHOW THE EXPANSION AND EVOLUTION OF THAT PORTION OF THE NEBULA 3OME OF THE WISPSAPPEAR TO MOVING OUTWARD AT BETWEEN .cAND .cThe Structure of the Pulses"EFOREDESCRIBINGTHEDETAILSOFAMODELPULSARITISWORTHTAKINGACLOSERLOOKATTHEPULSESTHEMSELVES!SCANBESEENIN&IG THEPULSESAREBRIEFANDARERECEIVEDOVERASMALLFRACTIONOFTHEPULSEPERIODTYPICALLYFROMTO	'ENERALLYTHEYARERECEIVEDATRADIOWAVE FREQUENCIES BETWEEN ROUGHLY  -(Z AND  '(Z!STHEPULSESTRAVELTHROUGHINTERSTELLARSPACETHETIMEVARYINGELECTRIClELDOFTHERADIOWAVES CAUSES THE ELECTRONS THAT ARE ENCOUNTERED ALONG THE WAY TO VIBRATE 4HIS PROCESSSLOWS THE RADIO WAVES BELOW THE SPEED OF LIGHT IN A VACUUMc WITH A GREATER RETARDATIONAT LOWER FREQUENCIES 4HUS A SHARP PULSE EMITTED AT THE NEUTRON STAR WITH ALL FREQUENCIESPEAKING AT THE SAME TIME IS GRADUALLY DRAWN OUT ORdispersedAS IT TRAVELS TO %ARTH SEE&IG 	 "ECAUSE MORE DISTANT PULSARS EXHIBIT A GREATER PULSE DISPERSION THESE TIMEDELAYS CAN BE USED TO MEASURE THE DISTANCES TO PULSARS 4HE RESULTS SHOW THAT THE KNOWNPULSARS ARE CONCENTRATED WITHIN THE PLANE OF OUR -ILKY7AY 'ALAXY &IG 	 AT TYPICALDISTANCES OF HUNDREDS TO THOUSANDS OF PARSECS&IGURE  SHOWS THAT THERE IS A SUBSTANTIAL VARIATION IN THE SHAPE OF THE INDIVIDUALPULSESRECEIVEDFROMAGIVENPULSAR!LTHOUGHATYPICALPULSECONSISTSOFANUMBEROFBRIEFsubpulses THEintegrated pulse proﬁle AN AVERAGE BUILT UP BY ADDING TOGETHER A TRAIN OF OR MORE PULSES IS REMARKABLY STABLE 3OME PULSARS HAVE MORE THAN ONE AVERAGE PULSEPROlLE AND ABRUPTLY SWITCH BACK AND FORTH BETWEEN THEM &IG 	 4HE SUBPULSES MAYAPPEAR AT RANDOM TIMES IN THE hWINDOWv OF THE MAIN PULSE OR THEY MAY MARCH ACROSS INA PHENOMENON KNOWN ASdrifting subpulses AS SHOWN IN &IG  &OR ABOUT  OF ALLKNOWN PULSARS THE INDIVIDUAL PULSES MAY SIMPLY DISAPPEAR ORnull ONLY TO REAPPEAR UP TO PERIODS LATER $RIFTING SUBPULSES MAY EVEN EMERGE FROM A NULLING EVENT IN STEP WITHTHOSE THAT ENTERED THE NULL &INALLY THE RADIO WAVES OF MANY PULSARS ARE STRONGLY LINEARLYPOLARIZED UP TO 	 A FEATURE THAT INDICATES THE PRESENCE OF A STRONG MAGNETIC lELD
4IME S	FIGURE 190ULSESFROM032WITHAPERIODOFS&IGUREADAPTEDFROM-ANCHESTER AND4AYLORPulsars7 ( &REEMAN AND #O .EW9ORK 	3EE (ESTER ET ALAp. J.577 , 4HE MOVIES ARE AThttp://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/2002/0052/movies.html
The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 665>>>

FIGURE 20$ISPERSIONOFTHEPULSEFROM032&IGUREFROM,YNEAND'RAHAM3MITHPulsar AstronomyÚ#AMBRIDGE5NIVERSITY0RESS.EW9ORK2EPRINTEDWITHTHEPERMISSIONOF#AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS	The Basic Pulsar Model4HEBASICPULSARMODELSHOWNIN&IG CONSISTSOFARAPIDLYROTATINGNEUTRONSTARWITHA STRONG DIPOLE MAGNETIC lELD TWO POLES NORTH AND SOUTH	 THAT IS INCLINED TO THE ROTATIONAXIS AT AN ANGLEθ!S EXPLAINED IN THE PREVIOUS SECTION THE RAPID ROTATION AND THE STRONGDIPOLE lELD BOTH ARISE NATURALLY FOLLOWING THE COLLAPSE OF THE CORE OF A SUPERGIANT STAR&IRST WE NEED TO OBTAIN A MEASURE OF THE STRENGTH OF THE PULSARS MAGNETIC lELD!S THEPULSAR ROTATES THE MAGNETIC lELD AT ANY POINT IN SPACE WILL CHANGE RAPIDLY !CCORDING TO&ARADAYS LAW THIS WILL INDUCE AN ELECTRIC lELD AT THAT POINT &AR FROM THE STAR NEAR THElight cylinderDElNEDIN&IG 	THETIMEVARYINGELECTRICANDMAGNETIClELDSFORMANELECTROMAGNETIC WAVE THAT CARRIES ENERGY AWAY FROM THE STAR &OR THIS PARTICULAR SITUATIONThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 666>>>

l  l  nb  nb  
FIGURE 21$ISTRIBUTION OF  PULSARS IN GALACTIC COORDINATES WITH THE CENTER OF THE -ILKY7AY IN THE MIDDLE 4HE CLUMP OF PULSARS ATℓ=◦IS A SELECTION EFFECT DUE TO THE lXED ORIENTATIONOF THE !RECIBO RADIO TELESCOPE &IGURE FROM 4AYLOR -ANCHESTER AND ,YNEAp. J. Suppl.88 	
0ULSE NUMBER
4IME MS	

n n   !VERAGE032 
FIGURE 224HEAVERAGEOFPULSESTOP	ANDASERIESOFCONSECUTIVEPULSESBELOW	FOR032  &IGURE ADAPTED FROM #ORDESSpace Sci. Review24  	THE RADIATION IS CALLEDmagnetic dipole radiation!LTHOUGH IT IS BEYOND THE SCOPE OF THISBOOK TO CONSIDER THE MODEL IN DETAIL WE NOTE THAT THE ENERGY PER SECOND EMITTED BY THEROTATING MAGNETIC DIPOLE ISdEdt=−πBRSINθµcP,	The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 667>>>

)NTENSITY ARBITRARY UNITS	n,ONGITUDE DEG	.ORMAL!BNORMAL '(Z032 
FIGURE 23#HANGES IN THE INTEGRATED PULSE PROlLE OF 032  DUE TO MODE SWITCHING4HISPULSARDISPLAYSlVEDISTINCTSUBPULSES&IGUREADAPTEDFROM"ARTELETALAp. J.258	
0ULSE NUMBER -EAN                  n    
,ONGITUDE DEG	FIGURE 24$RIFTINGSUBPULSESFORTWOPULSARSNOTETHAT032ALSONULLS&IGUREFROM4AYLOR ET ALAp. J.195  	WHEREBIS THE lELD STRENGTH AT THE MAGNETIC POLE OF THE STAR OF RADIUSR 4HE MINUS SIGNINDICATESTHATTHENEUTRONSTARISDRAINEDOFENERGYCAUSINGITSROTATIONPERIODPTOINCREASE.OTETHATTHEFACTOROF/PMEANSTHATTHENEUTRONSTARWILLLOSEENERGYMUCHMOREQUICKLYATSMALLERPERIODS3INCETHEAVERAGEPULSARPERIODISSMOSTPULSARSAREBORNSPINNINGCONSIDERABLYFASTERTHANTHEIRCURRENTRATESWITHTYPICALINITIALPERIODSOFAFEWMILLISECONDS!SSUMING THAT ALL OF THE ROTATIONAL KINETIC ENERGY LOST BY THE STAR IS CARRIED AWAY BYMAGNETIC DIPOLE RADIATIONdE/dt=dK/dt 5SING %QS 	 AND 	 THIS IS−πBRSINθµcP=−πI˙PP.	The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 668>>>

%MISSION CONE-AGNETIC AXIS2OTATION    AXIS/H9258,INE OF SIGHTTO %ARTH
0ATH FOLLOWED BY MAGNETICPOLE AS STAR ROTATESFIGURE 25!BASIC PULSAR MODEL4HIS CAN BE EASILY SOLVED FOR THE MAGNETIC lELD AT THE POLE OF THE NEUTRON STARB=πRSINθ/radicalBiggµcIP˙Pπ.	Example 7.7E WILL ESTIMATE THE MAGNETIC lELD STRENGTH AT THE POLES OF THE #RABPULSAR032	WITHP=.SAND˙P=.×−!SSUMINGTHATθ=◦%Q 	THENGIVESAVALUEOF.×4!SWEHAVESEENTHE#RABPULSARISINTERACTINGWITHTHEDUSTANDGASINTHESURROUNDINGNEBULASOTHEREAREOTHERTORQUESTHATCONTRIBUTETOSLOWINGDOWNTHEPULSARSSPIN4HISVALUEOFBISTHEREFOREANOVERESTIMATETHEACCEPTEDVALUE OF THE #RAB PULSARS MAGNETIC lELD IS ×46ALUES OFBAROUND 4 ARETYPICAL FOR MOST PULSARS(OWEVERREPEATINGTHECALCULATIONFOR032WITHP=.S˙P=.×− AND ASSUMING THE SAME VALUE FOR THE MOMENT OF INERTIA WE lND THE MAGNETIC lELDSTRENGTHTOBEONLYB=.×44HISMUCHSMALLERVALUEDISTINGUISHESTHEMILLISECONDPULSARS AND PROVIDES ANOTHER HINT THAT THESE FASTEST PULSARS MAY HAVE A DIFFERENT ORIGIN ORENVIRONMENTCorrelation Between Period Derivatives and Pulsar Classes&IGURE SHOWSTHEDISTRIBUTIONOFPERIODDERIVATIVESFORPULSARSASAFUNCTIONOFPULSARPERIOD !LTHOUGH THE VAST MAJORITY OF PULSARS FALL INTO A LARGE GROUPING IN THE MIDDLE OF4HE SUGGESTION THAT THE #RAB .EBULA IS POWERED BY THE MAGNETIC DIPOLE RADIATION FROM A ROTATING NEUTRON STARWAS MADE BY THE )TALIAN ASTRONOMER &RANCO 0ACINI IN  A YEARbeforeTHE DISCOVERY OF PULSARS
2.The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 669>>>

/H9275
,IGHT CYLINDER,IGHT CYLINDER/H92582OTATION AXIS
RcFIGURE 264HELIGHTCYLINDERAROUNDAROTATINGNEUTRONSTAR4HECYLINDERSRADIUSRcISWHEREA POINT COROTATING WITH THE NEUTRON STAR WOULD MOVE AT THE SPEED OF LIGHTRc=c/ω=cP/πTHE PLOT THE MILLISECOND PULSARS SHOW A CLEAR CORRELATION WITH PULSARS KNOWN TO EXIST INBINARY SYSTEMS /THER CLASSES OF PULSARS ARE ALSO EVIDENT 0ULSARS KNOWN TO EMIT ENERGY AT8RAYWAVELENGTHSHAVETHELONGESTPERIODSANDHAVETHELARGESTPERIODDERIVATIVESWHEREASHIGHENERGYPULSARSTHATEMITENERGIESFROMRADIOFREQUENCIESTHROUGHTHEINFRAREDORHIGHERFREQUENCIESTENDTOHAVELARGERVALUESOF˙PBUTOTHERWISETYPICALPERIODS.OTETHATALTHOUGHNEARLYALLOFTHEPULSARSREPRESENTEDIN&IG HAVEPOSITIVEVALUESOF˙PSOMEOFTHEMPRIMARILYTHEBINARYPULSARSACTUALLYHAVEVALUESOF˙P<MEANINGTHATTHEIRPERIODSAREDECREASING THEY ARE SPEEDING UP	 &IGURE  MAY BE COMPARED WITH THE HISTOGRAM OFPULSAR PERIODS SHOWN IN &IG Toward a Model of Pulsar Emission$EVELOPING A DETAILED MODEL OF THE PULSARS EMISSION MECHANISM HAS BEEN AN EXERCISE INFRUSTRATION BECAUSE ALMOST EVERY OBSERVATION IS OPEN TO MORE THAN ONE INTERPRETATION 4HEEMISSION OF RADIATION IS THE MOST POORLY UNDERSTOOD ASPECT OF PULSARS AND AT PRESENT THEREIS AGREEMENT ONLY ON THE MOST GENERAL FEATURES OF HOW A NEUTRON STAR MANAGES TO PRODUCERADIO WAVES 4HE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SUMMARIZES A POPULAR MODEL OF THE PULSE PROCESSThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 670>>>

!80 OR 3'2 WITH PULSATIONS(IGHENERGY"INARY/THER
nnn
n n n n n n    ,OGΩdPdtΩ SS	
,OG P S	FIGURE 274HE ABSOLUTE VALUE OF THE TIME DERIVATIVE OF PERIOD |˙P|	 VERSUS PERIOD P	FOR ALL PULSARS FOR WHICH˙PHAS BEEN DETERMINED 3PECIAL CLASSES OF PULSARS ARE DEPICTED SEPARATELY !NOMALOUS 8RAY PULSARS !80	 OR 3OFT 'AMMA 2EPEATERS 3'2	 WITH PULSATIONS HIGHENERGY PULSARS WITH EMITTED FREQUENCIES BETWEEN RADIO AND INFRARED OR HIGHER AND BINARY PULSARSWITH ONE OR MORE KNOWN BINARY COMPANIONS	 ARE DEPICTED SEPARATELY !LL REMAINING PULSARS AREINDICATED AS hOTHERv .OTE THE ABUNDANCE OF KNOWN BINARY PULSARS AMONG THE MILLISECOND PULSARS $ATA FROM -ANCHESTER (OBBS 4EOH AND (OBBSA. J.129   $ATA AVAILABLE AThttp://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat	9OUSHOULDKEEPINMINDHOWEVERTHATTHEREISASYETNOGENERALCONSENSUSONWHETHERTHEOBJECT BEING DISCUSSED ACTUALLY OCCURS IN NATURE OR ONLY IN THE MINDS OF ASTROPHYSICISTS)T IS AT LEAST CERTAIN THAT THE RAPIDLY CHANGING MAGNETIC lELD NEAR THE ROTATING PULSARINDUCES A HUGE ELECTRIC lELD AT THE SURFACE 4HE ELECTRIC lELD OF ABOUT .×6M−EASILY OVERCOMES THE PULL OF GRAVITY ON CHARGED PARTICLES IN THE NEUTRON STARS CRUST &OREXAMPLETHEELECTRICFORCEONAPROTONISABOUTMILLIONTIMESSTRONGERTHANTHEFORCEOFGRAVITYANDTHERATIOOFTHEELECTRICFORCEONANELECTRONTOTHEGRAVITATIONALFORCEISEVENMOREOVERWHELMING $EPENDING ON THE DIRECTION OF THE ELECTRIC lELD EITHER NEGATIVELY CHARGEDELECTRONS OR POSITIVELY CHARGED IONS WILL BE CONTINUOUSLY RIPPED FROM THE NEUTRON STARSPOLAR REGIONS 4HIS CREATES AmagnetosphereOF CHARGED PARTICLES SURROUNDING THE PULSARTHAT IS DRAGGED AROUND WITH THE PULSARS ROTATION (OWEVER THE SPEED OF THE COROTATINGPARTICLES CANNOT EXCEED THE SPEED OF LIGHT SO AT THE LIGHT CYLINDER THE CHARGED PARTICLES ARESPUN AWAY CARRYING THE MAGNETIC lELD WITH THEM IN A PULSAR hWINDv 3UCH A WIND MAY BERESPONSIBLE FOR THE REPLENISHMENT OF THE #RAB .EBULAS MAGNETIC lELD AND THE CONTINUALDELIVERY OF RELATIVISTIC PARTICLES NEEDED TO KEEP THE NEBULA SHINING4HECHARGEDPARTICLESEJECTEDFROMTHEVICINITYOFTHEPULSARSMAGNETICPOLESAREQUICKLYACCELERATED TO RELATIVISTIC SPEEDS BY THE INDUCED ELECTRIC lELD!S THE ELECTRONS FOLLOW THEThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 671>>>

CURVEDMAGNETIClELDLINESTHEYEMITCURVATURERADIATIONINTHEFORMOFENERGETICGAMMARAY PHOTONS 4HIS RADIATION IS EMITTED IN A NARROW BEAM IN THE INSTANTANEOUS DIRECTIONOFMOTIONOFTHEELECTRONACONSEQUENCEOFTHERELATIVISTICHEADLIGHTEFFECT%ACHE=mcγ→e−+e+!STHESEPARTICLESCONTINUETOCURVEALONGTHEMAGNETIClELDLINESTHEYEMITACONTINUOUSSPECTRUMOFCURVATURERADIATIONINTHEFORWARDDIRECTIONPRODUCINGANARROWCONEOFRADIOWAVES RADIATING FROM THE MAGNETIC POLAR REGIONS!S THE NEUTRON STAR ROTATES THESE RADIOWAVES SWEEP THROUGH SPACE IN A WAY REMINISCENT OF THE LIGHT FROM A ROTATING LIGHTHOUSEBEACON)FTHEBEAMHAPPENSTOFALLONARADIOTELESCOPEONABLUEGREENPLANETINADISTANT3OLAR 3YSTEM THE ASTRONOMERS THERE WILL DETECT A REGULAR SERIES OF BRIEF RADIO PULSES!S THE PULSAR AGES AND SLOWS DOWN THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNDERLYING NEUTRON STAR MUSTADAPTTOTHEREDUCEDROTATIONALSTRESSES!SACONSEQUENCEPERHAPSTHECRUSTSETTLESAFRACTIONOF A MILLIMETER AND THE STAR SPINS FASTER AS A RESULT OF ITS DECREASED MOMENT OF INERTIA ORPERHAPS THE SUPERmUID VORTICES IN THE NEUTRON STARS CORE BECOME MOMENTARILY hUNPINNEDvFROM THE UNDERSIDE OF THE SOLID CRUST WHERE THEY ARE NORMALLY ATTACHED GIVING THE CRUSTA SUDDEN JOLT %ITHER POSSIBILITY COULD PRODUCE A SMALL BUT ABRUPT INCREASE IN THE ROTATIONSPEEDANDTHEASTRONOMERSON%ARTHWOULDRECORDAGLITCHFORTHEPULSARRECALL&IG	4HE QUESTION OF A PULSARS lNAL FATE AS ITS PERIOD INCREASES BEYOND SEVERAL SECONDSHAS SEVERAL POSSIBLE ANSWERS )T MAY BE THAT THE NEUTRON STARS MAGNETIC lELD ORIGINALLYPRODUCED BY THE COLLAPSE OF THE PRESUPERNOVA STARS DEGENERATE STELLAR CORE DECAYS WITHA CHARACTERISTIC TIME OF  MILLION YEARS OR SO 4HEN AT SOME FUTURE TIME WHEN THE PULSARSPERIOD HAS BEEN REDUCED TO SEVERAL SECONDS ITS MAGNETIC lELD MAY NO LONGER BE STRONGENOUGHTOSUSTAINTHEPULSEMECHANISMANDTHEPULSARTURNSOFF/NTHEOTHERHANDITMAYBE THAT THE MAGNETIC lELD DOES NOT DECAY APPRECIABLY BUT IS MAINTAINED BY A DYNAMOLIKEMECHANISM INVOLVING THE DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION OF THE CRUST AND CORE OF THE NEUTRON STAR(OWEVER ROTATION ITSELF IS AN ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT OF ANY PULSAR EMISSION MECHANISM !SA PULSAR AGES AND SLOWS DOWN ITS BEAM WILL BECOME WEAKER EVEN IF THE MAGNETIC lELDDOES NOT DECAY )N THIS CASE THE RADIO PULSES MAY BECOME TOO FAINT TO BE DETECTED AS THEPULSAR SIMPLY FADES BELOW THE SENSITIVITY OF RADIO TELESCOPES 4HE TIMESCALE FOR THE DECAYOFANEUTRONSTARSMAGNETIClELDISAMATTEROFCONSIDERABLEDEBATEANDBOTHSCENARIOSARECONSISTENT WITH THE OBSERVATIONSMagnetars and Soft Gamma Repeaters4HEPRECEDINGSKETCHREmECTSTHECURRENTSTATEOFUNCERTAINTYABOUTTHETRUENATUREOFPULSARS4HEREAREFEWOBJECTSINASTRONOMYTHATOFFERSUCHAWEALTHOFINTRIGUINGOBSERVATIONALDETAIL4HE VISIBLE 8RAY AND GAMMARAY PULSES RECEIVED FROM THE #RAB 6ELA #IRCINUS AND 'EMINGA PULSARS MAYORIGINATE FARTHER OUT IN THE PULSARS MAGNETOSPHERE

The Degenerate Remnants of Starsgamma-ray photon has so much energy that it can spontaneously convert this energy into an electron–positron pair via Einstein’s relation . (This process, described by  , is just the inverse of the annihilation process The electrons and posi-trons are accelerated and in turn emit their own gamma rays, which create more elec-tron–positron pairs, and so on. A cascade of pair production is thus initiated near the magnetic poles of the neutron star. Coherent beams of curvature radiation emitted by bunches of these particles may be responsible for the individual subpulses that contrib-ute to the integrated pulse profile..


<<<PAGE 672>>>

ANDYETARESOLACKINGINACONSISTENTTHEORETICALDESCRIPTION2EGARDLESSOFWHETHERTHEBASICPICTUREOUTLINEDISVINDICATEDORISSUPPLANTEDBYANOTHERVIEWPERHAPSINVOLVINGADISKOFMATERIAL SURROUNDING THE NEUTRON STAR	 PULSAR THEORISTS WILL CONTINUE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OFTHIS UNIQUE NATURAL LABORATORY FOR STUDYING MATTER UNDER THE MOST EXTREME CONDITIONS4O COMPLICATE THE PICTURE FURTHER IT IS NOW BELIEVED THAT A CLASS OF EXTREMELY MAGNETICNEUTRON STARS KNOWN ASmagnetarsEXISTS -AGNETARS HAVE MAGNETIC lELD STRENGTHS THATARE ON THE ORDER OF 4 SEVERAL ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE GREATER THAN TYPICAL PULSARS 4HEYALSOHAVERELATIVELYSLOWROTATIONPERIODSOFTOSECONDS-AGNETARSWERElRSTPROPOSEDTO EXPLAIN THEsoft gamma repeaters3'2S	 OBJECTS THAT EMIT BURSTS OF HARD 8RAYS ANDSOFT GAMMARAYS WITH ENERGIES OF UP TO  KE6RECALL &IG 	 /NLY A FEW 3'2S AREKNOWNTOEXISTINTHE-ILKY7AY'ALAXYANDONEHASBEENDETECTEDINTHE,ARGE-AGELLANIC#LOUD%ACHOFTHE3'2SISALSOKNOWNTOCORRELATEWITHSUPERNOVAREMNANTSOFFAIRLYYOUNGAGE ∼Y	 4HIS WOULD SUGGEST THAT MAGNETARS IF THEY ARE THE SOURCE OF THE 3'2S ARESHORTLIVEDPHENOMENA0ERHAPSTHE'ALAXYHASMANYhEXTINCTvORLOWENERGYMAGNETARSSCATTERED THROUGH IT4HEEMISSIONMECHANISMOFINTENSE8RAYSFROM3'2SISTHOUGHTTOBEASSOCIATEDWITHSTRESSES IN THE MAGNETIC lELDS OF MAGNETARS THAT CAUSE THE SURFACE OF THE NEUTRON STAR TOCRACK 4HE RESULTING READJUSTMENT OF THE SURFACE PRODUCES Asuper-EddingtonRELEASE OFENERGY ROUGHLY TO TIMES THE %DDINGTON LUMINOSITY LIMIT IN 8RAYS	 )N ORDER TOOBTAIN SUCH HIGH LUMINOSITIES IT IS BELIEVED THAT THE RADIATION MUST BE CONlNED HENCE THENEED FOR VERY HIGH MAGNETIC lELD STRENGTHS-AGNETARS ARE DISTINGUISHED FROM ORDINARY PULSARS BY THE FACT THAT THE ENERGY OF THEMAGNETARSlELDPLAYSTHEMAJORROLEINTHEENERGETICSOFTHESYSTEMRATHERTHANROTATIONASISTHECASEFORPULSARS#LEARLYMUCHREMAINSTOBELEARNEDABOUTTHEEXOTICENVIRONMENTOFRAPIDLYROTATINGDEGENERATESPHERESWITHRADIIONTHEORDEROFKMANDDENSITIESEXCEEDINGTHE DENSITY OF THE NUCLEUS OF AN ATOMSUGGESTED READINGGeneral"URNELL *OCELYN "ELL h4HE $ISCOVERY OF 0ULSARSvSerendipitous Discoveries in RadioAstronomy .ATIONAL 2ADIO!STRONOMY /BSERVATORY 'REEN "ANK76 'RAHAM3MITH & h0ULSARS4ODAYvSky and Telescope 3EPTEMBER +AWALER 3TEPHEN $ AND7INGET $ONALD % h7HITE $WARFS &OSSIL 3TARSvSky and Tele-scope!UGUST .ATHER 2 %DWARD AND 7INGET $ONALD % h4AKING THE 0ULSE OF 7HITE $WARFSvSky andTelescope!PRIL 4RIMBLE6IRGINIAh7HITE$WARFS4HE/NCEAND&UTURE3UNSvSky and Telescope/CTOBERTechnical#LAYTON $ONALD $Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis 5NIVERSITY OF#HICAGO 0RESS #HICAGO The Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 673>>>

$!NTONA&RANCESCAAND-AZZITELLI)TALOh#OOLINGOF7HITE$WARFSvAnnual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics28  'OLD 4 h2OTATING .EUTRON 3TARS AS THE /RIGIN OF THE 0ULSATING 2ADIO 3OURCESvNature218  (ANSEN"RAD-3AND,IEBERT*AMESh#OOL7HITE$WARFSvAnnual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics41  (ANSEN #ARL * +AWALER 3TEVEN $ AND 4RIMBLE 6IRGINIAStellar Interiors: PhysicalPrinciples, Structure, and Evolution3ECOND%DITION3PRINGER6ERLAG.EW9ORK(EWISH! ET AL h/BSERVATIONS OF A 2APIDLY 0ULSATING 2ADIO 3OURCEvNature217 +ALOGERA 6ASSILIKI AND "AYM 'ORDON h4HE -AXIMUM -ASS OF A .EUTRON 3TARvTheAstrophysical Journal470 , ,IEBERT *AMES h7HITE $WARF 3TARSvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics18 ,YNE !NDREW ' AND 'RAHAM3MITH &Pulsar Astronomy 4HIRD %DITION #AMBRIDGE5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE -ANCHESTER*OSEPH(AND4AYLOR2ICHARD.Pulsars7(&REEMANAND#OMPANY3AN&RANCISCO #! -ICHEL&#URTISTheory of Neutron Star Magnetospheres4HE5NIVERSITYOF#HICAGO0RESS#HICAGO 0ACINI & h%NERGY %MISSION FROM A .EUTRON 3TARvNature216  3ALARIS -AURIZIO ET AL h4HE #OOLING OF #/ 7HITE $WARFS )NmUENCE OF THE )NTERNAL#HEMICAL $ISTRIBUTIONvThe Astrophysical Journal486  3HAPIRO3TUART,AND4EUKOLSKY3AUL!Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars*OHN7ILEY AND 3ONS .EW9ORK 4HOMPSON #HRISTOPHER AND $UNCAN 2OBERT # h4HE 3OFT 'AMMA 2EPEATERS AS 6ERY3TRONGLY -AGNETIZED .EUTRON 3TARS n ) 2ADIATIVE -ECHANISM FOR /UTBURSTSvMonthlyNotices of the Royal Astronomical Society275  7INGET $ % ET AL h!N )NDEPENDENT -ETHOD FOR $ETERMINING THE!GE OF THE 5NIVERSEvThe Astrophysical Journal Letters315 , 7INGET $ % ET AL h(YDROGEN$RIVING AND THE "LUE %DGE OF #OMPOSITIONALLY 3TRATIlED:: #ETI 3TAR -ODELSvThe Astrophysical Journal Letters252 , A7INGET $ONALD % ET AL h0HOTOMETRIC /BSERVATIONS OF '$  $" 7HITE $WARFS $O0ULSATEvThe Astrophysical Journal Letters262 , BThe Degenerate Remnants of Stars


<<<PAGE 674>>>

PROBLEM SET1The most easily observed white dwarf in the sky is in the constellation of Eridanus (the RiverEridanus). Three stars make up the 40 Eridani system: 40 Eri A is a 4th-magnitude star similarto the Sun; 40 Eri B is a 10th-magnitude white dwarf; and 40 Eri C is an 11th-magnitude redM5 star. This problem deals only with the latter two stars, which are separated from 40 Eri Aby 400 AU.(a)The period of the 40 Eri B and C system is 247.9 years. The system’s measured trigono-metric parallax is 0.201′′and the true angular extent of the semimajor axis of the reducedmass is 6.89′′. The ratio of the distances of 40 Eri B and C from the center of mass isaB/aC=0.37. Find the mass of 40 Eri B and C in terms of the mass of the Sun.(b)The absolute bolometric magnitude of 40 Eri B is 9.6. Determine its luminosity in termsof the luminosity of the Sun.(c)The effective temperature of 40 Eri B is 16,900 K. Calculate its radius, and compare youranswer to the radii of the Sun, Earth, and Sirius B.(d)Calculate the average density of 40 Eri B, and compare your result with the average densityof Sirius B. Which is more dense, and why?(e)Calculate the product of the mass and volume of both 40 Eri B and Sirius B. Is there adeparture from the mass–volume relation? What might be the cause?2The helium absorption lines seen in the spectra of DB white dwarfs are formed by excited He Iatoms with one electron in the lowest (n=1) orbital and the other in ann=2 orbital. Whitedwarfs of spectral type DB are not observed with temperatures below about 11,000 K. Usingwhat you know about spectral line formation, give aqualitativeexplanation why the heliumlines would not be seen at lower temperatures. As a DB white dwarf cools below 12,000 K,into what spectral type does it change?3Deduce a rough upper limit forX, the mass fraction of hydrogen, in the interior of a whitedwarf.Hint:Use the mass and average density for Sirius B in the equations for the nuclearenergy generation rate, and takeT=107K for the central temperature. Setψppandfpp=1inqthe beloweu a t i o nfor the pp chain, andXCNO=1 infor theCNO cycle.ϵCNO≃ϵ′0,CNOρXXCNOT19.96,ϵpp≃ϵ′0,ppρX2fppψppCppT46,4Estimate the ideal gas pressure and the radiation pressure at the center of Sirius B, using 3×107K for the central temperature. Compare these values with the estimated central pressure,Eq. (1).qthe beloweu a t i o n
Pc≈23πG ρ2R2wd≈3.8×1022Nm−2,5By equating the pressure of an ideal gas of electrons to the pressure of a degenerate electrongas, determine a condition for the electrons to be degenerate, and compare it with the conditionof Eq. (6). Use the exact expression (Eq. 12) for the electron degeneracy pressure.The Degenerate Remnants of Stars
(1)
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.16,

<<<PAGE 675>>>

Tρ2/3<D.P=/parenleftbig3π2/parenrightbig2/35/planckover2pi12me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg5/3.6In the extreme relativistic limit, the electron speedv=cmust be used instead of Eq. ( 10)to ﬁnd the electron degeneracy pressure. Use this to repeat the derivation of Eq. ( 11) andﬁndP≈/planckover2pi1c√3/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg4/3.≈√3/planckover2pi1me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg1/3.P≈/planckover2pi12me/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbiggZA/parenrightbiggρmH/bracketrightbigg5/3.7 (a)At what speed do relativistic effects become important at a level of 10%? In other words,for what value ofvdoes the Lorentz factor,γ, become equal to 1.1?(b)Estimate the density of the white dwarf for which the speed of a degenerate electron isequal to the value found in part (a).(c)Use the mass–volume relation to ﬁnd the approximate mass of a white dwarf with thisaverage density. This is roughly the mass where white dwarfs depart from the mass–volumerelation.8Crystallization will occur in a cooling white dwarf when the electrostatic potential energybetween neighboring nuclei,Z2e2/4πϵ0r, dominates the characteristic thermal energykT.The ratio of the two is deﬁned to beδGammaℓ,δGammaℓ=Z2e24πϵ0rkT.In this expression, the distancerbetween neighboring nuclei is customarily (and somewhatawkwardly) deﬁned to be the radius of a sphere whose volume is equal to the volume pernucleus. Speciﬁcally, since the average volume per nucleus isAmH/ρ,ris found from43πr3=AmHρ.(a)Calculate the value of the average separationrfor a 0.6 M⊙pure carbon white dwarf ofradius 0.012 R⊙.(b)Much effort has been spent on precise numerical calculations ofδGammaℓto obtain increasinglyrealistic cooling curves. The results indicate a value of aboutδGammaℓ=160 for the onset ofcrystallization. Estimate the interior temperature,Tc, at which this occurs.(c)Estimate the luminosity of a pure carbon white dwarf with this interior temperature.AssumecompositionlikethatofExample5.1offorthenondegenerate envelope.(d)For roughly how many years could the white dwarf sustain the luminosity found in part (c),using just the latent heat ofkTper nucleus released upon crystallization? Compare thisamount of time (when the white dwarf cools more slowly) with Fig. 9.e g e n e r a t e emnants o  fSt  ars The-The Degenerate Remnants of Stars: Problem Set(6)(12)
(1 ) 0(1 ) 1
DR“”a

<<<PAGE 676>>>

CrystallizationLog10 (L/L  )0.6 MWinget, et al. (1987)Text cooling curve
–5–4–3–2–1
05 10Time (109 yr)FIGURE 9Theoretical cooling curves for 0.6 M⊙white-dwarf models. [The solid line is fromEq. (23), and the dashed line is from Winget et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,315, L77, 1987.]9In theliquid-drop modelof an atomic nucleus, a nucleus with mass numberAhas a radius ofr0A1/3, wherer0=1.2×10−15m. Find the density of this nuclear model.10If our Moon were as dense as a neutron star, what would its diameter be?11 (a)Consider two point masses, each having massm, that are separated vertically by a distanceof 1 cm just above the surface of a neutron star of radiusRand massM. Using Newton’slawofgravity,ﬁndanexpressionfortheratioofthegravitationalforce onthe lower mass to that on the upper mass, and evaluate this expression forR=10 km,M=1.4M⊙, andm=1 g.F=GMmr2,(b)An iron cube 1 cm on each side is held just above the surface of the neutron star describedin part (a). The density of iron is 7860 kg m−3. If iron experiences a stress (force percross-sectional area) of 4.2×107Nm−2, it will be permanently stretched; if the stressreaches 1.5×108Nm−2, the iron will rupture. What will happen to the iron cube? (Hint:Imagine concentrating half of the cube’s mass on each of its top and bottom surfaces.)What would happen to an iron meteoroid falling toward the surface of a neutron star?12Estimate the neutron degeneracy pressure at the center of a 1.4 M⊙neutron star (take thecentral density to be 1.5×1018kg m−3), and compare this with the estimated pressure at thecenter of Sirius B.13 (a)Assume that at a density just below neutron drip, all of the neutrons are in heavy neutron-rich nuclei such as11836Kr. Estimate the pressure due to relativistic degenerate electrons.(b)Assume (wrongly!) that at a density just above neutron drip, all of the neutrons are free(and not in nuclei). Estimate the speed of the degenerate neutrons and the pressure theywould produce.14Suppose that the Sun were to collapse down to the size of a neutron star (10-km radius).(a)Assuming that no mass is lost in the collapse, ﬁnd the rotation period of the neutron star.(b)Find the magnetic ﬁeld strength of the neutron star.Even though our Sun will not end its life as a neutron star, this shows that the conservationof angular momentum and magnetic ﬂux can easily produce pulsar-like rotation speeds andmagnetic ﬁelds.The Degenerate Remnants of Stars: Problem Set
(the e  quation b  elow)


<<<PAGE 677>>>

15 (a)Usewithγ=5/3 to calculate the fundamental radial pulsation periodone-zone model of a pulsating white dwarf (use the values for Sirius B) and a 1.4 M⊙neutron star. Compare these to the observed range of pulsar periods.the eq ation  below  Π=2π/radicalBig43πG ρ0(3γ−4),(b)Use Eq. ( 29) to calculate the minimum rotation period for the same stars, and comparethem to the range of pulsar periods.Pmin=2π/radicalbiggR3GM.(c)Give an explanation for the similarity of your results.16 (a)Determine the minimum rotation period for a 1.4M⊙neutron star (the fastest it can spinwithout ﬂying apart). For convenience, assume that the star remains spherical with a radiusof 10 km.(b)Newton studied the equatorial bulge of a homogeneous ﬂuid body of massMthat isslowlyrotating with angular velocityδOmegaℓ. He proved that the difference between its equatorial radius(E) and its polar radius (P) is related to its average radius (R) byE−PR=5δOmegaℓ2R34GM.Use this to estimate the equatorial and polar radii for a 1.4M⊙neutron star rotating withtwice the minimum rotation period you found in part (a).17If you measured the period of PRS 1937+214 and obtained the value on page 588, about howlong would you have to wait before the last digit changed from a “5” to a “6”?18Consider a pulsar that has a periodP0and period derivative˙P0att=0. Assume that theproductP˙Premains constant for the pulsar (cf. Eq. 32).−32π5B2R6sin2θ3µ0c3P4=−4π2I˙PP3.(a)Integrate to obtain an expression for the pulsar’s periodPat timet.(b)Imagine that you have constructed a clock that would keep time by counting the radiopulses received from this pulsar. Suppose you also have aperfectclock (˙P=0) that isinitially synchronized with the pulsar clock when they both read zero. Show that when theperfect clock displays the characteristic lifetimeP0/˙P0, the time displayed by the pulsarclock is(√3−1)P0/˙P0.19During a glitch, the period of the Crab pulsar decreased by|δDeltaℓP|≈10−8P. If the increasedrotation was due to an overall contraction of the neutron star, ﬁnd the change in the star’sradius. Assume that the pulsar is a rotating sphere of uniform density with an initial radius of10 km.20The Geminga pulsar has a period ofP=0.237 s and a period derivative of˙P=1.1×10−14.Assuming thatθ=90◦, estimate the magnetic ﬁeld strength at the pulsar’s poles.21 (a)Find the radii of the light cylinders for the Crab pulsar and for the slowest pulsar, PSR 1841-0456. Compare these values to the radius of a 1.4M⊙neutron star.(b)The strength of a magnetic dipole is proportional to 1/r3. Determine the ratio of themagnetic ﬁeld strengths at the light cylinder for the Crab pulsar and for PSR 1841-0456.22 (a)Integrate Eq. ( 32) to obtain an expression for a pulsar’s periodPat timetif its initialperiod wasP0at timet=0.−32π5B2R6sin2θ3µ0c3P4=−4π2I˙PP3.The Degenerate Remnants of Stars: Problem Setufor a
(29)
() 3 2() 3 2


<<<PAGE 678>>>

(b)Assuming that the pulsar has had time to slow down enough thatP0≪P, show that theagetof the pulsar is given approximately byt=P2˙P,where˙Pis the period derivative at timet.(c)Evaluate this age for the case of the Crab pulsar, using the values found in Example 7.1Compare your answer with the known age.23One way of qualitatively understanding the ﬂow of charged particles into a pulsar’s magneto-sphere is to imagine a charged particle of massmand chargee(the fundamental unit of charge)at the equator of the neutron star. Assume for convenience that the star’s rotation carries thecharge perpendicular to the pulsar’s magnetic ﬁeld. The moving charge experiences a magneticLorentz force ofFm=evBand a gravitational force,Fg. Show that the ratio of these forces isFmFg=2πeBRPm g,whereRis the star’s radius andgis the acceleration due to gravity at the surface. Evaluate thisratio for the case of a proton at the surface of the Crab pulsar, using a magnetic ﬁeld strengthof 108T.24Find the minimum photon energy required for the creation of an electron–positron pair via thepair-production processγ→e−+e+. What is the wavelength of this photon? In what regionof the electromagnetic spectrum is this wavelength found?25A subpulse involves a verynarrowradio beam with a width between 1◦and 3◦. Usefor the headlight effect to calculate the minimum speed of the electrons responsiblea1◦subpulse.ofThe  egenerate  e m n a n t s  o f  t a r s
the  equation  belowsinθ=vyv=/radicalbig1−u2/c2=γ−1,The Degenerate Remnants of Stars: Problem Set
DRS“”
for


<<<PAGE 679>>>



<<<PAGE 680>>>

General Relativity
and Black Holes
1 The General Theory of Relativity
2 Intervals and Geodesics
3 Black Holes
1 THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
Gravity, the weakest of the four forces of nature, plays a fundamental role in sculpting the
universe on the largest scale. Newton’s law of universal gravitation,
F=GMm
r2, (1)
remained an unquestioned cornerstone of astronomers’ understanding of heavenly motions
until the beginning of the twentieth century. Its application had explained the motions of
the known planets and had accurately predicted the existence and position of the planet
Neptune in 1846. The sole blemish on Newtonian gravitation was the inexplicably large
rate of shift in the orientation of Mercury’s orbit.
The gravitational inﬂuences of the other planets cause the major axis of Mercury’s
elliptical orbit to slowly swing around the Sun in a counterclockwise direction relative to
the ﬁxed stars; see Fig. 1. The angular position at which perihelion occurs shifts at a
rate of 574′′per century.1However, Newton’s law of gravity was unable to explain 43′′per
century of this shift, an inconsistency that led some mid-nineteenth century physicists to
suggest that Eq. ( 1) should be modiﬁed from an exact inverse-square law. Others thought
that an unseen planet, nicknamed Vulcan, might occupy an orbit inside Mercury’s.
The Curvature of Spacetime
Between the years 1907 and 1915, Albert Einstein developed a new theory of gravity,
hisgeneral theory of relativity . In addition to resolving the mystery of Mercury’s orbit,
it predicted many new phenomena that were later conﬁrmed by experiment. In this and
the next section we will describe just enough of the physical content of general relativity
to provide the background needed for future discussions of black holes and cosmology.
1The value of 1 .5◦per century encountered in some texts includes the very large effect of the precession of Earth’s
rotation axis on the celestial coordinate system.
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 7 ,


<<<PAGE 681>>>

Sun
FIGURE 1The perihelion shift of Mercury’s orbit. Both the eccentricity of the orbit and theamount of shift in the location of perihelion in successive orbits have been exaggerated to better showthe effect.Einstein’s view of the universe provides an exhilarating challenge to the imaginations ofall students of astrophysics. But, before embarking on our study of general relativity, it willbe helpful to take an advanced look at this new gravitational landscape.The general theory of relativity is fundamentally a geometric description of how distances(intervals) in spacetime are measured in the presence of mass. For the moment, the effectson space and time will be considered separately, although you should always keep in mindthat relativity deals with a uniﬁed spacetime. Near an object, both space and time must bedescribed in a new way.Distances between points in the space surrounding a massive object are altered in away that can be interpreted as space becomingcurvedthrough a fourth spatial dimensionperpendicular toallof the usual three spatial directions. The human mind balks at picturingthis situation, but an analogy is easily found. Imagine four people holding the corners ofa rubber sheet, stretching it tight and ﬂat. This represents the ﬂatness of empty space thatexists in the absence of mass. Also imagine that a polar coordinate system has been paintedon the sheet, with evenly spaced concentric circles spreading out from its center. Nowlay a heavy bowling ball (representing the Sun) at the center of the sheet, and watch theindentation of the sheet as it curves down and stretches in response to the ball’s weight,as pictured in Fig. 2. Closer to the ball, the sheet’s curvature increases and the distancebetween points on the circles is stretched more. Just as the sheet curves in a third directionperpendicular to its original ﬂat two-dimensional plane, the space surrounding a massiveobject may be thought of as curving in a fourth spatial dimension perpendicular to the usualthree of “ﬂat space.”2The fact that mass has an effect on the surrounding space is the ﬁrstessential element of general relativity. The curvature of space is just one aspect of the effect2It is important to note that this fourth spatial dimension has nothing at all to do with the role played by time as afourth nonspatialcoordinatein the theory of relativity.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 682>>>

Bowling ballTennis ball
FIGURE 2Rubber sheet analogy for curved space around the Sun. It is assumed that the rubbersheet is much larger than the area of curvature, so that the edges of the sheet have no effect on thecurvature produced by the central mass.
SunAC B
FIGURE 3A photon’s path around the Sun is shown by the solid line. The bend in the photon’strajectory is greatly exaggerated.of mass on spacetime. In the language of uniﬁed spacetime,mass acts on spacetime, tellingit how to curve.Now imagine rolling a tennis ball, representing a planet, across the sheet. As it passesnear the bowling ball, the tennis ball’s path is curved. If the ball were rolled in just theright way under ideal conditions, it could even “orbit” the more massive bowling ball. Ina similar manner, a planet orbits the Sun as it responds to the curved spacetime around it.Thuscurved spacetime acts on mass, telling it how to move.The passage of a ray of light near the Sun can be represented by rolling a ping-pong ballvery rapidly past the bowling ball. Although the analogy with a massless photon is strained,it is reasonable to expect that as the photon moves through the curved space surroundingthe Sun, its path will be deﬂected from a straight line. The bend of the photon’s trajectory issmall because the photon’s speed carries it quickly through the curved space; see Fig. 3.In general relativity, gravity is the result of objects moving through curved spacetime, andeverything that passes through, even massless particles such as photons, is affected.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 683>>>

SunActual pathABCFIGURE 4Comparison of two photon paths through curved space between pointsAandB.The projection of the pathACBonto the plane is the straight line depicted in Fig. 3.Figure 3 hints at another aspect of general relativity. Since nothing can move betweentwo points in space faster than light, light must always follow the quickest route betweenany two points.3In ﬂat, empty space, this path is a straight line, but what is the quickestroute through curved space? Suppose we use a series of mirrors to force the light beam totravel between pointsAandBby the apparent “shortcut” indicated by the dashed lines inFigs. 3 and 4. Would the light taking the dashed path outrace the beam free to followits natural route through curved space? The answer is no—the curved beam would win therace. This result seems to imply that the beam following the dashed line would slow downalong the way. However, this inference can’t be correct because, according to the postulatesgeneral relativity, these effects contribute equally to delaying the light beam’s trip fromAtoBalong the dashed line. The curving light beam actually does travel theshorterpath. Iftwo space travelers were to lay meter sticks end-to-end along the two paths, the dashed pathwould require a greater number of meter sticks because it penetrates farther into curvedspace, as shown in Fig. 4. In addition, the curvature of space involves a concomitantslowing down of time, so clocks placed along the dashed path would actuallyrun moreslowly. This is the ﬁnal essential feature of general relativity:Time runs more slowly incurved spacetime.It is important to note that all of the foregoing ideas have been tested experimentallymany times, and in every case the results agree with general relativity. As soon as Einsteincompleted his theory, he applied it to the problem of Mercury’s unexplained residual per-ihelion shift of 43′′per century. Einstein wrote that his heart raced when his calculationsexactly explained the discrepancy in terms of the planet’s passage through the curved spacenear the Sun, saying that, “For a few days, I was beside myself with joyous excitement.”Another triumph came in 1919 when the curving path of starlight passing near the Sunwas ﬁrst measured, by Arthur Stanley Eddington, during a total solar eclipse. As shown3Throughout this chapter, light is assumed to be traveling in a vacuum.General Relativity and Black Holes
of relativity, every observer, including one at point C, measures the same value for the speed of light. There are just two possible answers. The distance along the dashed line might actually be longer than the light beam’s natural path, and/or time might run more slowly along the dashed path; either would retard the beam’s passage. In fact, according to


<<<PAGE 684>>>

Sun's positionin sky
SunStar'sactualpositionStar'sobservedposition
Path ofstarlightObserverFIGURE 5Bending of starlight measured during a solar eclipse.in Fig. 5, the apparent positions of stars close to the Sun’s eclipsed edge were shiftedfrom their actual positions by a small angle. Einstein’s theory predicted that this angulardeﬂection would be 1.75′′, in good agreement with Eddington’s observations. General rel-ativity has been tested continuously ever since. For instance, the superior conjunction ofMars that occurred in 1976 led to a spectacular conﬁrmation of Einstein’s theory. Radiosignals beamed to Earth from the Viking spacecraft on Mars’s surface were delayed as theytraveled deep into the curved space surrounding the Sun. The time delay agreed with thepredictions of general relativity to within 0.1%.The Principle of EquivalenceIt is now time to retrace our steps and discover how Einstein came to his revolutionaryunderstanding of gravity as geometry. One of the postulates of special relativity states thatthe laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames. Accelerating frames ofreference are not inertial frames, because they introduce ﬁctitious forces that depend on theacceleration. For example, an apple at rest on the seat of a car will not remain at rest if thecar suddenly brakes to a halt. However, the acceleration produced by the force of gravityhas a unique aspect. This may be clearly seen by noting a fundamental difference betweenNewton’s law of gravity and Coulomb’s law for the electrical force.Consider two objects separated by a distancer, one of massmand chargeq, and theother of massMand chargeQ. The magnitude of the acceleration (ag) of massmdue tothe gravitational forceis found frommag=GmMr2,(2)General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 685>>>

while the magnitude of the acceleration (ae)due to the electrical forceis found frommae=qQ4πϵ0r2.(3)The massmon the left-hand sides is aninertial massand measures the object’s resistanceto being accelerated (its inertia). On the right-hand sides, the massesmandMand chargesqandQare numbers that couple the masses or charges to their respective forces anddetermine the strength of these forces. The mystery is the appearance ofmon both sides ofthe gravitational formula.Why should a quantity that measures an object’s inertia (which exists even in the completeabsence of gravity) be the same as the “gravitational charge” that determines the force ofgravity? The answer is that the notation in Eq. ( 2) is ﬂawed, and the expression shouldproperly be written asmiag=GmgMgr2orag=GMgr2mgmi(4)to clearly distinguish between the inertial and gravitational mass of each object. Similarly,for Eq. (3),ae=14πϵ0qQr21mi.In this case the only mass that enters the expression is the inertial mass.It is an experimental fact, tested to a precision of 1 part in 1012, thatmg/miin Eq. ( 4)is a constant. For convenience, this constant is chosen to be unity so the two types of masswill be numerically equal; if the gravitational mass were chosen to betwicethe inertial mass,for example, the laws of physics would be unchanged except the gravitational constantGwould be assigned a new value only one-fourth as large. The proportionality of the inertialand gravitational masses means that at a given location, all objects experience thesamegravitational acceleration. The constancy ofmg/miis sometimes referred to as theweakequivalence principle.This distinctive aspect of gravity, that every object falls with the same acceleration, hasbeen known since the time of Galileo. It presented Einstein with both a problem and anopportunity to extend his theory of special relativity. He realized that if an entire laboratorywere in free-fall, with all of its contents falling together, there would then be no way to detectits acceleration. In such a freely falling laboratory, it would be impossible to experimentallydetermine whether the laboratory was ﬂoating in space, far from any massive object, orfalling freely in a gravitational ﬁeld. Similarly, an observer watching an apple falling withan accelerationgtoward the ﬂoor of a laboratory would be unable to tell whether thelaboratory was on Earth or far out in space, accelerating at a rategin the direction of theceiling, as illustrated in Fig. 6. This posed a serious problem for the theory of specialGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 686>>>

(b)(a)FIGURE 6Gravity is equivalent to an accelerating laboratory: (a) a laboratory on Earth, and(b) a laboratory accelerating in space.relativity, which requires that inertial reference frames have a constant velocity. Becausegravity is equivalent to an accelerating laboratory, an inertial reference frame cannot evenbe deﬁned in the presence of gravity. Einstein had to ﬁnd a way to remove gravity from thelaboratory.In 1907, Einstein had “the happiest thought of my life.”I was sitting in a chair in the patent ofﬁce at Bern when all of a sudden a thoughtoccurred to me: “If a person falls freely he will not feel his own weight.” I wasstartled. This simple thought made a deep impression on me. It impelled metoward a theory of gravitation.The way to eliminate gravity in a laboratory is to surrender to it by entering into a state offree-fall; see Fig. 7.4However, there was an obstacle to applying this to special relativitybecause its inertial reference frames areinﬁnitecollections of meter sticks and synchronizedrealized that he would have to uselocalreference frames, just small enough that the ac-celeration due to gravity would be essentially constant in both magnitude and directioneverywhere inside the reference frame (see Fig. 8). Gravity would then be abolishedinside a local, freely falling reference frame.4Free-fallmeans that there are no nongravitational forces accelerating the laboratory. In his meditation on generalrelativity,A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime(see Suggested Readings), John A. Wheeler prefers the termfree-ﬂoat. Since gravity has been abolished, why should falling even be mentioned? You are also urged to browsethrough the pages ofGravitationby Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler (1973) for additional insights into generalrelativity.General Relativity and Black Holes
clocks. It would be impossible to eliminate gravity everywhere in an inﬁnite, freely falling reference frame, because different points would have to be falling at differ-ent rates in different directions (toward the center of Earth, for example). Einstein


<<<PAGE 687>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 7Gravity abolished in a freely falling laboratory: (a) a laboratory in free-fall, and(b) a laboratory ﬂoating in space. g ª constant
FIGURE 8A local inertial reference frame, withg≈constant inside. The arrows denote thegravitational acceleration vectors at those points around the mass.In 1907 Einstein adopted this as the cornerstone of his theory of gravity, calling it theprinciple of equivalence.The Principle of Equivalence:All local, freely falling, nonrotating laborato-ries are fully equivalent for the performance of all physical experiments.The restriction to nonrotating labs is necessary to eliminate the ﬁctitious forces associatedwith rotation, such as the Coriolis and centrifugal forces. We will call these local, freelyfalling, nonrotating laboratorieslocal inertial reference frames.Note that special relativity is incorporated into the principle of equivalence. For example,measurements made from two local inertial frames in relative motion are related by theGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 688>>>

The Bending of LightWe now move on to two simple thought experiments involving the equivalence principlethat demonstrate the curvature of spacetime. For the ﬁrst experiment, imagine a laboratorysuspended above the ground by a cable [see Fig. 9(a)]. Let a photon of light leave ahorizontal ﬂashlight at the same instant the cable holding the lab is severed [Fig. 9(b)].Gravity has been abolished from this freely falling lab, so it is now a local inertial referenceframe. According to the equivalence principle, an observer falling with the lab will measurethe light’s path across the room as a straight horizontal line, in agreement with all of thelaws of physics. But another observer on the ground sees a lab that is falling under theinﬂuence of gravity. Because the photon maintains a constant height above the lab’s ﬂoor,the ground observer must measure a photon that falls with the lab, following a curvedpath. This displays the spacetime curvature represented by the rubber sheet analogy. Thecurved path taken by the photon is the quickest route possible through the curved spacetimesurrounding Earth.The angle of deﬂection,φ, of the photon is very slight, as the following bit of geometryshows.Although the photon does not follow a circular path, we will use thebest-ﬁtting circleof radiusrcto the actual path measured by the ground observer. Referring to Fig. 10,the center of the best-ﬁtting circle is at pointO, and the arc of the circle subtends an angleφ(exaggerated in the ﬁgure) between the radiiOAandOB. If the width of the lab isℓ,then the photon crosses the lab in timet=ℓ/c. (The difference between the length of thearc and the width of the lab is negligible.) In this amount of time, the lab falls a distance
PhotonPhoton pathseen fromthe ground/H5129/H5129t = 0t = /H5129/c(a)(b)FIGURE 9The equivalence principle for a horizontally traveling photon. The photon (a) leavesthe left wall att=0, and (b) arrives at the right wall att=ℓ/c.General Relativity and Black HolesLorentz transformations using the instantaneous value of the relative velocity between the two frames. Thus general relativity is in fact an extension of the theory of special relativity.


<<<PAGE 689>>>

/H9278/2/H9278/2/H9278
rcD/H5129ACBgt2/2Photon
OFIGURE 10Geometry for the radius of curvature,rc, and angular deﬂection,φ.d=12gt2. Because trianglesABCandOBDare similar (each containing a right angle andanother angleφ/2),BC/AC=BD/OD/parenleftbigg12gt2/parenrightbigg/slashbiggℓ=/bracketleftbiggℓ2 cos(φ/2)/bracketrightbigg/slashbiggOD.In fact,φis so small that we can set cos(φ/2)≃1 and the distanceOD≃rc. Then, usingt=ℓ/candg=9.8ms−2for the acceleration of gravity near the surface of Earth, we ﬁndrc=c2g=9.17×1015m,(5)for the radius of curvature of the photon’s path, which is nearly a light-year!Of course, the angular deﬂectionφdepends on the widthℓof the lab. For example, ifℓ=10 m, thenφ=ℓrc=1.09×10−15rad,or only 2.25×10−10arcsecond. The large radius of the photon’s path indicates that space-time near Earth is only slightly curved. Nonetheless, the curvature is great enough to producethe circular orbits of satellites, which move slowly through the curved spacetime (slowly,that is, compared to the speed of light).General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 690>>>

Gravitational Redshift and Time DilationOur second thought experiment also begins with the laboratory suspended above the groundby a cable. This time, monochromatic light of frequencyν0leaves a vertical ﬂashlight onthe ﬂoor at the same instant the cable holding the lab is severed. The freely falling labis again a local inertial frame where gravity has been abolished, and so the equivalenceprinciple requires that a frequency meter in the lab’s ceiling record thesamefrequency,ν0,for the light that it receives. But an observer on the ground sees a lab that is falling underthe inﬂuence of gravity. As shown in Fig. 11, if the light has traveled upward a heighthtoward the meter in timet=h/c, then the meter has gained a downward speed toward thelight ofv=gt=gh/csince the cable was released. Accordingly, we would expect thatfrom the point of view of the ground observer, the meter should have measured a blueshiftedfrequency greater thanν0.For the slow free-fall speedsinvolved here, this expectedincreasein frequency is/Delta1νν0=vc=ghc2.But in fact, the meter recordedno changein frequency. Therefore there must be anothereffect of the light’s upward journey through the curved spacetime around Earth that exactlycompensates for this blueshift. This is agravitational redshiftthat tends todecreasethefrequency of the light as it travels upward a distanceh, given by/Delta1νν0=−vc=−ghc2.(6)An outside observer, not in free-fall inside the lab, would measure only this gravitational
Photon pathhPhotonMeterMeter
t = 0t = h/c(a)(b)FIGURE 11Equivalence principle for a vertically traveling light. The photon (a) leaves the ﬂooratt=0, and (b) arrives at the ceiling att=h/c.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 691>>>

redshift. If the light were traveling downward, a corresponding blueshift would be measured.It is left as an exercise to show that this formula remains valid even if the light is travelingat an angle to the vertical, as long ashis taken to be theverticaldistance covered by thelight.Example 1.1.In 1960, a test of the gravitational redshift formula was carried out atHarvard University. A gamma ray was emitted by an unstable isotope of iron,5726Fe, at thebottom of a tower 22.6 m tall, and received at the top of the tower. Using this value forh,the expected decrease in frequency of the gamma ray due to the gravitational redshift is/Delta1νν0=−ghc2=−2.46×10−15,(7)in excellent agreement with the experimental result of/Delta1ν/ν0=−(2.57±0.26)×10−15.More precise experiments carried out since that time have obtained agreement to within0.007%.In actuality, the experiment was performed with both upward- and downward-travelinggamma rays, providing tests of both the gravitational redshift and blueshift.An approximate expression for the total gravitational redshift for a beam of light thatescapes out to inﬁnity can be calculated by integrating Eq. ( 6) from an initial positionr0to inﬁnity, usingg=GM/r2(Newtonian gravity) and settinghequal to the differentialradial element,drfor a spherical mass,M, located at the origin. Some care must be takenwhen carrying out the integration, because Eq. ( 7) was derived using alocalinertialreference frame. By integrating, we are really adding up the redshifts obtained for a chainofdifferentframes. The radial coordinatercan be used to measure distances for theseframes only if spacetime is nearly ﬂat [that is, if the radius of curvature given by Eq. ( 5)is very large compared withr0]. In this case, the “stretching” of distances seen previouslyin the rubber sheet analogy is not too severe, and we can integrate/integraldisplayν∞ν0dνν≃−/integraldisplay∞r0GMr2c2dr,whereν0andν∞are the frequencies atr0and inﬁnity, respectively. The result isln/parenleftbiggν∞ν0/parenrightbigg≃−GMr0c2,which is valid when gravity is weak (r0/rc=GM/r0c2≪1). This can be rewritten asν∞ν0≃e−GM/r0c2.(8)Because the exponent is≪1, we usee−x≃1−xto getν∞ν0≃1−GMr0c2.(9)This approximation shows the ﬁrst-order correction to the frequency of the photon.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 692>>>

The exact result for the gravitational redshift, valid even for a strong gravitational ﬁeld,isν∞ν0=/parenleftbigg1−2GMr0c2/parenrightbigg1/2.(10)When gravity is weak and the exponent in Eq. ( 8) is≪1, we use(1−x)1/2≃1−x/2to recover Eq. (9).The gravitational redshift can be incorporated into the redshift parametergivingz=λ∞−λ0λ0=ν0ν∞−1=/parenleftbigg1−2GMr0c2/parenrightbigg−1/2−1(11)≃GMr0c2,(12)where Eq. (12) is valid only for a weak gravitational ﬁeld.To understand the origin of the gravitational redshift, imagine a clock that is constructedto tick once with each vibration of a monochromatic light wave. The time between ticksis then equal to the period of the oscillation of the wave,/Delta1t=1/ν. Then according toEq. (10), as seen from an inﬁnite distance, the gravitational redshift implies that theclock atr0will be observed to run more slowly than an identical clock atr=∞.I fa namount of time/Delta1t0passes at positionr0outside a spherical mass,M, then the time/Delta1t∞atr=∞is/Delta1t0/Delta1t∞=ν∞ν0=/parenleftbigg1−2GMr0c2/parenrightbigg1/2.(13)For a weak ﬁeld,/Delta1t0/Delta1t∞≃1−GMr0c2.(14)We must conclude thattime passes more slowly as the surrounding spacetime becomes morecurved, an effect calledgravitational time dilation. The gravitational redshift is thereforea consequence of time running at a slower rate near a massive object.In other words, suppose two perfect, identical clocks are initially standing side by side,equally distant from a spherical mass. They are synchronized, and then one is slowly loweredbelow the other and then raised back to its original level. All observers will agree that whenthe clocks are again side by side, the clock that was lowered will be running behind theother because time in its vicinity passed more slowly while it was deeper in the mass’sgravitational ﬁeld.,General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 693>>>

Example 1.2.The white dwarf Sirius B has a radius ofR=5.5×106m and a massofM=2.1×1030kg. The radius of curvature of the path of a horizontally traveling lightbeam near the surface of Sirius B is given by Eq. (5),rc=c2g=R2c2GM=1.9×1010m.The fact thatGM/Rc2=R/rc≪1 indicates that the curvature of spacetime is not severe.Even at the surface of a white dwarf, gravity is considered relatively weak in terms of itseffect on the curvature of spacetime.From Eq. ( 12), the gravitational redshift suffered by a photon emitted at the star’ssurface isz≃GMRc2=2.8×10−4.This is in excellent agreement with the measured gravitational redshift for Sirius B of(3.0±0.5)×10−4.To compare the rate at which time passes at the surface of Sirius B with the rate at a greatdistance, suppose that exactly one hour is measured by a distant clock. The time recordedby a clock at the surface of Sirius B would belessthan one hour by an amount found usingEq. (14):/Delta1t∞−/Delta1t0=/Delta1t∞/parenleftbigg1−/Delta1t0/Delta1t∞/parenrightbigg≃(3600 s)/parenleftbiggGMRc2/parenrightbigg=1.0s.The clock at the surface of Sirius B runs more slowly by about one second per hour comparedto an identical clock far out in space.The preceding experimental results (results obtained from tests of the equivalence prin-ciple) conﬁrm the curvature of spacetime. In Section 2, we will learn that a freely fallingparticle takes the straightest possible path through curved spacetime.2INTERVALS AND GEODESICSWe now consider the united concepts of space and time as expressed inspacetime, withfour coordinates(x, y, z, t)specifying eachevent.5Einstein’s crowning achievement wasthe deduction of hisﬁeld equationsfor calculating the geometry of spacetime produced bya given distribution of mass and energy. His equations have the formG=−8πGc4T.(15)5Nothing special (in fact, nothing at all) need happen at an event.ne v e n ti ss i m p l yalocationinspacetimeidentiﬁedby(x, y, z, t).AGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 694>>>

On the right is thestress–energy tensor,T, which evaluates the effect of a given distributionof mass and energy on the curvature of spacetime, as described mathematically by theEinstein tensor,G(forGravity), on the left.6The appearance of Newton’s gravitationalconstant,G, and the speed of light symbolizes the extension of relativity theory to includegravity. It is far beyond the scope of this book to delve further into this fascinating equation.We will be content merely to describe the curvature of spacetime around a spherical object ofmassMand radiusR, then demonstrate how an object moves through the curved spacetimeit encounters.Worldlines and Light ConesFigure 12 shows three examples of some paths traced out in spacetime. In thesespacetimediagrams, time is represented on the vertical axis, while space is depicted by the horizontalx–yplane. The third spatial dimension,z, cannot be shown, so this ﬁgure deals only withmotion that occurs in a plane. The path followed by an object as it moves through spacetimeis called itsworldline. Our task will be to calculate the worldline of a freely falling objectin response to the local curvature of spacetime. The spatial components of such a worldlinedescribe the trajectory of a baseball arcing toward an outﬁelder, a planet orbiting the Sun,or a photon attempting to escape from a black hole.The worldlines of photons in ﬂat spacetime point the way to an understanding of thegeometry of spacetime. Suppose a ﬂashbulb is set off at the origin at timet=0; call thiseventA. As shown in Fig. 13, the worldlines of photons traveling in thex–yplaneform alight conethat represents a widening series of horizontal circular slices throughthe expanding spherical wavefront of light. The graph’s axes are scaled so that the straightworldlines of light rays make 45◦angles with the time axis.
xt
yxt
yxy(a)(b)(c)
t
FIGURE 12Worldlines for (a) a man at rest, (b) a woman running with constant velocity, and(c) a satellite orbiting Earth.6Note thatErest=mc2implies that both mass and energy contribute to the curvature of spacetime.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 695>>>

t
xyAFuture of A
Past of AElsewhere of AFIGURE 13Light cones generated by horizontally traveling photons leaving the origin at timet=0.A massive object initially at eventAmust travel slower than light, so the angle betweenits worldline and the time axis must be less than 45◦. Therefore the region inside the lightcone represents the possiblefutureof eventA. It consists of all of the events that can possiblybe reached by a traveler initially at eventA—and therefore all of the events that the travelercould ever inﬂuence in a causal way.Extending the diverging photon worldlines back through the origin generates a lowerlight cone. Within this lower light cone is the possiblepastof eventA, the collection of allevents from which a traveler could have arrived just as the bulb ﬂashed. In other words, thepossible past consists of the locations in space and time of every event that could possiblyhave caused the ﬂashbulb to go off.Outside the future and past light cones is an unknowableelsewhere, that part of spacetimeof which a traveler at eventAcan have no knowledge and over which he or she can haveno inﬂuence. It may come as a surprise to realize that vast regions of spacetime are hiddenfrom us. You just can’t get there from here.In principle, every event in spacetime has a pair of light cones extending from it. Thelight cone divides spacetime into that event’s future, past, and elsewhere. For any event inthe past to have possibly inﬂuenced you, that event must lie within your past light cone,just as any event that you can ever possibly affect must lie within your future light cone.Your entire future worldline, yourdestiny, must therefore lie within your future lightcone at every instant. Light cones act as spacetime horizons, separating the knowable fromthe unknowable.Spacetime Intervals, Proper Time, and Proper DistanceMeasuring the progress of an object as it moves along its worldline involves deﬁning a“distance” for spacetime. Consider the familiar case of purely spatial distances. If twoGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 696>>>

points have Cartesian coordinates(x1,y1,z1)and(x2,y2,z2),then the distance/Delta1ℓmeasured along the straight line between the two points in ﬂat spaceis deﬁned by(/Delta1ℓ)2=(x2−x1)2+(y2−y1)2+(z2−z1)2.The analogous measure of “distance” in spacetime is called thespacetime interval(orsimplyintervalfor short).Let two eventsAandBhavespacetime coordinates(xA,yA,zA,tA)and(xB,yB,zB,tB),measured by an observer in an inertial reference frame,S. Then the interval/Delta1smeasuredalong the straight worldline between the two events in ﬂat spacetime is deﬁned by(/Delta1s)2=[c(tB−tA)]2−(xB−xA)2−(yB−yA)2−(zB−zA)2.(16)In words,(interval)2=(distance traveled by light in time|tB−tA|)2−(distance between eventsAandB)2.This deﬁnition of the interval is very useful because(/Delta1s)2isinvariantunderaLorentztransformation.An observer in another inertialreference frame,S′,willmeasurethesamevaluefortheintervalbetweeneventsAandB;that is,/Delta1s=/Delta1s′.Note that(/Delta1s)2may be positive, negative, or zero. The sign tells us whether light hasenough time to travel between the two events. If(/Delta1s)2>0, then the interval istimelikeandlight has more than enough time to travel between eventsAandB. An inertial referenceframeScan therefore be chosen that moves along the straight worldline connecting eventsAandBso that the two events happen at thesame locationinS(at the origin, for example);see Fig. 14. Because the two events occur at the same place inS, the time measuredbetween the two events is/Delta1s/c. By deﬁnition, the time between two events that occur atthe same location is theproper time,/Delta1τ, where/Delta1τ≡/Delta1sc(17)Thepropertimeisjusttheelapsedtimerecordedbyawatchmovingalong the worldline fromAtoB. An observer in any inertial reference frame can use theinterval to calculate the proper time between two events that are separated by a timelikeinterval.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 697>>>

BAxySOFIGURE 14An inertial reference frameSmoving along the timelike worldline connectingeventsAandB. Both events occur at the origin ofS.If(/Delta1s)2=0, then the interval islightlikeornull. In this case, light has exactly enoughtime to travel between eventsAandB. Only light can make the journey from one event tothe other, and the proper time measured along a null interval is zero.Finally, if(/Delta1s)2<0, then the interval isspacelike; light does not have enough time totravel between eventsAandB. No observer could travel between the two events becausespeeds greater thancwould be required. The lack of absolute simultaneity in this situation,however, means that there are inertial reference frames in which the two events occur inthe opposite temporal order, or even at thesame time. By deﬁnition, the distance measuredbetween two eventsAandBin a reference frame for which they occur simultaneously(tA=tB) is theproper distanceseparating them,7/Delta1L=/radicalbig−(/Delta1s)2.(18)If a straight rod were connected between the locations of the two events, this would be therest lengthof the rod. An observer in any inertial reference frame can use this to calculatethe proper distance between two events that are separated by a spacelike interval.8The interval is clearly related to the light cones discussed in the foregoing paragraphs.Let eventAbe a ﬂashbulb set off at the origin at timet=0. The surfaces of the light cones,where the photons are at any timet, are the locations of all eventsBthat are connected toAby a null interval. The events within the future and past light cones are connected toAbya timelike interval, and the events that occur elsewhere are connected toAby a spacelikeinterval.The Metric for Flat SpacetimeReturning to three-dimensional space for a moment, it is obvious that a path connectingtwo points in space doesn’t have to be straight. Two points can be connected by inﬁnitelymany curved lines. To measure the distance along a curved path,P, from one point to the7hen the emphasis s on length rather than distance, this s called theproper length. Theterms may be used interchangeably, depending on the context.8For both proper time and proper distance, the termproperhas the connotation of “measured by an observer whois right there, moving along with the clock or the rod.”WiiGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 698>>>

other, we use a differential distance formula called ametric,(dℓ)2=(dx)2+(dy)2+(dz)2.Thendℓmay be integrated along the pathP(aline integral) to calculate the total distancebetween the two points,/Delta1ℓ=/integraldisplay21/radicalbig(dℓ)2=/integraldisplay21/radicalbig(dx)2+(dy)2+(dz)2(alongP).The distance between two points thus depends on the path connecting them. Of course, theshortestdistance between two points in ﬂat space is measured along a straight line. In fact,we candeﬁnethe “straightest possible line” between two points as the path for which/Delta1ℓis aminimum.Similarly, a worldline between two events in spacetime is not required to be straight; thetwo events can be connected by inﬁnitely many curved worldlines. To measure the intervalalong a curved worldline,W, connecting two events in spacetime with no mass present, weuse themetric for ﬂat spacetime,(ds)2=(c dt)2−(dℓ)2=(c dt)2−(dx)2−(dy)2−(dz)2.(19)Thendsis integrated to determine the total interval along the worldlineW,/Delta1s=/integraldisplayBA/radicalbig(ds)2=/integraldisplayBA/radicalbig(c dt)2−(dx)2−(dy)2−(dz)2(alongW).The interval is still related to the proper time measured along the worldline by Eq. (17).The interval measured along any timelike worldline divided by the speed of light is alwaysthe proper time measured by a watch moving along that worldline.The proper time is zeroalong a null worldline and is undeﬁned for a spacelike worldline.In ﬂat spacetime, the interval measured along a straight timelike worldline between twoevents is amaximum. Any other worldline between the same two events will not be straightand will have a smaller interval. For a massless particle such as a photon, all worldlineshave a null interval (so/integraltext/radicalbig(ds)2=0).The maximal character of the interval of a straight worldline in ﬂat spacetime is easilydemonstrated. Figure 15 is a spacetime diagram showing two events,AandB, that occurat timestAandtB. The events are observed from an inertial reference frame,S, that movesfromAtoB, chosen such that the two events occur at the origin ofS. The interval measuredalong the straight worldline connectingAandBis/Delta1s(A→B)=/integraldisplayBA/radicalbig(ds)2=/integraldisplayBA/radicalbig(c dt)2−(dx)2−(dy)2−(dz)2=/integraldisplaytBtAcdt=c(tB−tA).General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 699>>>

xtBCAFIGURE 15Worldlines connecting eventsAandB.Now consider the interval measured along another worldline connectingAandBthatincludes eventC, which occurs at(x, y, z, t)=(xC,0,0,tC). In this case,/Delta1s(A→C→B)=/integraldisplayCA/radicalbig(ds)2+/integraldisplayBC/radicalbig(ds)2=/integraldisplayCA/radicalbig(c dt)2−(dx)2−(dy)2−(dz)2+/integraldisplayBC/radicalbig(c dt)2−(dx)2−(dy)2−(dz)2.Usingdx/dt=vACfor the constant velocity along worldlineA→Cin the ﬁrst integral,anddx/dt=vCBfor the constant velocity alongC→Bin the second integral, leads to/Delta1s(A→C→B)=(tC−tA)/radicalBigc2−v2AC+(tB−tC)/radicalBigc2−v2CB<c ( tC−tA)+c(tB−tC)< /Delta1s(A→B).Thus the straight worldline has the longer interval. Any worldline connecting eventAandBcan be represented as a series of short segments, so we can conclude that the interval/Delta1sis indeed a maximum for the straight worldline.Curved Spacetime and the Schwarzschild MetricIn a spacetime that is curved by the presence of mass, the situation is slightly more compli-cated. Even the “straightest possible worldline” will be curved. These straightest possibleworldlines are calledgeodesics. In ﬂat spacetime a geodesic is a straight worldline.In curved spacetime, a timelike geodesic between two events has either amaximumor aminimuminterval. In other words, the value of/Delta1salong a timelike geodesic is anextremum, either a maximum or a minimum, when compared with the intervals of nearbyGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 700>>>

worldlines between the same two events.9In the situations we will encounter in this chapter,the intervals of timelike geodesics will be maxima. A massless particle such as a photonfollows anull geodesic, with/integraltext/radicalbig(ds)2=0.10Einstein’s key realization was thatthe pathsfollowed by freely falling objects through spacetime are geodesics.We are now prepared to deal with the effect of mass on the geometry of spacetime, basedon the three fundamental features of general relativity:• Mass acts on spacetime, telling it how to curve.• Spacetime in turn acts on mass, telling it how to move.• Any freely falling particle (including a photon) follows the straightest possible world-line, a geodesic, through spacetime. For a massive particle, the geodesic has amaxi-mumor aminimuminterval, while for light, the geodesic has anullinterval.These components of the theory will allow us to describe the curvature of spacetimearound a massive spherical object and to determine how another object will move in re-sponse, whether it is a satellite orbiting Earth or a photon orbiting a black hole. For situationswith spherical symmetry, it will be more convenient to use the familiar spherical coordi-nates(r, θ, φ)instead of Cartesian coordinates. The metric between two nearby points inﬂat space is then(dℓ)2=(dr)2+(r dθ)2+(rsinθd φ )2,(20)and the corresponding expression for the ﬂat spacetime metric is(ds)2=(c dt)2−(dr)2−(r dθ)2−(rsinθd φ )2.(21)Of course, spacetime will not be ﬂat in the vicinity of a massive object. The speciﬁcsituation to be investigated here is the motion of a particle through the curved spacetimeproduced by a massive sphere. It could be a planet, a star, or a black hole. The ﬁrst task is tocalculate how this massive object acts on spacetime, telling it how to curve. This requiresa description of the metric for this curved spacetime that will replace Eq. ( 21) for a ﬂatspacetime.Before presenting this metric, we must emphasize that the variablesr,θ,φ, andtthatappear in the expression for the metric are thecoordinatesused by an observer at rest agreat (≃inﬁnite) distance from the origin. In the absence of a central mass at the origin,rwould be the distance from the origin, and differences inrwould measure the distancebetween points on a radial line. The timetmeasured by clocks scattered throughout thecoordinate system would remain synchronized, advancing everywhere at the same rate.9In fact, a calculation of the intervals of nearby worldlines would show that the interval of a timelike geodesiccorresponds to a maximum, a minimum, or an inﬂection point. You are referred to Section 13.4 of Misner, Thorne,and Wheeler (1973) for an interesting discussion of geodesics as worldlines of extremal proper time.10The extremal principle for intervals cannot be directly applied to ﬁnd the straightest possible worldline for aphoton, since its interval is always null. However, the straightest possible worldline for a massless particle is thesame as that for a massive particle in the limit of a vanishingly small mass as its velocityv→c.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 701>>>

Now we place a sphere of massMand radiusR(which will be called a “planet”) at theorigin of our coordinate system. Some care must be taken in laying out the radial coordinate.The origin (which is inside the sphere) should not be used as a point of reference, and so wewill avoid deﬁningras “the distance from the origin.” Instead, imagine a series of nestedconcentric spheres centered at the origin. The surface area of a sphere can be measuredwithout approaching the origin, so the coordinaterwill be deﬁned by the surface of thatsphere having an area 4πr2. With this careful approach, we will ﬁnd that these coordinatescan be used with the metric for curved spacetime to measure distances in space and thepassage of time near this massive sphere.As an object moves through this curved spacetime,itscoordinate speedis just the rate at which its spatial coordinates change.At a large distance (r≃∞) from the planet, spacetime is essentially ﬂat, and the gravita-tional time dilation of a photon received from the planet is given by Eq. ( 13). From this,it might be expected that/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2would play a role in the metric for the spacetimesurrounding the planet. Furthermore, recall from Section 1 that the stretching of spaceand the slowing down of time contribute equally to delaying a light beam’s passage throughcurved spacetime. This provides a hint that the same factor will be involved in the metric’sradial term. The angular terms are the same as those in Eq. ( 21) for ﬂat spacetime.These effects are indeed present in the metric that describes the curved spacetime sur-rounding a spherical mass,M. In 1916, just two months after Einstein published his generaltheory of relativity, the German astronomer Karl Schwarzschild (1873–1916) solved Ein-stein’s ﬁeld equations to obtain what is now called theSchwarzschild metric:(ds)2=/parenleftBigcdt/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBig2−/parenleftBiggdr/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBigg2−(r dθ)2−(rsinθd φ )2.(22)There is no other, easier way to obtain the Schwarzschild metric, so we must be contentwith the foregoing heuristic description of its terms.It is important to realize that the Schwarzschild metric is the spherically symmetricvacuum solutionof Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. That is, it is valid only in the empty spaceoutsidethe object. The mathematical form of the metric is different in the object’s interior,which is occupied by matter.The Schwarzschild metric contains all of the effects considered in the last section. The“curvature of space” resides in the radial term. The radial distance measured simultaneously(dt=0) between two nearby points on the same radial line (dθ=dφ=0) is just the properdistance, Eq. (18),dL=/radicalbig−(ds)2=dr/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2.(23)Thus the spatial distancedLbetween two points on the same radial line isgreaterthan thecoordinate differencedr. This is precisely what is represented by the stretched grid linesin the rubber sheet analogy of the previous section. The factor of 1/slashbig/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2mustbe included in any calculation of spatial distances. This is analogous to using a topographicGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 702>>>

FIGURE 16Topographical map with elevation contour lines. The shortest distance between twopoints on the map may not be a straight line. (Courtesy of USGS.)map when planning a hike up a steep trail. The additional information provided by the map’selevation contour lines must be included in any calculation of the actual hiking distance,which is always greater than the difference in map coordinates; see Fig. 16.The Schwarzschild metric also incorporates time dilation and the gravitational redshift(two aspects of the same effect). If a clock is at rest at the radial coordinater, then the propertimedτit records (Eq. 17) is related to the timedtthat elapses at an inﬁnite distance bydτ=dsc=dt/radicalbigg1−2GMrc2,(24)which is, of course, just Eq. ( 13). Sincedτ < dt, this shows that time passes more slowlycloser to the planet.The Orbit of a SatelliteHaving ﬁnally learned how a spherical object of any mass acts on spacetime, telling it howto curve, we are now ready to calculate how curved spacetime acts on a particle, telling ithow to move. The rest of this section will be devoted to using general relativity to ﬁnd themotion of a satellite about the planet. All we need is the rule that it will follow the straightestpossible worldline, the worldline with anextremalinterval.11At this point, you may be fondly recalling the simplicity of Newtonian gravity.Accordingto Newton, the motion of a satellite in a circular orbit around Earth is found by simplyequating the centripetal and gravitational accelerations. That is,v2r=GMr2,11It is assumed that the satellite’s massmis small enough that its effect on the surrounding spacetime is negligible.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 703>>>

wherevis the orbital speed. This immediately results inv=/radicalbiggGMr.Einstein and Newton must agree in the limiting case of weak gravity, so this result mustbe concealed within the Schwarzschild metric for curved spacetime.12It can be found byusing the Schwarzschild metric to ﬁnd the straightest possible worldline for the satellite’scircular orbit.Powerful tools are available for calculating the worldline with the maximum intervalbetween two ﬁxed events. If we employed such an approach, the orbit of the satellitewould emerge along with the laws of the conservation of energy, momentum, and angularmomentum because they are built into Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. However, we will usea simpler strategy and assume from the beginning that the satellite travels above Earth’sequator (θ=90◦) in a circular orbit with a speciﬁed angular speedω=v/r. Inserting thesechoices, along withdr=0,dθ=0, anddφ=ωdt, into the Schwarzschild metric gives(ds)2=/bracketleftbigg/parenleftBigc/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBig2−r2ω2/bracketrightbiggdt2=/parenleftbiggc2−2GMr−r2ω2/parenrightbiggdt2.Integrating, the spacetime interval for one orbit is just/Delta1s=/integraldisplay2π/ω0/radicalbiggc2−2GMr−r2ω2dt.(25)When ﬁnding the value ofrfor which the interval is an extremum, we must be certainthat the endpoints of the satellite’s worldline remain ﬁxed. That is, the satellite’s orbit mustalways begin and end at the same position,r0, for all of the worldlines. To accommodateorbits of different radii, consider the “orbit” shown in Fig. 17. We start the satellite atr0and then move it (at nearly the speed of light) radially outward to the radiusrof its actualorbit. At the end of the orbit, the satellite returns just as rapidly to its starting point atr0.Fortunately, the quick radial excursions at the beginning and the end of the orbit can bemade with negligible contribution to the integral for the spacetime interval. (At almost thespeed of light, the contribution is nearly null.) The net effect is a purely circular motion, soEq. ( 25) can be used to evaluate the interval.In Eq. ( 25), the limits of integration are constant and the only variable isr. The valueof the radial coordinaterfor the orbit actually followed by the satellite must be the one forwhich/Delta1sis an extremum. This value may be found by taking the derivative of/Delta1swithrespect torand setting it equal to zero:ddr(/Delta1s)=ddr/parenleftBigg/integraldisplay2π/ω0/radicalbiggc2−2GMr−r2ω2dt/parenrightBigg=0.12To avoid succumbing to Newtonian nostalgia, you should remember that when Einstein and Newton disagree,nature sides with Einstein.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 704>>>

rr0
FIGURE 17The “orbit” of a satellite, showing the radial motions used to keep the endpoints ofthe satellite’s worldline ﬁxed. The net effect is a circular orbit.The derivative may be taken inside the integral to obtainddr/radicalbiggc2−2GMr−r2ω2=0,implying2GMr2−2rω2=0.Thus, as promised,v=rω=/radicalbiggGMr(26)is the coordinate speed of the satellite for a circular orbit. [By coordinate speed, we simplymean thatv=rd φ / d tis speed of the satellite measured in the(r, θ, φ, t)coordinate systemused by a distant observer.] Figure 18 illustrates how this straightest possible worldlinethrough curved spacetime is projected onto the orbital plane, resulting in the satellite’scircular orbit around Earth. In fact, this result is valid even for the very large spacetimecurvature encountered around a black hole.3BLACK HOLESIn 1783 John Michell (1724–1793), an English clergyman and amateur astronomer, con-sidered the implications of Newton’s corpuscular theory of light. If light were indeed astream of particles, then it should be inﬂuenced by gravity. In particular, he conjecturedthat the gravity of a star 500 times larger than the Sun, but with the Sun’s average density,would be sufﬁciently strong that even light could not escape from it.he escape velocity of Michell’s star would be the speed of light. NaivelyTGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 705>>>

xyt
Circular orbitStraightest possiblesatellite worldline(maximum Ds)Earthworldline
FIGURE 18The straightest possible worldline through curved spacetime and its projection ontothe orbital plane of the satellite.setting the Newtonian formula for the escape velocity equal tocshows thatR=2GM/c2is the radius of a star whose escape velocity equals the speed of light. In terms of the massof the Sun,R=2.95(M/M⊙)km. Even if this Newtonian derivation were correct, theresulting radius of such a star seemed unrealistically small, and so it held little interest forastronomers until the middle of the twentieth century.In 1939 American physicists J. Robert Oppenheimer and Hartland Snyder (1913–1962)be more massive than about 3 M⊙.13Oppenheimer and Snyder pursued the question of thefate of a degenerate star that might exceed this limit and surrender completely to the forceof gravity.The Schwarzschild RadiusFor the simplest case of a nonrotating star, the answer lies in the Schwarzschild metric,Eq. (22):(ds)2=/parenleftBigcdt/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBig2−/parenleftBiggdr/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBigg2−(r dθ)2−(rsinθd φ )2.13he upper mass limit of a neutron star is between 2.2M⊙and 2.9M⊙depending on theamount of rotation.We will adopt an approximate value of 3 M⊙for the purposesof this discussion.TGeneral Relativity and Black Holes
described the ultimate gravitational collapse of a massive star that had exhausted its sources of nuclear fusion. It was earlier that year that Oppenheimer and Volkoff had calculated the ﬁrst models of neutron stars. We have seen that a neutron star cannot


<<<PAGE 706>>>

When the radial coordinate of the star’s surface has collapsed toRS=2GM/c2,(27)called theSchwarzschild radius, the square roots in the metric go to zero. The resultingbehavior of space and time atr=RSis remarkable. For example, according to Eq. ( 17),the proper time measured by a clock at the Schwarzschild radius isdτ=0. Time has slowedto a complete stop, as measured from a vantage point that is at rest a great distance away.14From this viewpoint,nothing ever happens at the Schwarzschild radius!This behavior is quite curious; does it imply that even light is frozen in time? The speedof light measured by an observer suspended above the collapsed star must always bec.But from far away, we can determine that light is delayed as it moves through curvedspacetime. (Recall the time delay of radio signals from the Viking lander on Mars describedin Section 1.) The apparent speed of light, the rate at which the spatial coordinates ofa photon change, is called thecoordinate speed of light. Starting with the Schwarzschildmetric withds=0 for light,0=/parenleftBigcdt/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBig2−/parenleftBiggdr/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2/parenrightBigg2−(r dθ)2−(rsinθd φ )2,we can calculate the coordinate speed of a vertically traveling photon. Insertingdθ=dφ=0 shows that, in general, the coordinate speed of light in the radial direction isdrdt=c/parenleftbigg1−2GMrc2/parenrightbigg=c/parenleftbigg1−RSr/parenrightbigg.(28)Whenr≫RS,dr/dt≃c, as expected in ﬂat spacetime. However, atr=RS,dr/dt=0(see Fig. 19). Light is indeed frozen in time at the Schwarzschild radius. The sphericalsurface atr=RSacts as a barrier and prevents our receiving any information from within.For this reason, a star that has collapsed down within the Schwarzschild radius is called ablack hole.15It is enclosed by theevent horizon, the spherical surface atr=RS. Notethat the event horizon is a mathematical surface and need not coincide with any physicalsurface.Although the interior of a black hole, inside the event horizon, is a region that is foreverhidden from us on the outside, its properties may still be calculated. A nonrotating blackhole has a particularly simple structure. At the center is thesingularity, a point of zerovolume and inﬁnite density where all of the black hole’s mass is located. Spacetime isinﬁnitely curved at the singularity.16Cloaking the central singularity is the event horizon,14You should recall that the spacetime coordinates(r, θ, φ, t)in the Schwarzschild metric were established foruse by an observer at rest atr≃∞.15The termblack holeis the 1968 invention of the American theoretical physicist John A. Wheeler.16The black hole’s singularity is a real physical entity. It is not a mathematical artifact, as is themathematicalsin-gularity exhibited by the Schwarzschild metric at the event horizon (where 1//radicalbig1−2GM/rc2→∞). Choosinganother coordinate system would remove the divergence at the event horizon, so that divergence has no physicalsigniﬁcance.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 707>>>

123456789 1 00.00.20.40.60.81.0Coordinate speed of lightCoordinate speed v/c
r/RSCoordinate speed of frameseen from infinityCoordinate speed of frameseen from frame S
FIGURE 19Coordinate speed of light, and coordinate speeds of a freely falling frameSseenby an observer at rest at inﬁnity and by an observer in the frameS. The radial coordinates are in termsofRSfor a 10 M⊙black hole having a Schwarzschild radius of≈30 km.so the singularity can never be observed. In fact, there is a hypothesis dubbed the “Law ofCosmic Censorship” that forbids anaked singularityfrom appearing unclothed (without anassociated event horizon).A Trip into a Black HoleAn object as bizarre as a black hole deserves closer scrutiny. Imagine an attempt to investi-gate the black hole by starting at a safe distance and reﬂecting a radio wave from an objectat the event horizon. How much time will it take for a radio photon (or any photon) to reachthe event horizon from a radial coordinater≫RSand then return? Since the round trip issymmetric, it is necessary only to ﬁnd the time for either the journey in or out and then dou-ble the answer. It is easiest to integrate the coordinate speed of light in the radial direction,Eq. (28), between two arbitrary values ofr1andr2to obtain the general answer,/Delta1t=/integraldisplayr2r1drdr/dt=/integraldisplayr2r1drc(1−RS/r)=r2−r1c+RScln/parenleftbiggr2−RSr1−RS/parenrightbigg,assuming thatr1<r2. Insertingr1=RSfor the photon’s original position, we ﬁnd that/Delta1t=∞. Now, since the trip is symmetric, the same result applies if the photon started atRS. According to the distant observer, the radio photon willneverreach the event horizon.Instead, according to gravitational time dilation, the photon’s coordinate velocity will slowdown until it ﬁnally stops at the event horizon in the inﬁnite future. In fact, any object fallingtoward the event horizon will suffer the same fate. Seen from the outside, even the surfaceof the star that collapsed to form the event horizon would be frozen, and so a black hole isin this sense afrozen star.Abrave (andindestructible) astronomer decides to test this remarkable conclusion. Start-ing from rest at a great distance, she volunteers to fall freely toward a 10 M⊙black holeGeneral Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 708>>>

(RS≃30 km). We remain behind to watch her local inertial frameSas it falls with coordi-nate speeddr/dtall the way to the event horizon. She gradually accelerates as she monitorsher watch and shines a monochromatic ﬂashlight back in our direction once every second.As her fall progresses, the light signals arrive farther and farther apart for several reasons:Subsequent signals must travel a longer distance as she accelerates, and her proper timeτis running more slowly than our coordinate timetdue to her location (gravitational timedilation) and her motion (special relativity time dilation). Furthermore, the coordinate speedof light becomes slower as she approaches the black hole, so the signals travel back to usmore slowly. The frequency of the light waves we receive is also increasingly redshifted.This is caused by both her acceleration away from us and the gravitational redshift. Thelight becomes dimmer as well, as the rate at which her ﬂashlight emits photons decreases(seen from our vantage point) and the energy per photon (hc/λ) also declines. Then whenshe is about 2RSfrom the event horizon, the time between her signals begins to increasewithout limit as the strength of the signals decreases. The light is redshifted and dimmedinto invisibility as time dilation brings her coordinate speed to zero (see Figs. 19 and20).Sheisfrozenintime,heldforeternitylikeaﬂycaughtinamber.Oursuccessorscould watch for millennia while stars were born, evolved, and died without receiving asingle photon from her.How does all of this appear to the brave astronomer, freely falling toward the blackhole? Because gravity has been abolished in her local inertial frame, initially she does notnotice her approach to the black hole. She monitors her watch (which displays her propertime,τ), and she turns on her ﬂashlight once per second. However, as she draws closer,she begins to feel as though she is being stretched in the radial direction and compressedin the perpendicular directions; see Fig. 21. The gravitational pull on her feet (nearerthe black hole) is stronger than on her head, and the variation in the direction of gravity
–2–1012012345678910
Time (ms)r/RSr(t)r(t)
FIGURE 20Coordinater(t)of a freely falling frameSaccording to an observer at rest at inﬁnity,andr(τ)according to an observer in the frameS. The radial coordinates are in terms ofRSfor a10 M⊙black hole.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 709>>>

FIGURE 21Tidal forces near a black hole.from side to side produces a compression that is even more severe. These differentialtidalforcesincrease in strength as she falls. In other words, the size of her local inertial frame(where gravity has been abolished) becomes increasing smaller as the spatial variation in thegravitational acceleration vector,g, increases. Were she not indestructible, our astronomerwould be torn apart by the tidal force while still several hundred kilometers from the blackhole.In just two milliseconds (proper time), she falls the ﬁnal few hundred kilometers to theevent horizon and crosses it. Her proper time continues normally, and she encounters nofrozen stellar surface since it has fallen through long ago.1However, once inside the eventhorizon, her fate is sealed. It is impossible for any particle to be at rest whenr<RS,a scan be seen from the Schwarzschild metric (Eq. 22). Usingdr=dθ=dφ=0 for anobject at rest, the interval is given by(ds)2=(c dt)2/parenleftbigg1−RSr/parenrightbigg<0whenr<RS. This is aspacelikeinterval, which is not permitted for particles. Thereforeit is impossible to remain at rest wherer<RS. Within the event horizon of a nonrotatingblack hole, all worldlines converge at the singularity. Even photons are pulled in toward thecenter. This means that the astronomer never has an opportunity to glimpse the singularitybecause no photons can reach her from there. She can, however, see the light that falls inbehind her from events in the outside universe, but she does not see the entire history of1The presence or absence of a frozen stellar surface at the event horizon makes no real difference; the Schwarz-schild metric speciﬁes the same spacetime curvature outside.7
7General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 710>>>

the universe as it unfolds. Although the elapsed coordinate time in the outside world doesbecome inﬁnite, the light from all of these events does not have time to reach the astronomer.Instead, these events occur in her “elsewhere.” Just 6.6×10−5s of proper time after passingthe event horizon, she is inexorably drawn to the singularity.1Mass Ranges of Black HolesBlack holes appear to exist with a range of masses.Stellar-mass black holes, with masses inthe range of 3 to 15 M⊙or so, may form directly or indirectly as a consequence of the core-the degeneracy pressure to support it, again resulting in a black hole.Intermediate-mass black holes(IMBHs) may exist that range in mass from roughly100 M⊙to in excess of 1000 M⊙(or perhaps even greater than 104M⊙). Evidence forthem exists in the detection of sources known asultraluminous X-ray sources(ULXs)that have been discovered by satellites such as Chandra and XMM-Newton. It is not entirelyclear how these objects might form, although the correlation of IMBHs with the cores ofglobular clusters and low-mass galaxies suggests that they may develop in these densestellar environments either by the mergers of stars to form a supermassive star that thencore-collapses, or by the merger of stellar-mass black holes.Supermassive black holes(SMBH) are known to exist at the centers of many (andprobably most) galaxies. These enormous black holes range in mass from 105M⊙to 109M⊙(our own Milky Way Galaxy has a central black hole of massM=3.7±0.2×106M⊙).How these behemoths formed remains an open question. One popular suggestion is thatthey formed from collisions between galaxies; another is that they formed as an extensionof the formation process of IMBHs. Whatever the process, SMBHs appear to be closelylinked with some bulk properties of galaxies, implying an important connection betweengalaxy formation and the formation of SMBHs.Black holes may have also been manufactured in the earliest instants of the universe.Presumably, theseprimordial black holeswould have been formed with a wide range ofmasses, from 10−8kg to 105M⊙. The only criterion for a black hole is that its entire massmust lie within the Schwarzschild radius, so the Schwarzschild metric is valid at the eventhorizon.Example 3.1.If Earth could somehow (miraculously) be compressed sufﬁciently tobecome a black hole, its radius would only beRS=2GM⊕/c2=0.009 m. Although aprimordial black hole could be this size, it is almost impossible to imagine packing Earth’sentire mass into so small a ball.18A thorough description of the ﬁnal view of the falling astronomer may be found in Rothman et al. (1985).You are reminded that the Schwarzschild metric is valid only outside matter. It does not describe the spacetimeinside Earth.8
1919General Relativity and Black Holes
collapse of a sufﬁciently massive supergiant star. The direct collapse of the core to a black hole may be responsible for the production of collapsar, whereas a delayed collapse of a rapidly rotating neutron star may result in a supranova. It is also pos-sible that a neutron star in a close binary system may gravitationally strip enough mass from its companion that the neutron star’s self-gravity exceeds the ability of


<<<PAGE 711>>>

Black Holes Have No Hair!Whatever the formation processes of black holes, they are certain to be very complicated. Forexample, the core-collapse of a star is almost certainly not symmetrical. Detailed calcula-tions have demonstrated, however, that any irregularities are radiated away by gravitationalAnother complication is the fact that all stars rotate, and therefore so will the resultingblack hole. Remarkably, however, any black hole can be completely described by just threenumbers: its mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.2Black holes have no otherattributes or adornments, a condition commonly expressed by saying that “a black hole hasno hair.”2There is a ﬁrm upper limit for a rotating black hole’s angular momentum given byLmax=GM2c.(29)If the angular momentum of a rotating black hole were to exceed this limit, there would beno event horizon and a naked singularity would appear, in violation of the Law of CosmicCensorship.Example 3.2.The maximum angular momentum for a solar-mass black hole isLmax=GM2⊙c=8.81×1041kg m2s−1.By comparison, the angular momentum of the Sun (assuming uniform rotation) is 1.63×1041kg m2s−1, about 18% ofLmax. We should expect that many stars will have angularmomenta that are comparable toLmax, and so vigorous (if not maximal) rotation ought tobe common for stellar-mass black holes.Spacetime Frame DraggingThe structure of a maximally rotating black hole is shown in Fig. 22.2The rotationhas distorted the central singularity from a point into a ﬂat ring, and the event horizon hasassumed the shape of an ellipsoid. The ﬁgure also shows additional features caused by therotation. As a massive object spins, it induces a rotation in the surrounding spacetime, aphenomenon known asframe dragging. To gain some insight into this effect, recall thebehavior of a pendulum swinging at the north pole of Earth. As Earth rotates, the planeof the pendulum’s swing remains ﬁxed with respect to the distant stars. The stars deﬁne20If magnetic monopoles exist, the “magnetic charge” would also be required for a complete speciﬁcation. How-ever, both magnetic and electric charge can be safely ignored because stars should be very nearly neutral.21The “no hair” theorem actually applies only to the universe outside the event horizon. Inside, the spacetimegeometry is complicated by the mass distribution of the collapsed star.2TheKerr metricfor a rotating black hole was derived from Einstein’s ﬁeld equations by a New Zealand mathe-matician, Roy Kerr, in 1963.01
2
2General Relativity and Black Holeswaves. As a result, once the surface of the collapsing star reaches the event horizon, the exterior spacetime horizon is spherically symmetric and described by the Schwarzschild metric.


<<<PAGE 712>>>

Static limitRing singularityErgosphereEvent horizon
FIGURE 22The structure of a maximally rotating black hole, with the ring singularity seenedge-on. The location of the event horizon at the equator isr=12RS=GM/c2.a nonrotating frame of reference for the universe, and it is relative to this frame that thependulum’s swing remains planar. However, the rotating spacetime close to a massivespinning object produces a local deviation from the nonrotating frame that describes theuniverse at large. Near a rotating black hole, frame dragging is so severe that there isa nonspherical region outside the event horizon called theergospherewhere any particlemustmove in the same direction that the black hole rotates. Spacetime within the ergosphereis rotating so rapidly that a particle would have to travel faster than the speed of light toremain at the same angular coordinate (e.g., at the same value ofφin the coordinate systemused by a distant observer). The outer boundary of the ergosphere is called thestatic limit,so named because once beyond this boundary, a particle can remain at the same coordinateas the effect of frame dragging diminishes.Even Earth’s rotation produces very weak frame dragging. Detecting the effect of framedragging was the mission of the Stanford Gravity Probe B experiment. The polar-orbitspacecraft was launched in April 2004 and ended data collection in October 2005 when thecryogenic liquid helium was used up. The experiment employed four superconducting gyro-scopes made of precisely shaped spheres of fused quartz 3.8 cm in diameter. The gyroscopeswere so nearly freely rotating that they formed an almost perfect spacetime reference frame.Although the predicted precession rate of the gyroscopes was only 0.042′′yr−1, the effectof frame dragging is cumulative. It is anticipated that frame dragging will be measurableby comparing the changes that occurred in the gyroscopes’ different initial orientations.2At this point, you should be warned that the previous descriptions of a black hole’sstructure inside the event horizon, such as Fig. 22, are based on vacuum solutions toEinstein’s ﬁeld equations. These solutions were obtained by ignoring the effects of the massof the collapsing star, so the vacuum solutions do not describe the interior of a real black hole.Furthermore, the present laws of physics, including general relativity, break down under2At the time the text was written, the year-long, painstaking process of data analysis was under way. Results ofthe experiment are expected to be announced in late 2006 (for updates, visit the Stanford Gravity Probe B websiteathttp://einstein.stanford.edu/).3
3General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 713>>>

the extreme conditions found very near the center. The details of the singularity cannot befully described until a theory of quantum gravity is found. The presence of a singularityseems assured, however. In 1965 an English mathematician, Roger Penrose, proved thateverycomplete gravitational collapse must form a singularity.Tunnels in SpacetimeThe possibility of using a black hole as a tunnel connecting one location in spacetime withanother (perhaps in a different universe) has inspired both physicists and science ﬁctionwriters. Most conjectures of spacetime tunnels are based on vacuum solutions to Einstein’sﬁeld equations and as such don’t apply to the interiors of real black holes. Still, they havebecome part of the popular culture, and we will consider them brieﬂy here. Figure 23depicts a spacetime tunnel called aSchwarzschild throat(also known as anEinstein–Rosenbridge), which uses the Schwarzschild geometry of a nonrotating black hole to connect tworegions of spacetime. The width of the throat is a minimum at the event horizon, and the“mouths” may be interpreted as opening onto two different locations in spacetime. It istempting to imagine this as a tunnel, and writers of speculative ﬁction have dreamed ofwhite holespouring out mass or serving as passageways for starships. However, it appearsthat any attempt to send a tiny amount of matter or energy (even a stray photon) throughthe throat would cause it to collapse. For a real nonrotating black hole, all worldlines endat the inescapable singularity, where spacetime is inﬁnitely curved. There is simply no wayto bypass the singularity.The story is somewhat different for a rotating black hole. Although spacetime is stillinﬁnitely curved at the ring singularity, all worldlines need not converge there. In fact, itis difﬁcult for an infalling object to hit the singularity in a rotating black hole. Theoristshave calculated worldlines for vacuum solutions that miss the singularity and emerge in thespacetime of another universe. But just as for nonrotating black holes, any attempt to pass
FIGURE 23Depiction of a Schwarzschild throat connecting two different regions of spacetime.Any attempted passage of matter or energy through the throat would cause it to collapse.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 714>>>

the smallest amount of matter or energy along such a route would cause the passageway tocollapse, thereby pinching it off. In summary, it seems extremely unlikely that black holescan provide a stable passageway for any matter or energy, even for idealized cases. Formore realistic situations, any voyager attempting a trip through a black hole would end upbeing torn apart by the singularity.Another possibility is that of awormhole, a hypothetical tunnel between two points inspacetime separated by an arbitrarily great distance.24We will brieﬂy consider nonrotating,spherically symmetric wormholes. They are described bynonvacuumsolutions to Einstein’sﬁeld equation. In other words, a wormhole must be threaded by some sort ofexotic materialwhose tension prevents the collapse of the wormhole. There is no known mechanism thatwould allow a wormhole to arise naturally; it would have to be constructed by an incrediblyadvanced civilization. However, the theoretical possibilities alone are fascinating. Thesesolutions to Einstein’s ﬁeld equations have no event horizon (permitting two-way tripsthrough the wormhole) and involve survivable tidal forces. Journey times from one endthrough to the other can be less than one year (traveler’s proper time), although the ends ofthe wormhole may be separated by interstellar or intergalactic distances.The catch, of course, is the problematic existence of the exotic material needed to stabilizethe wormhole. The unusual nature of the exotic material becomes apparent if we considertwo light rays that converge on the wormhole and enter it, only to diverge when theyexit the other end. This implies that the exotic material must be capable of gravitationallydefocusing light, an “antigravity” effect involving the gravitational repulsion of the light bythe material through which the rays pass. Exotic material meeting this requirement wouldhave a negative energy density (ρc2<0), at least as experienced by the light rays.Althougha negative energy density arises in certain quantum situations, it may or may not be allowedphysically on macroscopic scales. We will leave wormholes as a fascinating possibility andabandon the discussion at this point, recalling Einstein’s remark that “all our thinking is ofthe nature of a free play with concepts.”25Stellar-Mass Black Hole CandidatesYou may feel as though much of this section was borrowed from the pages of a science ﬁctionnovel. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof, and proof of the mere existence ofblack holes has been difﬁcult to obtain. The problem lies in detecting an object only a fewtens of kilometers across that emits no radiation directly. The best hope of astronomers hasbeen to ﬁnd a black hole in a close binary system. If the black hole in such a system is ableto pull gas from the envelope of the normal companion star, the angular momentum of theirorbital motion would cause a disk of gas to form around the black hole (see Fig. 24).As the gas spirals down toward the event horizon, it is compressed and heated to millionsof kelvins and emits X-rays. Only the gravity of a neutron star or a black hole can produceX-rays in a close binary system, and in fact the compact object in most X-ray binaries is24The termwormholerecalls the holes eaten in some ancient map books by worms, providing a symbolic shortcutbetween the distant locations portrayed on the maps.2You are referred to Morris and Thorne (1988) and Thorne (1994) for more details and further speculationsconcerning wormholes.5General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 715>>>

Accretion disk
Black holeCompanion star
FIGURE 24Gas pulled from a companion star forms an X-ray emitting disk around a blackhole.believed to be a neutron star. However, if an X-ray binary can be found in which the mass ofthe compact object exceeds 3 M⊙, then a strong case can be made that the compact objectis a black hole.The ﬁrst black hole to be tentatively identiﬁed in this way is Cygnus X-1, near the brightstarηCygni in the middle of the swan’s neck. Another promising candidate is LMC X-3,an X-ray binary in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Yet another compelling case involves theX-ray binary A0620−00, also known as V616 Mon.2The orbital velocities along the lineof sight ofbothcomponents of A0620−00 have been determined using Doppler-shiftedspectral lines. A simple application of Kepler’s laws shows that the mass of the compactobject must beat least3.82±0.24 M⊙, well above the 3 M⊙upper limit for a neutron star.a companion star of type K0 IV with a radial velocity amplitude of 211±4k ms−1and anorbital period of 6.473±0.001 d. The best estimate of the mass of the unseen companionto the K0 IV star is 12±2M⊙. As more evidence accumulates, it seems that astronomershave ﬁnally found the extraordinary proof required for the existence of a black hole.Hawking RadiationThe black holes of classical general relativity last forever. A very general result derivedby Stephen Hawking states that the surface area of a black hole’s event horizon can neverdecrease. If a black hole coalesces with any other object, the result is an even larger black2A0620−00 (V616 Mon) is on the border of the constellations Monoceros and Orion, about one-third of the wayalong a line from Betelgeuse to Sirius.6
6General Relativity and Black Holes
However, perhaps the strongest candidate is V404 Cygni. Originally determined to be a recurrent nova, V404 Cyg underwent an X-ray outburst in 1989 that was detect-ed by the Ginga satellite. Examination with ground-based optical telescopes revealed


<<<PAGE 716>>>

hole. In 1974, however, Hawking discovered a loophole in this law when he combinedquantum mechanics with the theory of black holes and found that black holes can slowlyevaporate. The key to this process is pair production, the formation of a particle–antiparticlepair just outside the event horizon of a black hole. Ordinarily the particles quickly recombineand disappear, but if one of the particles falls into the event horizon while its partner escapes,as shown in Fig. 25, this disappearing act may be thwarted. The black hole’s gravitationalenergy was used to produce the two particles, and so the escaping particle has carried awaysome of the black hole’s mass. The net effect as seen by an observer at a great distance isthe emission of particles by the black hole, known asHawking radiation, accompanied bya reduction in the black hole’s mass.The rate at which energy is carried away by particles in this manner is inversely pro-portional to the square of the black hole’s mass, or 1/M2. For stellar-mass black holes, theemitted particles are photons and the rate of emission is minuscule. As the black hole’s massdeclines, however, the rate of emission increases. The ﬁnal stage of a black hole’s evapora-tion proceeds extremely rapidly, releasing a burst of all types of elementary particles. Thistremendous explosion probably leaves behind only an empty region of ﬂat spacetime.The lifetime of a primordial black hole prior to its evaporation,tevap, is quite long,tevap=2560π2/parenleftbigg2GMc2/parenrightbigg2/parenleftbiggMh/parenrightbigg(30)≈2×1067/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbigg3yr.Since the age of the universe is 13.7 billion years, this process is of no consequence forblack holes formed by a collapsing star. However, a primordial black hole with a mass of
tEventhorizonworldlinePairproductionxyFIGURE 25Spacetime diagram showing particle–antiparticle pairs created near the event hori-zon of a black hole.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 717>>>

roughly 1.7×1011kg would evaporate in about 13 billion years. Thus primordial blackholes with this mass should be in the ﬁnal, explosive stage of evaporation right now andcould possibly be detected. The ﬁnal burst of Hawking radiation is thought to release high-energy (≈100 MeV) gamma rays at a rate of 1013W, together with electrons, positrons,and many other particles. The subsequent decay of these particles should produce additionalgamma rays that would be observable by Earth-orbiting satellites. To date, measurementsof the cosmic gamma-ray background at this energy have not detected anything that can beidentiﬁed with the demise of a nearby primordial black hole. Although there is as yet nopositive evidence that primordial black holes exist, this negative result is still important.It implies that on average there cannot be more than 200 primordial black holes with thismass in every cubic light-year of space.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBegelman, Mitchell, and Rees, Martin,Gravity’s Fatal Attraction: Black Holes in the Uni-verse, Scientiﬁc American Library, New York, 1996.Charles, Philip A., and Wagner, R. Mark, “Black Holes in Binary Stars: Weighing theEvidence,”Sky and Telescope, May 1996.Davies, Paul, “Wormholes and Time Machines,”Sky and Telescope, January 1992.Ferguson, Kitty,Prisons of Light—Black Holes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,1996.Ford, Lawrence H., and Roman, Thomas A., “Negative Energy, Worm Holes, and WarpDrive,”Scientiﬁc American, January, 2000.Hawking, Stephen W.,A Brief History of Time, Updated and Expanded Tenth AnniversaryEdition, Bantam Books, New York, 1998.Hawking, Stephen W., “The Quantum Mechanics of Black Holes,”Scientiﬁc American,January 1977.Lasota, Jean-Pierre, “Unmasking Black Holes,”Scientiﬁc American, May 1999.Luminet, Jean-Pierre,Black Holes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992.Morris, Michael S., and Thorne, Kip S., “Wormholes in Spacetime and Their Use forInterstellar Travel: A Tool for Teaching General Relativity,”American Journal of Phy-sics,56, 395, 1988.Rothman, Tony, et al.,Frontiers of Modern Physics, Dover Publications, New York, 1985.Thorne, Kip S.,Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy, W. W. Nortonand Co., New York, 1994.Wheeler, John A.,A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime, Scientiﬁc American Library, NewYork, 1990.Will, Clifford,Was Einstein Right?Basic Books, New York, 1986.TechnicalBekenstein, Jacob D., “Black Hole Thermodynamics,”Physics Today, January 1980.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 718>>>

Berry, Michael,Principles of Cosmology and Gravitation, Institute of Physics Publishing,Bristol, 1989.Casares, J., Charles, P. A., and Naylor, T., “A 6.5-day Periodicity in the Recurrent NovaV404 Cygni Implying the Presence of a Black Hole,”Nature,335, 614, 1992.Charles, PhilipA., “Black-Hole Candidates in X-Ray Binaries,”Encyclopedia of Astronomyand Astrophysics, P. Murdin (ed.), Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 2000.Fré, P., Gorini, V., Magli, G., and Moschella, U. (eds.),Classical and Quantum Black Holes,Institute of Physics Publishing, 1999.Hartle, James B.,Gravity:An Introduction to Einstein’s General Relativity,Addison-Wesley,San Francisco, 2003.Misner, Charles W., Thorne, Kip S., and Wheeler, John A.,Gravitation, W. H. Freeman andCo., San Francisco, 1973.Rufﬁni, Remo, and Wheeler, JohnA., “Introducing the Black Hole,”Physics Today, January1991.Shapiro, Stuart L., and Teukolsky, Saul A.,Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars:The Physics of Compact Objects, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983.Taylor, Edwin F., and Wheeler, John A.,Exploring Black Holes: Introduction to GeneralRelativity, Addison Wesley Longman, San Francisco, 2000.Wald, Robert M. (ed.),Black Holes and Relativistic Stars, University of Chicago Press,Chicago, 1998.General Relativity and Black Holes


<<<PAGE 719>>>



<<<PAGE 720>>>

PROBLEM SET
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 byPearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.1In the rubber sheet analogy of Section 1a keeneye would notice that thedepresses the sheet slightly, and so the bowling ball constantly tiltsslightlytoward the tennisball as they orbit each other. Qualitatively comparethiswith themotionof two stars in a binaryorbit.2Show that Eq. (6) for the gravitational redshift r emains valid even if the light travels upwardat an angleθmeasured from the vertical as long ashis taken to be thevertical distancetraveledby the light pulse. /Delta1νν0=−vc=−ghc2.3A photon near the surface of Earth travels a horizontal distance of 1 km. How far does thephoton “fall” in this time?4Leadville, Colorado, is at an altitude of 3.1 km above sea level. If a person there lives for 75years (as measured by an observer at a great distance from Earth), how much longer wouldgravitational time dilation have allowed that person to live if he or she had moved at birth fromLeadville to a city at sea level?5 (a)Estimate the radius of curvature of a horizontally traveling photon at the surface of a1.4 M⊙neutron star, and compare the result with the 10-km radius of the star. Can generalrelativity be neglected when studying neutron stars?(b)If one hour passes at the surface of the neutron star, how much time passes at a greatdistance? Compare the times obtained from the exact and approximate expressions,Eqs. (13) and (14), respectively./Delta1t0/Delta1t∞=ν∞ν0=/parenleftbigg1−2GMr0c2/parenrightbigg1/2./Delta1t0/Delta1t∞≃1−GMr0c2.6Imagine a series of rectangular local inertial reference frames suspended by cables in a linenear the Sun’s surface, as shown in Fig. 26. The frames are carefully lined up so that the topsand sides of neighboring frames are parallel, and the tops of the frames lie along thephoton travels unhindered through the frames. As the photon enters each frame, the frame isreleased from rest and falls freely toward the center of the Sun.General Relativityand Black Holes
17 ofGeneral Relativity and Black Holes  ““”(6)
(13)(14)z-axis. A(a)Show that as it passes through the frame located at angleα(shown in the ﬁgure), theangular deﬂection of the photon’s path isdφ=g0cos3αc2dz,

<<<PAGE 721>>>

(b)Integrate the result you found in part (a) fromα=−π/2 to+π/2 and so ﬁnd the totalangular deﬂection of the photon as it passes through the curved spacetime near the Sun.(c)Your answer (which is also the answer obtained by Einstein in 1911 before he arrived athis ﬁeld equations) is only half the correct value of 1.75′′. Can youqualitativelyaccountfor the missing factor of two?
7Assume that you are at the origin of a laboratory reference system at timet=0 when you startyour clock (eventA). Determine whether the following events are within the future light coneof eventA, within the past light cone of eventA, or elsewhere.(a)A ﬂashbulb goes off 7 m away at timet=0.(b)A ﬂashbulb goes off 7 m away at timet=2 s.(c)A ﬂashbulb goes off 70 km away at timet=2 s.(d)A ﬂashbulb goes off 700,000 km away at timet=2 s.(e)A supernova explodes 180,000 ly away at timet=−5.7×1012s.(f)A supernova explodes 180,000 ly away at timet=5.7×1012s.(g)A supernova explodes 180,000 ly away at timet=−5.6×1012s.(h)A supernova explodes 180,000 ly away at timet=5.6×1012s.For items (e) and (g), could an observer in another reference frame moving relative to yoursmeasure that the supernova explodedaftereventA? For items (f) and (h), could an observerin another frame measure that the supernova explodedbeforeeventA?8τCeti is the closest single star that is similar to the Sun. At timet=0, Alice leaves Earth inher starship and travels at a speed of 0.95ctoτCeti, 11.7 ly away as measured by astronomerson Earth. Her twin brother, Bob, remains at home, atx=0.(a)According to Bob, what is the interval betweenAlice’s leaving Earth and arriving atτCeti?(b)According to Alice, what is the interval between her leaving Earth and arriving atτCeti?(c)Upon arriving atτCeti, Alice immediately turns around and returns to Earth at a speedof 0.95c. (Assume that the actual turnaround takes negligible time.) What was the propertime for Alice during her round trip toτCeti?(d)When she and Bob meet on her return to Earth, how much younger will Alice be than herbrother?General Relativity and Black Holes: Problem Set
/H9251Oz
FIGURE 26Local inertial frames for measuring the deﬂection of light near the Sun.wheredzis the width of the reference frame andg0is the Newtonian gravitational accel-eration at the point of closest approach,O. The angular deﬂection is small, so assume thatthe photon is initially traveling in thez-direction as it enters the frame. (Hint:The widthof the frame in thez-direction isdz, so the time for the photon to cross the frame can betaken to bedz/c.)


<<<PAGE 722>>>

(b)Both observers use Wien’s law,, to determine the blackbody’stemperature .Show thatT∞=T/radicalbigg1−2GMRc2.λmaxT=0.002897755 m K.(c)Both observers use the Stefan–Boltzmann law,, to determine thespherical blackbody. Show thatR∞=R/radicalbig1−2GM/Rc2.L=4πR2σT4e.Thus, using the Stefan–Boltzmann law without including the effects of general relativitywill lead to anoverestimateof the size of a compact blackbody.10In 1792 the French mathematician Simon-Pierre de Laplace (1749–1827) wrote that a hypo-thetical star, “of the same density as Earth, and whose diameter would be two hundred andﬁfty times larger than the Sun, would not, in consequence of its attraction, allow any of its raysto arrive at us.” Use Newtonian mechanics to calculate the escape velocity of Laplace’s star.11Qualitatively describe the effects on the orbits of the planets if the Sun were suddenly tobecome a black hole.12Consider four black holes with masses of 1012kg, 10 M⊙, 105M⊙, and 109M⊙.(a)Calculate the Schwarzschild radius for each.(b)Calculate the average density, deﬁned byρ=M/(43πR3S), for each.13 (a)Show that the proper distance from the event horizon to a radial coordinateris given by/Delta1L=r/radicalbigg1−RSr+RS2ln/parenleftbigg1+√1−RS/r1−√1−RS/r/parenrightbigg.This illustrates the danger of interpretingras a distance instead of a coordinate.Hint:Integrate Eq. ( 23).dL=/radicalbig−(ds)2=dr/radicalbig1−2GM/rc2.(b)Make a graph of/Delta1Las a function ofrfor values ofrbetweenr=RSandr=10RS.the below equationradius of thethe below equationGeneral Relativity and Black Holes: Problem Set
temperature .Show that
( 23)9Consider a spherical blackbody of constant temperature and massMwhose surface lies at radialcoordinater=R. An observer located at the surface of the sphere and a distant observer bothmeasure the blackbody radiation given off by the sphere.(a)If the observer at the surface of the sphere measures the luminosity of the blackbody tobeL, use the gravitational time dilation formula, Eq. ( 13), to show that the observer atinﬁnity measuresL∞=L/parenleftbigg1−2GMRc2/parenrightbigg./Delta1t0/Delta1t∞=ν∞ν0=/parenleftbigg1−2GMr0c2/parenrightbigg1/2.(13)


<<<PAGE 723>>>

Find an expression for the coordinate speed of light in theφ-direction.(b)Consider Eq. ( 26) in the limit that the particle’s mass goes to zero and its speed ap-proaches that of light. Use your result for part (a) to show thatr=1.5RSfor the circularorbit of a photon around a black hole.(c)Find the orbital period (in coordinate timet) for this orbit around a 10 M⊙black hole.(d)If a ﬂashlight were beamed in theφ-direction atr=1.5RS,hesurface atr=1.5RSis called thephoton sphere.)v=rω=/radicalbiggGMr17To obtain a crude estimate for the maximum angular momentum of a rotating black hole,imagine (obviously incorrectly!) that the black hole’s mass is distributed uniformly throughouta solid sphere of radiusRS(the Schwarzschild radius). From basic physics, the moment ofinertia of a uniform, rotating sphere isI=25MR2, and the angular momentum of the sphere isL=Iω, whereωis the sphere’s angular velocity. From this classical approach, estimate themaximum angular momentum of the solid sphere, and compare your answer with Eq. ( 29).(Be sure to specify any additional assumptions you have made.) What is the percentage errorin your estimate compared to the exact result?18Use Eq. ( 29) to compare the maximum angular momentum of a 1.4 M⊙black hole withthe angular momentum of the fastest known pulsar, which rotates with a period of 0.00139 s.Assume that the pulsar is a 1.4 M⊙uniform sphere of radius 10 km.Lmax=GM2c.19An electron is a point-like particle of zero radius, so it is natural to wonder whether an electroncould be a black hole. However, a black hole of massMcannot have an arbitrary amount ofangular momentumLand chargeQ. These values must satisfy an inequality,/parenleftbiggGMc/parenrightbigg2≥G/parenleftbiggQc/parenrightbigg2+/parenleftbiggLM/parenrightbigg2.If this inequality were violated, the singularity would be foundoutsidethe event horizon, inviolation of the Law of Cosmic Censorship. Use/planckover2pi1/2 for the electron’s angular momentum todetermine whether or not an electron is a black hole.General Relativity and Black Holes: Problem Set
16 (a)
Lmax=GM2c.(29)(a)Find the coordinate speed of a particle in the smallest stable orbit around a 10 M⊙blackhole.(b)Find the orbital period (in coordinate timet) for this smallest stable orbit around a 10 M⊙black hole(2)6 whatwouldhappen?(T
(29)15Equation (26)describes the coordinate speed of a massive particle orbiting a nonrotatingblack hole. However, it can be shown that the orbit is not stable unlessr≥3RS; any disturbancewill cause a particle in a smaller orbit to spiral down to the event horizon.v=rω=/radicalbiggGMr( 23)(c)Show that, for large values ofr,/Delta1L≃r.Thus, far from the black hole, the radial coordinatercan be treated as a distance.14Verify that the area of the event horizon of a black hole is 4πR2S.(Hint:Remember that theradial coordinaterisnotthe distance to the center. Use the Schwarzschild metric as yourstarting point.)


<<<PAGE 724>>>

22By combining gravitation (G), thermodynamics (k), and quantum mechanics (/planckover2pi1), StephenHawking calculated the temperature,T, of a nonrotating black hole to bekT=/planckover2pi1c38πGM=/planckover2pi1c4πRS,whereRSis the Schwarzschild radius.(a)Verify that the expression has the right units.(b)It was mentioned in the text that if a primoridal black hole formed at the beginning of theuniverse 13.7 Gyr ago with a mass of 1.7×1011kg, it would be reaching the end of its lifenow. Compute the temperature of a primordial black hole having a mass of 1.7×1011kg.(c)Approximately what portion of the electromagnetic spectrum would this blackbody tem-perature correspond to?(d)What would the radius of a sphere having the density of water be if it had a mass of1.7×1011kg?(e)Compute the temperature of a 10 M⊙black hole.23In this problem we will derive the expression for the lifetime of a nonrotating, evaporatingblack hole (Eq. 30).tevap=2560π2/parenleftbigg2GMc2/parenrightbigg2/parenleftbiggMh/parenrightbigg≈2×1067/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbigg3yr.(a)Consider a black hole to be a perfectly radiating blackbody of temperatureT, given byEq. ( 34) in Problem 22. Assuming that the surface area of the black hole is given by4πR2S, whereRSis the Schwarzschild radius, show that the luminosity of the black holedue to Hawking radiation isL=/planckover2pi1c615360πG2M2=/planckover2pi1c23840πR2S.General Relativity and Black Holes: Problem Set
(30)21 (a)Use dimensional arguments to combine the fundamental constants/planckover2pi1,c, andGinto anexpression that has units of mass. Evaluate your result, which is an estimate of the leastmassive primordial black hole formed in the ﬁrst instant after the Big Bang. What is themass in kilograms?(b)What is the Schwarzschild radius for such a black hole?(c)How long would it take light to travel this distance?(d)What is the lifetime of this black hole before its evaporation?
kT=/planckover2pi1c38πGM=/planckover2pi1c4πRS,(34)(b)Evaluate this for Earth, assuming that it is a uniformly rotating sphere. Set the leadingconstant equal to one, and express your answer in arcseconds per year. How much timewould it take for a pendulum at the north pole to rotateoncerelative to the distant starsbecause of frame dragging?(c)Repeat part (b) for the fastest known pulsar, expressing/Omega1in revolutions per second.20 (a)The angular rotation rate,/Omega1, at which spacetime is dragged around a rotating mass mustbe proportional to its angular momentumL. The expression for/Omega1must also contain theconstantsGandc, together with the radial coordinater. Show on purely dimensionalgrounds that/Omega1=constant×GLr3c2,where the constant (which you need not determine) is of order unity.


<<<PAGE 725>>>

General Relativity and Black Holes: Problem Set
(b)Now use the value of the orbital radial velocity of the compact object to determine itsmass, assumingi=90◦. What does this result say about the mass of the compact object?(c)The X-rays are not eclipsed in this system, so the angle of inclination must be less thanapproximately 85◦. Suppose that the angle of inclination were 45◦. What would the massof the compact object be then?25From the data in the text, make an estimate of the lower mass limit of the compact companionin V404 Cyg by setting the orbital inclinationi=90◦.ake arough determination of the massof the K0 IV companion. Why does your calculation result in alowerlimit?Whatfurtherinformationwouldberequiredtomakeamoreprecisedetermination?M24In the X-ray binary system A0620−00, the radial orbital velocities for the normal star and thecompact object arevs,r=457 km s−1andvc,r=43 km s−1, respectively. The orbital periodis 0.3226 day.(a)Calculate the mass function (the right-hand side o),m3c(ms+mc)2sin3i,wheremsis the mass of the normal star,mcis the mass of its compact companion, andiis the angle of inclination of the orbit. What does this result say about the mass of thecompact object? (Note that the value ofvc,rwas not needed to obtain this result.)f this equationm32(m1+m2)2sin3i=P2πGv31r.(7)(b)The luminosity of the black hole must originate from a loss in the black hole’s internalenergy. Assuming that the energy of the black hole is given byE=Mc2and thatL=dE/dt, show that the time required for the black hole to lose all of its mass to Hawkingradiation is given by Eq. (30).tevap=2560π2/parenleftbigg2GMc2/parenrightbigg2/parenleftbiggMh/parenrightbigg(30)≈2×1067/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbigg3yr.


<<<PAGE 726>>>

Close Binary Star Systems
1 Gravity in a Close Binary Star System
2 Accretion Disks
3 A Survey of Interacting Binary Systems
4 White Dwarfs in Semidetached Binaries
5 Type Ia Supernovae
6 Neutron Stars and Black Holes in Binaries
1 GRAVITY IN A CLOSE BINARY STAR SYSTEM
another. They evolve essentially independently, living out their lives in isolation except for
the gentle grip of gravity that binds them together.
If the stars are very close, with a separation roughly equal to the diameter of the larger
star, then one or both stars may have their outer layers gravitationally deformed into a
teardrop shape. As a star rotates through the tidal bulge raised by its partner’s gravitational
Lagrangian Points and Equipotential Surfaces
To understand how gravity operates in a close binary star system, consider two stars in a
circular orbit in the x–yplane with angular velocity ω=v1/r1=v2/r2. Here, v1andr1
are the orbital speed of Star 1 and its distance from the center of mass of the system, and
similarly for Star 2. It is useful to choose a corotating coordinate system that follows the
1If one of the stars is a compact object such as a white dwarf or a neutron star, its spin may not be synchronized.
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 
byPearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.8 ,At least half of all “stars” in the sky are actually multiple systems, consisting of two 
(or more) stars in orbit about their common center of mass. In most of these sys -
tems the stars are sufﬁciently far apart that they have a negligible impact on one
pull, it is forced to pulsate. Orbital and rotational energy is dissipated in this way until 
the systemreaches the state of minimum energy for its (constant) angular momentum, 
resulting in synchronous rotation and circular orbits. Thereafter the same side of each 
star always faces the other as the system rotates rigidly in space, and no further en -
ergy can be lost by tidally driven oscillations.1 The distorted star may even lose some 
of its photospheric gases to its companion. The spilling of gas from one star onto 
another can lead to some spectacular celestial fireworks, the subject of this chapter.


<<<PAGE 727>>>

rotation of the two stars about their center of mass. If the center of mass is at the origin,then the stars will be at rest in this rotating reference frame, with their mutual gravitationalattraction balanced by the outward “push” of a centrifugal force.2The centrifugal forcevector on a massmin this frame a distancerfrom the origin is thenFc=mω2rˆr,(1)in the outward radial direction.It is usually easier to work with the gravitational potential energy, given by,Ug=−GMmr,instead of with the gravitational force.3To do this in a rotating coordinate system, we mustinclude a ﬁctitious “centrifugal potential energy” in the potential energy term through theuse of:Uf−Ui=/Delta1Uc=−⎡integraldisplayrfriFc·dr.Here,Fcis the centrifugal force vector,riandrfare the initial and ﬁnal position vectors,respectively, anddris the inﬁnitesimal change in the position vector.Thechangeincentrifugalpotentialenergyisthus/Delta1Uc=−⎡integraldisplayrfrimω2rd r=−12mω2⎡parenleftbigr2f−r2i⎡parenrightbig.Realizing that onlychangesin potential energy are physically meaningful, we can arbitrarilychooseUc=0 atr=0 to give the ﬁnal result for the centrifugal potential energy,Uc=−12mω2r2.(2)Figure 1 shows a corotating coordinate system in which two stars with massesM1andM2are separated by a distancea. The stars are located on thex-axis at distancesr1andr2, respectively, from the center of mass, which is placed at the origin. Thusr1+r2=aandM1r1=M2r2.(3)Including the centrifugal term, the effective potential energy for a small test massmlocatedin the plane of the orbit (thex–yplane) isU=−G⎡parenleftbiggM1ms1+M2ms2⎡parenrightbigg−12mω2r2.2The centrifugal force is aninertial force(as opposed to a physical force) that must be included when describingmotion in a rotating coordinate system. There is another inertial force, called theCoriolis force, that will beneglected in what follows.3Most stars can be treated as point masses in what follows because the mass is concentrated at their centers,allowing their teardrop shapes to be neglected.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 728>>>

Xxyms2M2M1s1r1r2ar/H9258Center of massFIGURE 1Corotating coordinates for a binary star system.For convenience, the effective potential energy can be divided bymto obtain theeffectivegravitational potential,/Phi1:/Phi1=−G⎡parenleftbiggM1s1+M2s2⎡parenrightbigg−12ω2r2.(4)This is just the effective potential energyper unit mass. From the law of cosines, thedistancess1ands2are given bys21=r21+r2+2r1rcosθ(5)s22=r22+r2−2r2rcosθ.(6)The angular frequency of the orbit,ω, comes from Kepler’s third law for the orbital period,P,ω2=⎡parenleftbigg2πP⎡parenrightbigg2=G(M1+M2)a3.(7)Equations ( 3) and ( 4– 7) can be used to evaluate the effective gravitationalpotential/Phi1at every point in the orbital plane of a binary star system. For example, Fig. 2shows the value of/Phi1along thex-axis. The signiﬁcance of this graph becomes clear whenthex-component of the force on a small test massm, initially at rest on thex-axis, is writtenasFx=−dUdx=−md/Phi1dx(8)The three “hilltops” labeledL1,L2, andL3areLagrangianpoints,wherethereisnoforceonthetestmass(d/Phi1/dx=0). At these three equilibrium points, theClose Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 729>>>

–3.0–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0
–2–1012x/aM1L1L2L3M2F/[G(M1 + M2)/a]
FIGURE 2The effective gravitational potential/Phi1for two stars of massM1=0.85 M⊙,M2=0.17 M⊙on thex-axis. The stars are separated by a distancea=5×108m=0.718 R⊙, with theircenter of mass located at the origin. Thex-axis is in units ofa, and/Phi1is expressed in units ofG(M1+M2)/a=2.71×1011J kg−1. (In fact, the ﬁgure is the same for anyM2/M1=0.2.) Thedashed line is the value of/Phi1at the inner Lagrangian point. If the total energy per unit mass of aparticle exceeds this value of/Phi1, it can ﬂow through the inner Lagrangian point between the two stars.gravitational forces onmdue toM1andM2are balanced by the centrifugal force.4Theseequilibrium points areunstablebecause they arelocal maximaof/Phi1; if the test mass isdisplaced slightly, the minus sign in Eq. ( 8) indicates that it will accelerate “downhill,”away from its equilibrium position. Theinner Lagrangian point,L1, plays a central role inclose binary systems. Approximate expressions for the distances fromL1toM1andM2,denoted respectively byℓ1andℓ2, areℓ1=a⎡bracketleftbigg0.500−0.227 log10⎡parenleftbiggM2M1⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg(9)ℓ2=a⎡bracketleftbigg0.500+0.227 log10⎡parenleftbiggM2M1⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg.(10)Points in space that share the same value of/Phi1form anequipotential surface. Figure 3showsequipotential contoursthat outline the intersection of several equipotential surfaceswith the plane of the orbit. Very close to either of the massesM1orM2, the equipotentialsurfaces are nearly spherical and centered on each mass. Farther away, the combined gravi-tational inﬂuence ofM1andM2distorts the equipotential surfaces into teardrop shapes until4From an inertial (nonrotating) frame of reference, this motion would be described by saying that gravitationalforces ofM1andM2produce the inward centripetal acceleration of the test mass as it orbits the center of mass ofthe system.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 730>>>

–2–1012–2–1012
M1M2L1L2L3L4
L5y/a
x/aFIGURE 3Equipotentials forM1=0.85 M⊙,M2=0.17 M⊙, anda=5×108m=0.718 R⊙.The axes are in units ofa, with the system’s center of mass (the “×”) at the origin. Starting at the top ofthe ﬁgure and moving down toward the center of mass, the values of/Phi1in units ofG(M1+M2)/a=2.71×1011J kg−1for the equipotential curves are/Phi1=−1.875,−1.768,−1.583,−1.583,−1.768(the “dumbbell”),−1.875 (the Roche lobe), and−3 (the spheres).L4andL5are local maxima, with/Phi1=−1.431.they ﬁnally touch at the inner Lagrangian point. At even greater distances, the equipotentialsurfaces assume a “dumbbell” shape surrounding both masses.5These equipotential surfaces arelevel surfacesfor binary stars. In a binary system, asone of the stars evolves, it will expand to ﬁll successively larger equipotential surfaces(somewhat like inﬂating a balloon). To see this, consider that the effective gravity at eachpoint is alwaysperpendicularto the equipotential surface there.6Hydrostatic equilibriumguarantees that the pressure is constant along a surface of constant/Phi1; there is no componentof gravity parallel to an equipotential surface, and so a pressure difference in that direction5We will not be concerned with the other equipotential contours on Fig. 3 that pass through the LagrangianpointsL3,L4, andL5. However, theTrojan asteroidsthat accumulate at two locations along Jupiter’s orbit arecollections of interplanetary rubble found at Lagrangian pointsL4andL5. (IfM1>24.96M2, as for the Sun andJupiter, then the Coriolis force is strong enough to causeL4andL5to bestableequilibrium points.) Each of theLagrangian pointsL4andL5forms an equilateral triangle with massesM1andM2in Fig. 3, so the Trojanasteroids are found at about 60◦ahead of and behind Jupiter in its orbit, with a spread due to the ﬁnite width ofthe potential well.6The mathematical statement of this isF=−m∇/Phi1. This is analogous to an electric ﬁeld vector being orientedperpendicular to an electrical equipotential surface, pointing from higher to lower voltage.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 731>>>

cannot be balanced and maintained. And because the pressure is due to the weight of theoverlying layers of the star, the density must also be the same along each equipotentialsurface in order to produce a constant pressure there.Classes of Binary Star SystemsThe appearance of a binary star system depends on which equipotential surfaces are ﬁlledby the stars. Binary stars with radii much less than their separation are nearly sphericalIf one star expands enough to ﬁll the “ﬁgure-eight” contour in Fig. 3, then its atmo-spheric gases can escape through the inner Lagrangian pointL1to be drawn toward itscompanion. The teardrop-shaped regions of space bounded by this particular equipotentialsurface are calledRoche lobes.7The transfer of mass from one star to the other can be-gin when one of the stars has expanded beyond its Roche lobe. Such a system is called asemidetached binary. The star that ﬁlls its Roche lobe and loses mass is usually calledthesecondary star, with massM2, and its companion theprimary starhas massM1. Theprimary star may be either more or less massive than the secondary star.It may happen thatboth starsﬁll, or even expand beyond, their Roche lobes. In this case,the two stars share a common atmosphere bounded by a dumbbell-shaped equipotentialsurface, such as the one passing through the Lagrangian pointL2. Such a system is calledacontact binary. Figure 4 illustrates the three classes of binary stars.Mass Transfer RateA crude estimate of the rate at which mass is transferred in a semidetached binary maybe obtained for the case of two stars of equal mass. Let the radius of the star that hasexpanded beyond its Roche lobe beR. The equipotential surface at the radius of this starwill be modeled by two spheres of radiusRthat overlap slightly by a distanced, as shownin Fig. 5. We will assume that stellar gas will escape from the ﬁlled lobe through thecircular opening of radiusx. If the density of the stellar material at the opening isρand itsspeed toward the opening of areaA=πx2isv,t h e ni ti sl e f ta sa ne x e r c i s etoshowthattherateatwhichmassleavestheﬁlledlobe,themass transfer rate, is˙M=ρvA.(11)A bit of geometry shows thatx=√Rd(12)whend≪R.he thermal velocity of the gas particles results in the7The termRoche lobewas chosen in honor of the nineteenth-century French mathematician Edouard Roche(1820–1883).TClose Binary Star Systems
(as shown by the small circles in Fig.  3). This situation describes a detached binary in which the stars evolve nearly independently. Detached binary systems are a primary source of astronomical information about the basic properties of stars.


<<<PAGE 732>>>

(c)(b)(a)DetachedSemidetachedContactSecondaryPrimary
FIGURE 4The classiﬁcation of binary star systems. (a) A detached system. (b) A semidetachedsystem in which the secondary star has expanded to ﬁll its Roche lobe. (c) A contact binary.RxdR
FIGURE 5Intersecting spheres used to estimate the mass transfer rate,˙M.estimate˙M≈ρvrmsπx2(13)or˙M≈πRdρ⎡radicalBigg3kTmH,(14)assuming a gas of hydrogen atoms. As the overﬁll distancedbecomes larger, the values ofthe density and temperature increase at the opening.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 733>>>

Example 1.1.Suppose a star like the Sun is in a semidetached binary system with acompanion of equal mass, and it slightly overﬁlls its Roche lobe to a point just below itsphotosphere.Usingzonei=9fortheStatStarmodel,wehaved=r0−r9=1.52×106m,T=6348 K, andρ=2.87×10−7kg m−3. UsingR=7.10×108m at theoutermost point of the model, the rate at which this Sun-like star would lose its atmosphericgases would be roughly˙M≈πRdρ⎡radicalBigg3kTmH=1.2×1013kg s−1=1.9×10−10M⊙yr−1.This is typical of the mass transfer rates for semidetached binary systems. The values of˙Minferred from observations of various systems range from 10−11to 10−7M⊙yr−1. Forcomparison,the solar wind transports mass away from theSunatamuchsmallerrate,approximately3×10−14M⊙yr−1.Before moving on to consider the consequences of the transfer of mass in semidetachedbinaries, it is worthwhile to consider the enormous energy that can be released when matterfalls onto a star, especially onto a compact object such as a white dwarf or a neutron star.Example 1.2.Consider a massm=1 kg that starts at rest inﬁnitely far from a star ofmassMand radiusR. The initial total mechanical energy of the massmisE=K+U=0.Using conservation of energy, we ﬁnd that the kinetic energy of the mass when it arrives atthe star’s surface isK=−U=GMmR.This kinetic energy will be converted into heat and light upon impact with the star. If the staris a white dwarf withM=0.85 M⊙andR=6.6×106m=0.0095 R⊙, then the energyreleased by one kilogram of infalling matter isGMmR=1.71×1013J.This is 0.019% of the rest energy (mc2) of one kilogram of material. For comparison, theamount of energy released by the thermonuclear fusion of one kilogram of hydrogen is0.007mc2=6.29×1014JClose Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 734>>>

If the star is a neutron star with massM=1.4M⊙and radiusR=10 km, then theenergy released is much greater:GMmR=1.86×1016J.This is 21% of the rest energy of one kilogram, nearly 30 times greater than the energy thathydrogen fusion could provide! The calculations show that infalling matter is capable ofgenerating immense amounts of energy.Observations of celestial X-ray sources have revealed objects with a steady X-ray lu-minosity of approximately 1030W. If this radiation were produced by gases pulled froma companion star that then fell onto a neutron star’s surface, the amount of mass per sec-ond transferred between the two stars that would be needed to account for the observedluminosity is˙M=1030W1.86×1016J kg−1=5.38×1013kg s−1,which is only about 10−9M⊙yr−1. This is similar to the mass transfer rate found in theprevious example, a fortuitous agreement because˙Mfor semidetached systems can varyby several orders of magnitude.2ACCRETION DISKSThe orbital motion of a semidetached binary can prevent the mass that escapes from theswollen secondary star from falling directly onto the primary star. The primary’s movementis often enough to keep it out of the path of the gases that spill through the inner Lagrangianpoint. If the radius of the primary star is less than about 5% of the binary separationa, themass stream will miss striking the primary’s surface. Instead, the mass stream goes into orbitaround the primary to form a thinaccretion diskof hot gas in the orbital plane, as shown inFig.6.8Viscosity,aninternalfrictionthatconvertsthedirectedkineticenergyof bulk mass motion into random thermal motion, causes the orbiting gases to lose energyand slowly spiral inward toward the primary. The physical mechanism responsible for theviscosity in accretion disks is as yet poorly understood. The familiar molecular viscositydue to interparticle forces is far too weak to be effective. Other possibilities involve randommotions of the gas, such as turbulence in the disk material caused by thermal convection or bya magnetohydrodynamic instability in the magnetic ﬁelds that interact with the differentially
8Astronomers refer to the process of accumulating mass from an outside source asaccretion.Close Binary Star Systems
rotating disk. Whatever the mechanism, the gas is heated throughout its descent to increasingly higher temperatures as the lost orbital energy is converted into thermal energy. Finally, the plunging gas ends its journey at the star’s surface.


<<<PAGE 735>>>

Secondary starPrimary star
Accretion diskOrbit of secondary about center of mass (   )L1MassstreamHotspotFIGURE 6A semidetached binary showing the accretion disk around the primary star and thehot spot where the mass streaming through the inner Lagrangian point impacts the disk. This system’sparameters correspond to those of Z Chamaeleontis, described in Example 4.1.The Temperature Proﬁle and LuminosityJust as a star may be treated as a blackbody in a rough ﬁrst approximation, the assumption ofan optically thick accretion disk radiating as a blackbody provides a simple, useful model.At each radial distance, an optically thick disk emits blackbody radiation with a continuousspectrum corresponding to the local disk temperature at that distance.To estimate the temperature of a model accretion disk at a distancerfrom the center ofthe primary star of massM1and radiusR1, let’s assume that the inward radial velocity ofthe disk gases is small compared with their orbital velocity. Then, to a good approximation,the gases follow circular Keplerian orbits, and the details of the viscous forces acting withinthe disk may be neglected. Furthermore, since the mass of the disk is very small comparedwith that of the primary, the orbiting material feels only the gravity of the central primary star.Thetotal energy(kinetic plus potential) of a massmof orbiting gas is given by,E=−GM1m2r.As the gas spirals inward, its total energyEbecomes more negative. The lost energymaintains the disk’s temperature and is ultimately emitted in the form of blackbody radiation.Now consider an annular ring of radiusrand widthdrwithin the disk, as shown inFig. 7. If the rate at which mass is transferred from the secondary to the primary star isa constant˙M, then in timetthe amount of mass that passes through the outer boundaryof the circular ring shown in Fig. 7 is˙Mt. Assuming asteady-state diskthat does notchange with time, no mass is allowed to build up within the ring. Therefore during this timean amount of mass˙Mtmust also leave through the ring’s inner boundary.Conservation of energy requires that the energydEradiated by the ring in timetbe equalto the difference in the energy that passes through the ring’s outer and inner boundaries:dE=dEdrdr=ddr⎡parenleftbigg−GM1m2r⎡parenrightbiggdr=GM1˙Mt2r2dr,Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 736>>>

drr
FIGURE 7One of the (imaginary) annular rings constituting the accretion disk.wherem=˙Mthas been used for the orbiting mass entering and leaving the ring. If theluminosity of the ring isdLring, then the energy radiated by the ring in timetis related todLringbydLringt=dE=GM1˙Mt2r2dr.Canceling thet’s and using the Stefan–BoltzmannwithA=2(2πrdr)forthesurfaceareaofthering(bothsides)givesdLring=4πrσT4dr(15)=GM1˙M2r2dr(16)for the luminosity of the ring. Solving forT, the disk temperature at radiusr, results inT=⎡parenleftbiggGM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4.(17)The “1” subscript has been dropped, with the understanding thatMandRare the mass andradius of the primary star, and that˙Mis the mass transfer rate for the semidetached binarysystem.A more thorough analysis would take into account the thin turbulent boundary layer thatmust be produced when the rapidly orbiting disk gases encounter the surface of the primarystar. This results in a better estimate of the disk temperature:T=⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4⎡parenleftBig1−⎡radicalbigR/r⎡parenrightBig1/4(18)=Tdisk⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4⎡parenleftBig1−⎡radicalbigR/r⎡parenrightBig1/4,(19)law  Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 737>>>

whereTdisk≡⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4(20)is a characteristic temperature of the disk. Actually,Tdiskis roughly twice the maximumdisk temperature,Tmax=0.488⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4=0.488Tdisk,(21)which occurs atr=(49/36)R; see Fig. 13.9Whenr≫R, the last term on the right-handside of Eq. ( 19) may be neglected, leavingT=⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4=Tdisk⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4(r≫R).(22)This differs from our simple estimate, Eq. ( 17), by a factor of 31/4=1.32.Integrating Eq. ( 16) for the luminosity of each ring fromr=Rtor=∞results inan expression for the disk luminosity,Ldisk=GM˙M2R.(23)However, recall from Example 1.2 that without an accretion disk, the accretion lumi-nosity (the rate at which falling matter delivers kinetic energy to the primary star) is twiceas great:Lacc=GM˙MR.(24)Thus, if half of the available accretion energy is radiated away as the gases spiral downthrough the disk, then the remaining half must be deposited at the surface of the star (or inthe turbulent boundary layer between the rapidly rotating disk and the more slowly rotatingprimary star).10Example 2.1.The maximum disk temperature,Tmax, and the value of the disk lumi-nosity for the white dwarf and neutron star used in Example 1.2 can now be eval-uated. For a white dwarf withM=0.85 M⊙,R=0.0095 R⊙, and˙M=1013kg s−1(1.6×10−10M⊙yr−1), Eq. (21) isTmax=0.488⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4=2.62×104K.9Including the boundary layer results inT=0 where the disk meets the star’s surface, an unrealistic artifact ofthe assumptions of the model.10This result is just another consequence of the virial theorem.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 738>>>

AccordingtoWien’sdisplacementlaw,atthistemperaturetheblackbodyspec-trum peaks at a wavelength ofλmax=(500 nm)(5800 K)26,200 K=111 nm,whichisintheultravioletregionoftheelectromagneticspectrum.FromEq.(23),theluminosityoftheaccretiondiskisLdisk=GM˙M2R=8.55×1025W,or about 0.22 L⊙.Turning now to a neutron star withM=1.4M⊙,R=10 km, and˙M=1014kg s−1(1.6×10−9M⊙yr−1), the maximum disk temperature isTmax=0.488⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4=6.86×106K.Its blackbody spectrum peaks at a wavelength ofλmax=(500 nm)(5800 K)686,000 K=0.423 nm,which is in the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The luminosity of the neutronstar’s accretion disk isLdisk=GM˙M2R=9.29×1029W,over 2400 L⊙. Thus the inner regions of accretion disks around white dwarfs should shinein the ultraviolet, whereas those around neutron stars will be strong X-ray sources.11The Radial Extent of an Accretion DiskThe radial extent of the accretion disk can be estimated by ﬁnding the value ofr=rcircwhere a continuous stream of mass that passes throughL1will settle into a circular orbitaround the primary star. This may be done by considering the angular momentum of a parcelof massmabout the primary star; see Fig. 8. Assuming that the motion of the mass at theinner Lagrangian point is due solely to the orbital motion of the binary system, the angularmomentum,L, of the mass located there isL=mωℓ21=mℓ21⎡radicalbiggG(M1+M2)a3,where Eq. ( 7) has been used for the angular frequency of the orbit, andℓ1is given byEq. (9).11Actually, as we will see in Section 6, the accretion disk around a white dwarf or neutron star may be disruptedby the star’s magnetic ﬁeld and so may not extend down to its surface. Such systems are strong sources of X-rays.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 739>>>

m/H9275
M1L1xy
/H51291FIGURE 8A parcel of massmpassing through the inner Lagrangian pointL1, seen from aframe of reference with the primary star at rest at the origin.The massmdoes not immediately enter into a circular orbit. Instead, the stream of massto whichmbelongs ﬂows around the primary star and collides with itself after one orbit.The orbits of the mass parcels are made circular around the primary by the collisions asenergy is lost while angular momentum is conserved. When the parcel of mass has settledinto a circular orbit of radiusrcircaroundM1, its angular momentum isL=m⎡radicalbigGM1rcirc,withµ=mM1/(m+M1)≃m. Equatingthesetwoexpressionsfortheangularmomentumresultsinrcirc=a⎡parenleftbiggℓ1a⎡parenrightbigg4⎡parenleftbigg1+M2M1⎡parenrightbigg=a⎡bracketleftbigg0.500−0.227 log10⎡parenleftbiggM2M1⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg4⎡parenleftbigg1+M2M1⎡parenrightbigg.(25)Since the total angular momentum must be conserved when only internal and centralforces act, you may wonder what happens to the angular momentum lost by the infallingmaterial as it spirals through the accretion disk.As shown in Pringle (1981), orbiting materialthat is initially in the form of a narrow ring atr=rcircwill spread, moving both inwardand outward. The time for this migration of the disk material probably ranges from a fewdays to a few weeks. While most of the matter spirals inward, a small amount of the masscarries the “missing” angular momentum to the outer edge of the disk. From there, theangular momentum may be carried away from the system by wind-driven mass loss. If theaccretion disk extends 80% to 90% of the way out to the inner Lagrangian point, angularmomentum may also be returned to the orbital motion of the two stars by tides raised in theClose Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 740>>>

disk by the secondary star. Because of this outward migration of mass, we will adoptRdisk≈2rcirc(26)as a rough estimate of the outer radius of the accretion disk.Eclipsing, Semidetached Binary SystemsIt is comforting to know that there is evidence, obtained from observingeclipsingsemide-tached binary systems, that the objects described above actually exist. Observations of lightcurves for eclipsing semidetached binaries, such as shown in Fig. 9, indicate the presenceof a hot spot where the mass transfer stream collides with the outer edge of the accretiondisk. The light curve can be interpreted as the result of observing consecutive “slices” ofthe disk as they disappear and then reappear from behind the primary star. In fact, Fig. 9can be used to re-create an image of the disk itself, shown in Fig. 10.12Because thehot spot is on the trailing side of the disk during the eclipse (see Fig. 12), more light isreceived from the disk near the beginning of the eclipse (when the hot spot is still visible)than near the end (when the hot spot is still hidden). This produces the deﬁcit in intensityon the right-hand side of the light curve in Fig. 9.
00.51Normalized intensity–0.2–0.100.10.2PhaseLX SerFIGURE 9The light curve of the eclipse of the accretion disk in the LX Serpentis binarysystem. The jagged line is the observed light curve, and the smooth line shows the ﬁt calculated froma reconstructed image of the accretion disk, shown in Fig. 10. (Figure adapted from Rutten, vanParadijs, and Tinbergen,Astron. Astrophys.,260, 213, 1992.)12Using slices of the emerging disk to reconstruct an image of the accretion disk is somewhat analogous to using aCAT scan (computerized axial tomography) in a hospital to mathematically reassemble X-ray slices of the humanbody. Because there is more than one model disk that will reproduce a given light curve, a technique calledmaximum entropyis used to choose the smoothest possible model for the ﬁnal disk image.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 741>>>

FIGURE 10A reconstructed negative image of the accretion disk in the LX Serpentis binarysystem. The hot spot on the edge of the lower right portion of the disk is smeared out in the azimuthaldirection and has the appearance of a partial ring. (Figure from Rutten, van Paradijs, and Tinbergen,Astron. Astrophys.,260, 213, 1992.)3A SURVEY OF INTERACTING BINARY SYSTEMSThe life history of a close binary system is quite complicated, with many possible variationsdepending on the initial masses and separation of the two stars involved. As mass passesfrom one star to the other, the mass ratioM2/M1will change. The resulting redistributionof angular momentum affects the orbital period of the system as well as the separation ofthe two stars. The extent of the Roche lobes, given by Eqs. ( 9) and ( 10), depends onboth the separation and the mass ratio of the stars, so it too will vary accordingly.The Effects of Mass TransferThe effects of mass transfer can be illustrated by considering the total angular momentumof the system. The contribution of the stars’ rotation to the total angular momentum issmall and may be neglected. The orbital angular momentum is givenwith aneccentricityofe=0 for a circular orbit,L=µ√GMa.In this expression,µis the reduced mass (Eq. 2.22),µ=M1M2M1+M2,andM=M1+M2is the total mass of the two stars.Assuming (to a ﬁrst approximation) thatno mass or angular momentum is removed from the system via stellar winds or gravitationalClose Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 742>>>

radiation, both the total mass and the angular momentum of the system remain constant asmass is transferred between the two stars.13That is,dM/dt=0 anddL/dt=0.Some useful insights concerning the effect of the transfer of mass on the separation ofthe two stars can be gained by taking a time derivative of the expression for the angularmomentum:dLdt=ddt⎡parenleftBigµ√GMa⎡parenrightBig0=√GM⎡parenleftbiggdµdt√a+µ2√adadt⎡parenrightbigg1adadt=−2µdµdt.(27)Remembering that the total mass,M, remains constant, we ﬁnd that the time derivative ofthe reduced mass isdµdt=1M⎡parenleftbiggdM1dtM2+M1dM2dt⎡parenrightbigg.The mass lost by one star is gained by the other. Writing˙M≡dM/dt, this means that˙M1=−˙M2, and sodµdt=˙M1M(M2−M1).Inserting this into Eq. (27) achieves our result,1adadt=2˙M1M1−M2M1M2.(28)Equation ( 28) describes the consequence of mass transfer on the separation of the binarysystem. The angular frequency of the orbit will also be affected, as shown by using Kepler’sthird law in the form of Eq. ( 7). SinceM1+M2=constant, Kepler’s third law statesthatω∝a−3/2so that1ωdωdt=−321adadt.(29)As the orbital separation decreases, the angular frequency increases.The Evolution of a Binary SystemThe following description illustrates the probable evolution of a binary system that is des-tined to become a cataclysmic variable. The starting point is a widely separated binarysystem with main-sequence stars having an initial orbital period ranging from a few months13In fact, gravitational radiation, which will be discussed in Section 6, is primarily responsible for the loss ofangular momentum in some short-period binary systems (P<14 hours).Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 743>>>

to a few years.At the start, suppose that Star 1 is more massive than Star 2, soM1−M2>0.Star 1 therefore evolves more rapidly and, depending on its mass, may become a red giantor supergiant before it begins to overﬂow its Roche lobe. This initiates the transfer of massfrom Star 1 to Star 2 (so˙M1<0). According to Eqs. ( 28) and ( 29), in this situationda/dtis negative anddω/dtis positive; the stars spiral closer together with an increasinglyshorter period.Now, from Eq. ( 9), asadecreases andM2/M1increases, the Roche lobe around Star 1shrinks, as measured by the distance of Star 1 from the inner Lagrangian point. The masstransfer rate accelerates under the positive feedback of a shrinking Roche lobe, eventuallyproducing an extended atmosphere around both stars, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The systemis now a contact binary, with the degenerate core of Star 1 and the main-sequence Star 2sharing a common gaseous envelope. The two stars transfer angular momentum to thisenvelope as they slowly spiral inward to a much smaller separation and shorter period.If the cores of the two stars merge, the result will be single star, which may explain theAfter emerging from their gaseous cocoon, the system is a detached binary; Star 2 (thesecondary) lies inside its Roche lobe as Star 1 (the primary) cools to become a white dwarf.Eventually, the originally less-massive secondary star evolves and ﬁlls its Roche lobe, andmass begins to ﬂow in the opposite direction, with˙M1>0. In this case a negative feedbackmitigates the mass transfer process, because, as Eq. ( 28) implies, the stars will nowspiral farther apart (assuming thatM1is still greater thanM2) as the Roche lobe aroundthe secondary star expands according to Eq. ( 10). If the mass ﬂow is to persist, eitherthe secondary must expand faster than the Roche lobe grows or the stars must move closertogether as angular momentum is removed from the system, either by torques due to stellarwinds conﬁned by magnetic ﬁelds or by gravitational radiation. Whatever the mechanism,a steady rate of mass transfer from the secondary to the white dwarf is maintained, and thestage is set for the outbursts of a cataclysmic variable, as will be described in Section 4.As the secondary star continues to evolve, another common envelope stage may occur.Figure 11 shows an example of the life history of a close binary system that beginswith two intermediate-mass stars (between 5 and 9 M⊙) and culminates with two carbon–supernova.11In Section 5, we will ﬁnd that nuclear reactions begin in the core of the white dwarf before the Chandrasekharlimit is reached.44Close Binary Star Systems
oxygen white dwarfs in a very tight orbit, circling each other every 15 s to 30 s. The larger, less massive white dwarf overﬂows its Roche lobe and dissolves into a heavy disk that is accreted by the more massive dwarf. The accumulation of mass pushes the primary white dwarf toward the Chandrasekhar limit, and it explodes as a Type Iaobservations of blue stragglers in stellar clusters. Alternatively, the envelope surrounding the stars may be ejected. In fact, several systems have been observed in which a binary is found at the center of a planetary nebula, possibly the result of the ejection of a common envelope. (For the sake of the following discussion, we will consider the situation where envelope ejection occurs.)


<<<PAGE 744>>>

PrimordialsystemsFirstcommonenvelopestageIntermediatesystemSecondcommonenvelopestageInitial system,gravitationalwave radiationStart ofheavy diskformationHeavy diskphaseSupernovatype IM1 ~ M2 ~ (5–9) MR1,2 ~ (3–6) Ra ~ (70–460) RPorb ~ 30 d to 1 yr/H9270 ~ (2–6) ¥ 107 yrM1 ~ –10–3 M   yr–1/H9270 ~ 103 yrM1R ~ (0.7–1) MR1R ~ (0.01–0.03) Ra ~ (10–65) RPorb ~ 2 d to 30 d/H9270 < 4 ¥ 107 yr
vclose ~ 0.005 yr–1M2 ~ –10–5 M   yr–1/H9270 ~ 105 yrM2R ~ (0.7–1) MR2R ~ (0.01–0.03) Ra ~ (0.2–1.4) RPorb ~ 12 min to 4 hr/H9270 ~ 105 yr to 2 ¥ 108 yra ~ (0.01–0.02) RPorb ~ 15 sec to 30 sec/H9270 ~ 102 secM (M   yr–1) <~ 2 ¥ 10–5 (R*/10–2 R  )d ~ 0.02 Rco co
FIGURE 11One possibility for the evolution of a close binary system, ending in a Type Iasupernova. The masses and radii of the stars, and their orbital separation (A), orbital period, and masstransfer rate, are given for some stages, along with the duration (τ). (Figure adapted from Iben andTutukov,Ap. J. Suppl.,54, 335, 1984.)Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 745>>>

Types of Interacting Binary SystemsThere are many types of close binary systems, too many to discuss in any detail. Thefollowing list1describes the main classes of interacting binaries, together with some of thefeatures that make these systems important for astronomers. Many of the classes are namedafter the prototype object for that class.•Algols. These are two normal stars (main-sequence stars or subgiants) in a semide-tached binary system. They provide checks on stellar properties and evolution, andthey yield information on mass loss and mass exchange.ActiveAlgols (the W Serpensstars) provide laboratories for studying rapid (short-lived) stages of stellar and binarystar evolution. These systems are important for studying accretion processes and ac-cretion disks. Mass loss from Algols may contribute to the chemical enrichment ofthe interstellar medium.•RS Canum VenaticorumandBY Draconis Stars. These stars are chromospher-ically active binaries that are important systems for investigating dynamo-drivenmagnetic activity in cool stars (spectral type F and later). Manifestations of enhancedmagnetic activity include starspots, chromospheres, coronae, and ﬂares. These sys-tems also contribute to our understanding of the magnetic activity of the Sun—theso-calledsolar–stellar connection.•W Ursae Majoris Contact Systems. These short-period (0.2–0.8 day) contact bina-ries display very high levels of magnetic activity and are important stars for studyingthe stellar dynamo mechanism at extreme levels. The drag of magnetic braking maycause these binaries to coalesce into single stars.•Cataclysmic VariablesandNova-like Binaries. These systems have short periodsand contain white dwarf components together with cool M-type secondaries that ﬁlltheir Roche lobes. They provide valuable information on the ﬁnal stages of stellarevolution. These binaries are also important for studying accretion phenomena andaccretion disk properties.•X-ray Binaries with Neutron Star and Black Hole Components. These systemsare powerful (Lx>1028W) X-ray sources that have neutron star or (more rarely)black hole components. The X-rays are due to the accretion of gas onto the degeneratecomponent of the system from a nondegenerate companion. Observations of neutronstar systems supplement the information on their structure and evolution that comesfrom pulsars (such as masses, radii, rotation, and magnetic ﬁelds). Systems such asV404 Cygni,A0620−00, and Cygnus X-1 provide evidence for the existence of blackholes; see Section 6.•ζAurigae andVVCephei Systems. These long-period interacting binaries contain alate-type supergiant component and a hot (usually spectral type B) companion.ζ-Aur1Quoted with permission from E. F. Guinan,Evolutionary Processes in Interacting Binary Stars, Kondo, Sisteró,and Polidan (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1992. Reprinted by permission of Kluwer AcademicPublishers.5
5Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 746>>>

systems contain G or K supergiant stars, and VV Cep binaries contain M supergiants.Although not originally interacting binaries, they became so when the more massivestar evolved to become a supergiant. When eclipses occur, the atmosphere and windof the cooler supergiant can be probed as the hotter star passes behind.•Symbiotic Binaries. Symbiotic stars are long-period interacting binaries consistingof an M giant (sometimes a pulsating Mira-type variable) and an accreting com-ponent that can be a white dwarf, subdwarf, or low-mass main-sequence star. Thecommon feature of these systems is the accretion of the cool component’s wind ontoits hot companion. Orbital periods of symbiotic stars typically range between 200and 1500 days. Several of the symbiotic binaries have the cool component ﬁlling itsRoche lobe, making them symbiotic Algol systems.•Barium and S-Star Binaries. These stars are thought to be long-period binaries in•Post-Common-Envelope Binaries. These binary systems usually contain hot whitedwarf or subdwarf components and cooler secondary stars that have presumablypassed through the common envelope phase of binary star evolution. The binarynuclei of planetary nebulae are examples of post-common-envelope binaries. Thesesystems are important for studying short-lived stages of stellar evolution.4WHITE DWARFS IN SEMIDETACHED BINARIESWhen a white dwarf is the primary component of a semidetached binary system, the resultmay be adwarf nova,aclassical nova,o rasupernova, in order of increasing brilliance.It is somewhat unfortunate that the termnova(Latin for “new”) appears in each name,because the three types of outbursts employ three very different mechanisms.Cataclysmic VariablesDwarf novae and classical novae belong to the general class ofcataclysmic variables,o fwhich more than one thousand systems are known to exist. They survive their release ofenergy (unlike supernovae), and the outburst process can reoccur. Cataclysmic variables arecharacterized by long quiescent intervals punctuated by outbursts in which the brightnessof the system increases by a factor between 10 (for dwarf novae) and 106(for classicalnovae). The mean mass of the primary star is 0.86 M⊙, which is larger than the average ofabout 0.58 M⊙for isolated white dwarfs. The secondary star is usually a main-sequencestar of spectral type G or later and is less massive than the primary star.The two stars orbit each other with periods ranging from 23 minutes to more than ﬁvedays, although the vast majority have orbital periods of between 78 minutes and 12 hours.Interestingly, a “period gap” exists in the orbital periods of cataclysmic variables betweenClose Binary Star Systems
which the originally more massive component evolved and transferred some of its  nuclear-processed gas to the present K or M  giant companion. The giant stars are thought to have white dwarf companions that are often too cool to be seen in the  ultraviolet. These systems are important for studying nucleosynthesis and mass loss in evolved stars.


<<<PAGE 747>>>

1.5 hours and 3.25 hours; it is probably due to an abrupt change in angular momentumtransfer in the system, associated with a complex interplay of disrupted magnetic braking,gravitational radiation, the changing size of Roche lobes, and the evolution of the stars.The outbursts are believed to be due to a sudden increase in the rate at which mass ﬂowsdown through the disk. As the eclipsed disk emerges from behind the secondary star, theradial variation in the disk’s temperature can be determined. During an outburst, the diskdoes indeed appear to be optically thick, withT∝r−3/4, in agreement with Eq. ( 22).But during quiescence the observations are not consistent with the disk model describedabove, probably because the disk is not completely optically thick when it is cooler andcontains less mass.Additional evidence supporting this view comes from the strong, wide emission lines ofhydrogen and helium that are seen in cataclysmic variables during quiescence. These linesare usually doubly peaked, as shown in Fig. 12. However, during an eclipse a singleemission line is observed, either redshifted or blueshifted. This is what would be expectedfrom a rotating disk of optically thin gas; the Doppler-shifted emission lines produced onthe opposite sides of the disk disappear when one side or the other is hidden behind thesecondary star.The source of the emission lines that appear during a cataclysmic variable’s quiescentphase is not yet clear. During an outburst, these lines appear in absorption, as would beexpected from an optically thick disk that produces absorption lines in the same manner asan optically thick stellar atmosphere. But during quiescence, the rate at which mass ﬂowsdown through the disk has presumably decreased, making the disk less dense and cooler. Atlarger radii the disk may then be optically thin and so produce emission lines. Alternatively,there may be a thin layer of hot gas above the disk that produces the emission lines.
To EarthTo EarthTo EarthTo EarthF/H9261F/H9261F/H9261F/H9261/H9261/H9261/H9261/H9261FIGURE 12A Doppler-shifted emission line at different stages of the eclipse of an accretiondisk. The binary system orbits about its center of mass (the “×”), and is observed nearly edge-on.The disk rotates in the direction indicated by the arrow.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 748>>>

Dwarf NovaeThe ﬁrst observation of a dwarf nova (U Geminorum) was made in 1855. However, the basicnature of these objects remained elusive until 1974, when Brian Warner at the Universityof Cape Town showed that the outburst of an eclipsing dwarf nova, Z Chamaeleontis,was due to a brightening of the accretion disk surrounding the white dwarf. Since most ofthe light from a dwarf nova comes from the accretion disk around the white dwarf, thesesystems provide astronomers with their best opportunity to study the dynamic structure ofaccretion disks.1Observations of the dwarf nova VW Hydri showed that the outburst atvisible wavelengths preceded the ultraviolet brightening by about a day. This indicates thatthe outburst started in the cooler, outer part of the disk and then spread down to the hottercentral regions. For these reasons, astronomers have concluded that the outbursts of dwarfnovae are caused by a sudden increase in the rate at which mass ﬂows down through theaccretion disk.Example 4.1.Z Chamaeleontis is a dwarf nova. It consists of anM1=0.85 M⊙whitedwarf primary with a radius ofR=0.0095 R⊙and a late M-type main-sequence secondarystar of massM2=0.17 M⊙. The orbital period of the system isP=0.0745 day. Whatdoes this system look like?From Kepler’s third law, Eq. (2.37), the separation of the two stars isa=⎡bracketleftbiggP2G(M1+M2)4π2⎡bracketrightbigg1/3=5.22×108m,about 75% of the radius of the Sun. The distance between the white dwarf primary and theinner Lagrangian pointL1is given by Eq. (9),ℓ1=a⎡bracketleftbigg0.500−0.227 log10⎡parenleftbiggM2M1⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg=3.44×108m.Because the secondary star ﬁlls its Roche lobe in a semidetached binary system, the distancebetween the secondary star and the inner Lagrangian point is a measure of the size of thesecondary. For Z Cha,R2≈ℓ2=a−ℓ1=1.78×108m,which agrees quite well with the size of an M6 main-sequence star.The value ofrcircfor this system is, from Eq. (25),rcirc=a⎡parenleftbiggℓ1a⎡parenrightbigg4⎡parenleftbigg1+M2M1⎡parenrightbigg=1.18×108m,continued1In some systems, the primary white dwarf has a magnetic ﬁeld that is sufﬁciently strong (a few thousand teslas)to prevent the formation of an accretion disk. Instead, the accretion takes place through a magnetically controlledcolumn that funnels mass onto one (or both) of the white dwarf’s magnetic poles. TheseAM Herculis stars(orpolars) will be considered in Section 6.6
6Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 749>>>

and so a crude estimate of the outer radius of the disk isRdisk≈2rcirc=2.4×108m,(Eq. 26), which is about two-thirds of the way to the inner Lagrangian point. This is ingood agreement with observations that indicate that the Z Cha’s disk emits very little lightfrom beyond this radius.The mass transfer rate inferred for Z Cha during an outburst is roughly˙M=1.3×10−9M⊙yr−1,or 7.9×1013kg s−1, which implies a maximum disk temperature ofTmax=0.488⎡parenleftbigg3GM˙M8πσR3⎡parenrightbigg1/4=4.4×104K,using Eq. ( 21). Figure 13 shows the variation in the disk temperature with radius forZ Cha [calculated from Eq. ( 19)]. Moving from the inner to the outer regions of the disk,thetemperaturefallsfrom44,000Kto8000K.AccordingtoWien’slaw,thiscorresponds to an increase in the peak wavelength of the emitted radiation from 66 nm to363 nm (from the far to the near portions of the ultraviolet spectrum).The monochromatic luminosity,Lλ,f o rt h ee n t i r ed i s kc a nb ec a l c u l a t e dforthePlanckfunction,Bλ, over the disk area and over all directions
0.010.11r//H51291104105T (K)
FIGURE 13The temperature of the accretion disk calculated for the dwarf nova Z Chamaeleon-tis. The radiusris given in units ofℓ1, the distance from the white dwarf to the inner Lagrangianpoint. The sudden drop in temperature near the surface of the white dwarf primary is an unrealisticartifact of the assumptions..Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 750>>>

UltravioletVisible
101001000Wavelength (nm)1022102310241025L/H9261 (W nm–1)
FIGURE 14The monochromatic luminosity calculated for the accretion disk of the dwarf novaZ Chamaeleontis.The resulting graph of the energy emitted per second within wavelengthintervals of 1 nm is shown in Fig. 14. According to Eq. ( 23), the total luminosity ofthe accretion disk (integrated over all wavelengths) isLdisk=GM˙M2R=6.8×1026W,which exceeds the luminosity of the Sun by about 75%.An artist’s conception of the appearance of Z Cha is shown in Fig. 15; see alsoFig. 6.Changes in the Mass Transfer RateTo date, more than 250 dwarf novae have been discovered. Characteristically, they brightenby between 2 and 6 magnitudes (factors of between 6 and 250 in luminosity) during outburststhat usually last from about 5 to 20 days. These eruptions are separated by quiet intervalsof 30–300 days; see Fig. 16. Estimates of the rate of mass transfer through the disks ofdwarf novae have been obtained by comparing theoretical models with observations of theamount of energy released at different wavelengths. Apparently, during the long quiescentintervals,˙M≈1012– 1013kg s−1≈10−11– 10−10M⊙yr−1,which increases to˙M≈1014– 1015kg s−1≈10−9– 10−8M⊙yr−1Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 751>>>

FIGURE 15An artist’s conception of Z Chamaeleontis. [Courtesy of Dale W. Bryner (1935–1999), Weber State University.]during an outburst. Since the disk luminosity is proportional to˙M(Eq. 23), this increasein the mass transfer rate by a factor of 10–100 is consistent with the observed brighteningof the system.1The mystery remaining to be solved by astronomers is the origin of the increased rate ofmass transfer through the disk of a dwarf nova during an outburst. Possible explanationsfocus on either an instability in the mass transfer rate from the secondary to the primarystar or an instability in the accretion disk itself that periodically dams up and releases thegases ﬂowing through it.A modulation of the mass transfer rate must depend on the details of the mass ﬂowthrough the inner Lagrangian point,L1. One possibility is an instability in the outer layersof the secondary star, causing it to periodically overﬂow its Roche lobe. Such an instabilitycould be powered by the hydrogen partial ionization zone (atT≈10,000 K) damming upand releasing energy.1When one kilogram of H II ions recombines with free electrons, asmuch as 1.3×109J is released. If the ionization zone occurs close enough to the surfaceof the secondary, this could be sufﬁcient to propel some of the overlying stellar materialthrough theL1point and initiate a dwarf nova outburst. Recall, however, that the secondarystar is usually a main-sequence star of spectral type G or later, so the ionization zone maywell lie too deep to produce the instability.The alternative explanation involving an instability in the outer part of the accretiondisk also utilizes the hydrogen partial ionization zone. The viscosity of the disk materialgoverns the rate at which mass spirals down through the disk. The lower the viscosity, thelower the resistance to the orbital motion of the disk gases; the inward drift of materialdecreases, and more matter accumulates in the disk. If the viscosity periodically switches17difference of 5 magnitudes corresponds to a factor of 100 in brightness.1This is somewhat reminiscent of theκ-mechanism that is involved in stellar pulsation.7
8
8A Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 752>>>

128128128128128128128128128128128128128128128128128
AAVSOLight curve of SS Cygni1896–1963FIGURE 16Outbursts of the dwarf nova SS Cygni, about 95 pc away. This light curve, labeledby Julian day at 500-day intervals, covers the years 1896–1963 and was compiled by the AmericanAssociation of Variable Star Observers. (We acknowledge with thanks the variable star observationsfrom the AA VSO International Database contributed by observers worldwide.)Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 753>>>

from a low to a high value, the resulting wave of stored material plunging inward couldproduce the brightening of the disk observed for dwarf novae. Although the source of theviscosity in accretion disks is poorly understood, it has been suggested that the switchbetween low and high viscosity may be produced by an instability involving the periodicionization and recombination of hydrogen in the outer part of the disk whereT≈10,000 K.In such a scenario, the viscosity is roughly proportional to the disk temperature, which inturn depends on the opacity of the disk material. Below 104K, a plausible chain of reasoningthen suggestsneutral hydrogen→low opacity→efﬁcient cooling→low temperature→low viscosity→mass retained in the outer disk.On the other hand, above 104K,ionized hydrogen→high opacity→inefﬁcient cooling→high temperature→high viscosity→mass released to fall through the disk.The instability occurs because the accumulation of matter tends to slowly heat the outerdisk, while its release results in a rapid cooling. This mechanism should operate only forlow accretion rates (<1012kg s−1≈10−11M⊙yr−1), so dwarf novae outbursts should notoccur for systems with larger values of˙M. This limit is in fact observed and is one reasonwhy most astronomers favor the disk instability explanation of dwarf novae outbursts.Classical NovaeHigher accretion rates are associated with classical novae. The earliest record of a novawas that of CK Vulpeculae, which occurred in 1670. Since then hundreds of others havebeen observed. About 30 novae are detected in the Andromeda galaxy (M31) each year,but only two or three per year can be seen in those regions of our own Milky Way Galaxythat are unobscured by dust. Novae are characterized by a sudden increase in brightnessof between 7 and 20 magnitudes, with an average brightening of about 10–12 magnitudes.The rise in luminosity is very rapid, taking only a few days, with a brief pause orstandstillwhen the star is about two magnitudes from its maximum brilliance. At its peak, a novamay shine with about 105L⊙and release roughly 1038J (integrated across all wavelengths)over∼100 days.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 754>>>

The subsequent decline occurs more slowly over several months, and its rate of declinedeﬁnes thespeed classof a nova. Afast novatakes a few weeks to dim by two mag-nitudes, whereas aslow novamay take nearly 100 days to decline by the same amountfrom maximum; see Figs. 17 and 18. The declines are sometimes punctuated by largeﬂuctuations in brightness, which in extreme cases may take the form of the complete ab-sence of visible light from the nova for a month or so before it reappears. Fast novae aretypically three magnitudes brighter than slow novae, but in either case a nova falls to nearlyits pre-eruption appearance after a few decades.During the ﬁrst few months, the decline in brightness occurs only at visual wavelengths.When observations at infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths are included, the bolometric
109876543210mv650 660 670 680 690 700 710 720 730 740 750JD 2442 +VisualPhotographicPhotoelectric665.381.85
FIGURE 17The light curve of V1500 Cyg, a fast nova. (Figure adapted from Young, Corwin,Bryan, and De Vaucouleurs,Ap. J.,209, 882, 1976.)
010020030040050013121110987654321mpg180445 DQ Herculis, Nova 1934AAVSODaysFIGURE 18The light curve of DQ Her, a slow nova. Thephotographic magnitude,mpg,i smeasured from the nova’s image on photographic plates. (We acknowledge with thanks the variablestar observations from the AA VSO International Database contributed by observers worldwide.)Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 755>>>

0.0010.010.11.0L/L (Day 4.4)02 0 4 0 6 0 8 0Days after visual maximumNova Serpentis 1970IR excessdevelopsV + IRV + UVVisual
/H9257 Car stage[Fe II] weakFIGURE 19The bolometric luminosity of nova FH Serpentis, in terms of its luminosity atday 4.4. Note that during the ﬁrst 60 days, the decline in visible energy was almost exactly offsetby an increase at ultraviolet wavelengths. Thereafter, the infrared rose as the visible light outputwas redistributed to infrared wavelengths. (Figure adapted from Gallagher and Starrﬁeld,Annu. Rev.Astron. Astrophys.,16, 171, 1978. Reproduced with permission from theAnnual Review of Astronomyand Astrophysics, V olume 16, ©1978 by Annual Reviews Inc.)luminosity of a nova is found to remain approximately constant for several months followingits outburst; see Fig. 19. In addition, spectra of novae show that they are accompaniedby the ejection of 10−5to 10−4M⊙of hot gases at velocities between several hundred andseveral thousand km s−1. The speed of the gases is roughly three times greater for fastnovae, but the total mass ejected is about the same for both speed classes. We will see thatthe changing characteristics of this expanding shell of gas are responsible for the featuresseen in Fig. 19.The average value of the absolute visual magnitude of a nova in its quiescent state isMV=4.5. Assuming that the light from such a system comes primarily from the accretiondisk around the white dwarf, an estimate of the mass transfer rate for a typical nova canbe obtained. (For the purposes of this estimation, visual magnitudes will be used insteadof bolometric magnitudes. This means that the mass transfer rate will be slightly under-estimated.)he luminosity of the system isL=100(MSun−MV)/5L⊙=1.3L⊙=4.9×1026W.With this result, the luminosity of an accretion disk (Eq. 23) can be solved for the masstransfer rate, giving˙M=2RLGM=5.7×1013kg s−1,or about 9.0×10−10M⊙yr−1.TClose Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 756>>>

This is in good agreement with the accepted theoretical model of a nova, which incorpo-rates a white dwarf in a semidetached binary system that accretes matter at a rate of about10−8to 10−9M⊙yr−1. The hydrogen-rich gases accumulate on the surface of the whitedwarf, where they are compressed and heated. At the base of this layer, turbulent mixingenriches the gases with the carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen of the white dwarf. (Without thismixing, the ensuing explosion would be too feeble to eject the mass observed for the ex-panding shell of hot gases.) Spectroscopic analysis of the shell shows an enrichment ofcarbon, nitrogen, and oxygen by a factor of 10 to 100 times the solar abundance of theseelements.At the base of this enriched layer of hydrogen, the material is supported by electrondegeneracy pressure. When about 10−4to 10−5M⊙of hydrogen has accumulated and thetemperature at the base reaches a few million kelvins, a shell of CNO-cycle hydrogen burn-ing develops. For highly degenerate matter the pressure is independent of the temperature,so the shell source cannot dampen the reaction rate by expanding and cooling. The result isa runaway thermonuclear reaction, with temperatures reaching 108K before the electronslosetheirdegeneracy.WhentheluminosityexceedstheEddingtonlimitofabout1031Wradiationpressurecanlifttheaccretedmaterialandexpelitintospace.The fast and slow speed classes of novae are likely due to variations in the mass of thewhite dwarf and in the degree of CNO enrichment of the hydrogen surface layer. The briefstandstill that occurs before maximum luminosity is probably an effect of the changingopacity of the ejecta.The energy that would be released in the complete fusion of a hydrogen layer ofm=10−4M⊙is 0.007mc2≈1041J, roughly 103times larger than the energies actually observed.If all of the hydrogen were in fact consumed, the nova would shine for several hundredyears. Most of the accumulated material must therefore be propelled into space by theexplosion. However, the kinetic energy of the ejecta (far from the nova) is much smallerthan the gravitational binding energy of the surface layer, indicating that the total energygiven to the ejecta is just barely enough to allow it to escape from the system.Only about 10% of the hydrogen layer is ejected by the nova explosion. Followingthis initialhydrodynamic ejection phasewhich dominates for fast novae, hydrostaticequilibrium is established and thehydrostatic burning phasebegins. During this prolongedstage of hydrogen burning, which is most important for slow novae, energy is produced at aconstant rate approximately equal to the Eddington luminosity. The layer above the shell ofCNO burning becomes fully convective and expands by a factor of 10 to 100, extending tosome 109m.2At the surface of the convective envelope the effective temperature is about105K, much less than the 4×107K in the active CNO shell source below.Finally, the last of the accreted surface layer is ejected, from between a few months toabout a year after the hydrostatic burning phase began. Deprived of fuel, the hydrostaticburning phase ends, and the white dwarf begins to cool. Eventually the binary system revertsto its quiescent conﬁguration and the accretion process begins anew. For accretion rates ofThis mechanism is similar to the helium core ﬂash.2The white dwarf remnant may overﬂow its Roche lobe. The consequences of the resulting disruption of the closebinary system are not yet clear.19,
0
190Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 757>>>

10−8to 10−9M⊙yr−1, it will take some 104to 105years to build up another surface layerof 10−4M⊙.The physical character of theejected gasespasses through three distinct phases as aconsequence of the nova explosion. During the initialﬁreball expansion phase, the materialblown off the star in the hydrodynamic ejection phase forms an optically thick “ﬁreball”that radiates as a hot blackbody of 6000–10,000 K. The observed light originates in the“photosphere” of the expanding ﬁreball; at this point, the spectrum of the nova resemblesthat of an A or F supergiant.The expanding model photosphere has a radius that initially increases linearly withtime and then approaches a limiting value ofR∞=3κ˙Meject8πv.(30)If the luminosity,L,o ft h en o v ai sa l s oa s s u m e dt ob ec o n s t a n t ,t h e ntheeffectivetemperatureofthemodelphotosphereapproachesT∞=⎡parenleftbiggL4πσ⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftBigg8πv3κ˙Meject⎡parenrightBigg1/2.(31)For an opacity ofκ=0.04 m2kg−1am a s se j e c t i o nr a t eo f˙Meject≈1019kgs−1(about10−4M⊙yr−1), and an ejection speed ofv≈1000 km s−1, the ﬁreball’s photosphere ap-proaches a limiting radius of about 5×1010m, or 1/3 AU. TakingLto be the Eddingtonlimit of about 1031W, the effective temperature of the model photosphere approaches avalue of nearly 9000 K.The optically thick ﬁreball phase ends in a few days, at the point of maximum visualbrightness. Then, as the shell of gas thrown off by the nova continues to expand, it becomesless and less dense. The rate of mass ejection,˙Meject, has also declined in the hydrostaticburning phase. The result, according to Eqs. ( 30) and ( 31), is that the location of thephotosphere moves inward and its temperature increases slightly. Although these generaltrends are correct, the opacity is in fact very sensitive to the temperature forT<104Kthin phasebegins. The central white dwarf, swollen by its hydrostatic burning phase, nowhas the appearance of a blue horizontal-branch object located just blueward of the RR Lyraestars on the H–R diagram. The white dwarf envelope may burn irregularly, resulting in thesubstantial ﬂuctuations in brightness observed for some novae.After a few months, when the temperature of the expanding envelope of gases has fallen toabout 1000 K, carbon in the ejecta can condense to form dust consisting of graphite grains.22The identiﬁcation of the grain composition comes in part from an infrared emission “bump” at a wavelength of5µm.Novae are natural laboratories for testing theories of grain formation.,
11,Close Binary Star Systems
and our model is too simplistic to describe the evolution of the nova. More advanced  arguments show that as the visual brightness declines, more light is received from the nova at ultraviolet wavelengths. Finally, the shell becomes transparent and the optically


<<<PAGE 758>>>

FIGURE 20A 1949 photo of Nova Persei, which exploded in 1901. (Courtesy of Palo-mar/Caltech.)This initiates thedust formation phase. The resulting dust shell becomes optically thick inroughly 50% of all novae. The visible light from a nova is undiminished by an optically thinshell, but the formation of an optically thick cocoon of dust obscures or completely hides thecentral white dwarf. In the latter case, the output of visible light suddenly plunges, as seen inFig. 19. The light from the white dwarf is absorbed and re-emitted by the graphite grains,so the optically thick dust shell radiates as a∼900 K blackbody at infrared wavelengths.In this way, the nova’s bolometric luminosity remains constant as long as the white dwarfcontinues to produce energy at roughly the Eddington rate while in its hydrostatic burningphase. Figure 20 shows that the expanding shell may remain visible for years after thehydrostatic burning phase has ended, its gases and dust enriching the interstellar medium.Polars: X-Rays from White Dwarf SystemsAM Herculis stars(also calledpolars), are semidetached binaries containing white dwarfswith magnetic ﬁelds of about 2000 T. The torque produced by the white dwarf’s ﬁeldinteracting with the secondary star’s envelope results in a nearly synchronous rotation;the two stars perpetually face each other, connected by a stream of hot gas.2As this gasapproaches the white dwarf, it moves almost straight down toward the surface and formsan accretioncolumna few tens of kilometers across. A shock front occurs above the whitedwarf’s photosphere, where the gas is decelerated and heated to a temperature of several108K. The hot gas emits hard X-ray photons; some escape, and some are absorbed by thephotosphere and re-emitted at soft X-ray and ultraviolet wavelengths.2If the white dwarf has a somewhat weaker ﬁeld (Bs<1000 T), or if the stars are farther apart, an accretion diskmay form, only to be disrupted near the star (as shown in Fig. 22). These systems, calledDQ Herculis stars,orintermediate polars, do not exhibit synchronous rotation.2
2Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 759>>>

The visible light observed from these systems is in the form ofcyclotron radiationemitted by nonrelativistic electrons spiraling along the magnetic ﬁeld lines of the accretioncolumn. This is the nonrelativistic analog of the synchrotron radiation emitted by relativisticelectrons.Incontrasttothecontinuousspectrumofsynchrotronradiation,mostoftheenergyofcyclotronradiationisemittedatthecyclotron frequency,νc=eB2πme.(32)ForBs=1000 T,νc=2.8×1013Hz, which is in the infrared. However, a small fractionof the energy is emitted at higher harmonics (multiples) ofνcand may be detected at visiblewavelengths by astronomers on Earth. The cyclotron radiation is circularly polarized whenobserved parallel to the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld lines, and linearly polarized whenviewed perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines.2Thus, as the two stars orbit each other (typicallyevery 1 to 2 hours), the measured polarization changes smoothly between being circularlyand linearly polarized. In fact, it is this strong variable polarization (up to 30%) that givespolars their name.5TYPE IA SUPERNOVAEWe have seen that there are many differences among the characteristics of individual novae.The peak luminosity, the rate of decline, the presence of rapid ﬂuctuations, and/or thecomplete disappearance of the nova at visible wavelengths—all of these vary greatly fromsystem to system. On the other hand, another type of cataclysmic variable, theType Iasupernova, varies relatively little and in a systematic way. This means that it is possibleto use these exploding stars as calibrated luminosity sources (“standardizable candles”),allowing astronomers to establish the distances to the systems in which they are found.ObservationsType Ia supernovae are remarkably consistent in their energy output; at maximum lightmost Type Ia’s reach an average maximum in the blue and visual wavelength bands of⟨MB⟩≃⟨MV⟩≃−19.3±0.03,with a typical spread of less than about 0.3 magnitudes. As can be seen in Fig. 21, a clearrelationship exists between the peak brightness and the rate of decline in the light curve(the brightest Type Ia’s decline the slowest), making it possible to accurately determine themaximum luminosity of an individual Type Ia by measuring the rate of decline. Knowingthe luminosity (or absolute magnitude), we can compute the distance to the supernova.Given their tremendous brightness, Type Ia supernovae serve as critically important tools2The electric ﬁeld vector of linearly polarized light oscillates in a single plane, whereas for circularly polarizedlight this plane of polarization rotates about the direction of travel.3
3Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 760>>>

–12–14–16–18–20Absolute magnitude
–20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120t – tpLuminositycorrection(magnitudes)–0.50–0.250.0+0.25+0.50+0.75+1.00+1.25+1.50FIGURE 21The rate of decline in the light curve of a Type Ia supernova is inversely correlatedwith the maximum brightness of the light curve. (Figure adapted from Riess, Press, and Kirshner,Ap.J.,438, L17, 1995.)for measuring the distances to the galaxies in which they reside. This in turn means thatastronomers can probe the structure of the universe to great distances. In fact, Type Iasupernovae played a crucial role in demonstrating that the expansion of the universe isactually accelerating today, 13.7 billion years after the Big Bang, and that nearly two-thirdsof the universe consists ofdark energy.evolved objects that have either lost their hydrogen or had it converted to heavier elements,or both. The spectral lines also show P-Cygni proﬁles, representative of mass loss. Inaddition, the blueshifted absorption features indicate expansion velocities of the ejecta of/greaterorsimilar104km s−1(∼0.1c).Models of Type Ia SupernovaeGiven the remarkable consistency of Type Ia light curves and spectra, it appears that a fairlyuniform mechanism must be responsible for these extremely energetic events.The standard model for Type Ia supernovae assumed by astronomers today is that theseevents are due to the destruction of a white dwarf star in a binary system. If sufﬁcientmass falls onto the white dwarf, its mass can be driven to near the Chandrasekhar limit,producing a catastrophic explosion. Still unclear at the time this text was written is the exactmechanism (or mechanisms) that trigger the explosion.Close Binary Star Systems
Type Ia supernovae do not exhibit hydrogen lines in their spectra and,  instead, show the strong presence of Si II lines, along with neutral and ionized lines of O, Mg, S, Ca and Fe. Given that hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, the absence of hydrogen indicates that Type Ia supernovae are


<<<PAGE 761>>>

Two general scenarios have been proposed. In one scenario, known asdouble-degeneratemodels, two white dwarf stars exist in a binary orbit. One of the most dramaticpredictions of Einstein’s general theory of relativity is the existence ofgravitational waves(orgravitational radiation). According to general relativity, mass acts on spacetime,telling it how to curve. If the distribution of a system’s mass varies, the resulting changesin the surrounding spacetime curvature may propagate outward as a gravitational wave,carrying energy and angular momentum away from the system. (If the collapse of a star isspherically symmetric, it will not produce gravitational waves; there must be a departurefrom spherical symmetry.) When applied to a close binary system, general relativity showsthat the emission of gravitational radiation will cause the stars to spiral together. If theorbital period is under about 14 hours, the loss of energy via gravitational waves governsthe subsequent evolution of a system with solar-mass components. For example, as a whitedwarf and a neutron star spiral closer together, the white dwarf may break up and donatesome of its mass and angular momentum to its companion. The result could be an isolatedmillisecond pulsar. A system of two neutron stars, known as the Hulse–Taylor pulsar, hasconﬁrmed this prediction of general relativity to incredibly high precisionIn the case where two white dwarf stars are spiraling together, the less massive star(which has the larger radius) will eventually spill over its Roche lobe and be completelytorn apart in just a few orbits. The resulting thick disk dumps its C–O-rich material ontothe more massive primary. As the mass of the primary grows and nears the Chandrasekharlimit, nuclear reactions begin in the deep interior, eventually destroying the primary whitedwarf (this scenario was illustrated in Fig. 11).Double-degenerate models appear to predict about the right number of mergers, con-sistent with the observed Type Ia supernova rate in galaxies, and they naturally accountfor the lack of hydrogen in the spectra of Type Ia’s. However, computer simulations ofnuclear burning suggest that the ignition may be off-center, resulting in ultimate collapseto a neutron star, rather than complete disruption of the white dwarf as a supernova. Inaddition, it appears that the production of heavy elements may be inconsistent with therelative abundances observed in supernova spectra.The other general scenario, known assingle-degeneratemodels, involves an evolvingstar in orbit about a white dwarf, much like the models of dwarf novae and novae. However,in this case, the mass falling onto the white dwarf results in complete destruction of thewhite dwarf in a Type Ia supernova. To date, this set of models is generally favored, but thedetails of the eruption are still unclear.One version of single-degenerate models suggests that as the material from the secondaryfalls onto the primary, the helium in the gas will settle on top of the C–O white dwarf,becoming degenerate. When enough helium has accumulated, a helium ﬂash will occur.Not only will this cause the helium to burn to carbon and oxygen, but it will also senda shock wave downward into the degenerate C–O white dwarf, causing ignition of thedegenerate carbon and oxygen.A second version of the single-degenerate models doesn’t invoke degenerate heliumburning on the surface but simply has carbon and oxygen igniting in the interior of thewhite dwarf as the star nears the Chandrasekhar limit, at which point the degenerate gas isno longer able to support the mass of the star. As the star approaches the fatal limit, two-.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 762>>>

and three-dimensional simulations suggest that multiple, independent ignition points mayoccur deep within the core, resulting in nonspherical events.What happens next is also a matter of signiﬁcant debate and ongoing research. It is as yetunclear if the resulting burning front of carbon and oxygen occurs at subsonic speeds (knownas adeﬂagrationevent) or if the front accelerates and steepens to become a supersonicburning front (known as adetonation, or a true explosion). Precisely how the burning frontadvances affects the details of the resulting light curve (the maximum luminosity and rate ofdecay following maximum) as well as the relative abundances of the elements produced asobserved in the spectrum. Of course, the question of deﬂagration versus detonation appliesto successful double-degenerate models as well.In all versions of the single-degenerate scenario, one of the general challenges has beento have just the right rate of accretion from the secondary. If the accretion rate isn’t appro-priately ﬁne-tuned, the result could be a dwarf nova or a classical nova.It is possible that both double- and single-degenerate mechanisms may be at work innature. It is also possible that some single-degenerate events (if they occur) may invokehelium ﬂashes while others may simply ignite carbon and oxygen in the interior withoutthe helium trigger. Perhaps even deﬂagration and detonation events occur. In any case, theconsistency of the light curves ultimately arises from the eruption of a C–O white dwarfnear 1.4M⊙. The variations may arise from slight variations in mass and/or variations inmechanisms.Much work remains to be done in understanding Type Ia supernovae, which are socritically important to so many aspects of modern astrophysics.6NEUTRON STARS AND BLACK HOLES IN BINARIESIf one of the stars in a close binary system is sufﬁciently massive that it explodes as acore-collapse supernova, the result may be either a neutron star or a black hole orbitingthe companion star. In a semidetached system, hot gas can then spill through the innerLagrangian point from the distended atmosphere of the companion star onto the compactobject. A variety of intriguing phenomena are powered by the energy released when thegas falls down the deep gravitational potential well onto the compact object. As will beseen shortly, many of these systems emit copious quantities of X-rays. In fact, thesebinaryX-ray systemsshine most strongly in the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum.Other systems may consist oftwocompact objects, such as the binary pulsars.Formation of Binaries with Neutron Stars or Black HolesWhether or not a binary system survives the supernova explosion of one of its component
2We have also seen that asymmetric jets during the formation of a neutron star may give the neutron star a violentkick, which would disrupt the system.4Close Binary Star Systems
stars depends on the amount of mass ejected from the system.24 Consider a system initially containing two stars of mass M1 and M2, separated by a distance a, that are in circular orbits about their common center of mass. We ﬁnd that the total energy of the


<<<PAGE 763>>>

system isEi=12M1v21+12M2v22−GM1M2a=−GM1M22a.(33)The speeds of the two stars are related by Eq. (7.4),M1v1=M2v2. Now suppose that Star 1explodes as a core-collapse supernova, leaving a remnant of massMR. For a sphericallysymmetric explosion, there is no change in the velocity of Star 1. Before the spherical shellof ejecta reaches Star 2, its mass acts gravitationally as though it were still on Star 1So far, the supernova has had no effect on the binary. However, as soonas the shell has swept beyond Star 2, the gravitational inﬂuence of the ejecta is no longerdetectable.Thus the main consequence of the supernova on the orbital dynamics of the binarysystem arises from the ejection of mass, the removal of some of the gravitational glue thatwas binding the stars together.2Since the velocity of Star 2 is initially unchanged andthe separation of the two stars remains the same, the total energy of the system after theexplosion is nowEf=12MRv21+12M2v22−GMRM2a.(34)If the explosion results in anunboundsystem, thenEf≥0. It is left as an exercise to showthat the mass of the remnant must satisfyMRM1+M2≤1(2+M2/M1)(1+M2/M1)<12(35)for an unbound system. That is,at leastone-half of the total mass of the binary systemmust be ejected if the supernova explosion of Star 1 is to disrupt the system. If one-halfor more of the system’s mass is retained, the result will be a neutron star or a black holegravitationally bound to a companion star. For a massive companion star (M2≫M1), thisis a likely result.Capturing Isolated Neutron StarsIt is possible that isolated neutron stars, formed by core-collapse supernovae, may be grav-itationally captured during a chance encounter with another star. Because the total energyof two unbound stars is initially greater than zero, some of the excess kinetic energy mustbe removed for a capture to occur.other star, the resulting binary system will have a period ranging from several hours (witha main-sequence star) to several days (with a giant).2The direct impact of the supernova blast on the companion star has been neglected, although this too willcontribute to disrupting the system.5
5.Close Binary Star Systems
If the proximity of the two objects raises a tidal bulge on the nondegenerate star, energy may be dissipated by the damping mechanisms for pulsating stars. The out-come of such a tidal capture depends on the nearness of the passage and the type of star involved. If the neutron star passes between about 1 to 3 times the radius of the


<<<PAGE 764>>>

systems containing a neutron star over a period of some 1010years. This is consistent withthe number of X-ray sources observed in globular clusters. (The estimated lifetime of abinary X-ray system is on the order of 109years, so only the most compact globular clusterswould be expected to harbor even one X-ray source at a given time.)An alternative capture mechanism involves three (or more) stars. One of the stars wouldbe gravitationally ﬂung from the system, removing energy and so allowing the capture totake place.Yet another possibility was envisioned by by Kip Thorne and Anna˙Zytkow of Caltech in1977. Although a direct hit would destroy a main-sequence star, the penetration of a neutronstar into a giant star would bring it close to the star’s degenerate core. The result could bea neutron star orbiting inside the giant star: a system that is known as aThorne–˙Zytkowobject. It is thought that the envelope of the giant star would be quickly expelled, producinga neutron star–white dwarf binary with an orbital period of about 10 minutes. (To date, theseobjects remain hypothetical.)Binary X-Ray PulsarsClose binary systems containing neutron stars were ﬁrst identiﬁed by their energetic emis-sion of X-rays. The ﬁrst source of X-rays beyond the Solar System was discovered in1962 in the constellation Scorpius by a Geiger counter arcing above Earth’s atmospherein a sounding rocket. (X-rays cannot penetrate the atmosphere, so detectors and telescopesdesigned for X-ray wavelengths must make their observations from space.2) This object,called Sco X-1, is now known to be abinary X-ray pulsar(also called simply an X-raypulsar). The periodic eclipse of another X-ray pulsar, Cen X-3 in the constellation Cen-taurus, revealed its binary nature. [It is important to note that the Crab pulsar also emitsX-rays (along with a small number of other isolated pulsars), but the Crab is primarily aradio pulsar that radiates in every region of the electromagnetic spectrum.]X-ray pulsars are powered by the gravitational potential energy released by accretingmatter. Recall from Example 1.2 that when mass falls from a great distance to the surface
X-ray pulsars also emit radio wavelength energy, just like isolated pulsars. However,radio wavelength emissions are easily quelched by the accretion disk in the binary system,and so the radio emissions are not as prominant as they are for isolated pulsars.2The ﬁrst X-ray detector was designed to look for X-rays from the lunar surface, produced when solar windparticles cause the lunar soil to ﬂuoresce. The presence of enormously stronger cosmic X-ray sources came as asurprise to astronomers at the time.6
6Close Binary Star SystemsThis tidal capture process is most effective in regions that are extremely densely populated with stars, such as the centers of globular clusters. It is estimated that in a compact globular cluster, tidal capture could produce up to about ten close binary
of a neutron star, about 20% of its rest energy is released, an amount that far exceeds the fraction of a percent that would be produced by fusion. The observed X-ray lu-minosities range up to 1031 W [the Eddington limit]. For a neutron star with a radius of 10 km, the Stefan–Boltzmann equation shows that the temperature associated with this luminosity is about 2 × 107 K. According to Wien’s law, the spectrum of a blackbody with this temperature would peak at an X-ray wavelength of about 0.15 nm.


<<<PAGE 765>>>

rAFIGURE 22Accreting gas channeled onto a neutron star’s magnetic poles, wherer≈rA.1/r3ﬁeld.When the magnetic energy densityum=B2/2µ0becomes comparable to thekinetic energy densityuK=12ρv2, the magnetic ﬁeld will channel the infalling ionizedgases toward the poles of the neutron star; see Fig. 22. This occurs at a distance fromthe star known as theAlfvén radius,rA, where12ρv2=B22µ0.(36)For the special case of spherically symmetric accretion, with the gases starting at rest at agreat distance, energy conservation implies that the free-fall velocity isv=√2GM/rfora star of massM. Furthermore, the density and velocity are related to the mass accretionrate,˙M, by ,˙M=4πr2ρv,(37)and the radial dependence of the magnetic dipole ﬁeld strength may be expressed asB(r)=Bs⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3,(38)whereBsis the surface value of the magnetic ﬁeld. Inserting these expressions intoEq. (36) and solving for the Alfvén radius, we obtainrA=⎡parenleftbigg8π2B4sR12µ20GM˙M2⎡parenrightbigg1/7(39)(the proof is left as an exercise). Of course, the accretion will not actually be sphericallysymmetric. However, the magnetic ﬁeld increases so rapidly as the falling matter approachesthe star that a more realistic calculation yields nearly the same result: The ﬂow will bedisrupted at adisruption radiusrd,rd=αrA,(40)withα∼0.5.Close Binary Star Systems
Neutron stars are often accompanied by powerful magnetic ﬁelds. In fact, these ﬁelds may be sufﬁciently strong to prevent the accreting matter from even reach-ing the star’s surface. The strength of the neutron star’s magnetic dipole ﬁeld is proportional to , so the plunging gases encounter a rapidly increasing


<<<PAGE 766>>>

Example 6.1.Before considering the details of channeled accretion onto a neutronstar, let’s look at the case of accretion onto the white dwarf considered in Example 2.1,for whichM=0.85 M⊙,R=0.0095 R⊙=6.6×106m, and˙M=1013kg s−1(1.6×10−10M⊙yr−1). Assume that its magnetic ﬁeld has a surface strength ofBs=1000 T,about 100 times stronger than the typical value for a white dwarf. Then, from Eq. ( 39),the Alfvén radius isrA=6.07×108m.This is comparable to the separation of the stars in a cataclysmic variable (see Exam-ple 4.1), so an accretion disk cannot form around a white dwarf with an extremely strongmagnetic ﬁeld. Instead, the mass spilling through the inner Lagrangian point is conﬁnedto a stream that narrows as it is magnetically directed toward one (or both) of the polesof the white dwarf. In the absence of an accretion disk, all of the accretion energy will bedelivered to the pole(s) of the star, with an accretion luminosity of (Eq. 24)Lacc=GM˙MR=1.71×1026W.A Polar Analog in a Neutron Star SystemExample 6.2.Consider the case of accretion onto the neutron star described in Ex-ample 2.1. For this star,M=1.4M⊙,R=10 km, and˙M=1014kg s−1(1.6×10−9M⊙yr−1). Furthermore, take the value of the magnetic ﬁeld at the neutron star’ssurface to beBs=108T. The value of the Alfvén radius is then given by Eq. (39),rA=3.09×106m.Although 300 times the radius of the neutron star itself, this is much less than the valueofrcirc(Eq. 25) that describes the extent of an accretion disk. Thus an accretion diskwill form around the neutron star but will be disrupted near the neutron star’s surface asshown in Fig. 22 (unless the magnetic ﬁeld is quite weak, roughly<104T). As theaccreting gas is funneled onto one of the magnetic poles of the neutron star, it forms anaccretion column similar to the one described for polars. In this case, however, the accretionluminosity (Eq. 24) is four orders of magnitude greater,Lacc=GM˙MR=1.86×1030W,close to the Eddington limit of∼1031W.AsLaccapproachesLEd,radiationpressureelevatestheshockfronttoheightsreachingr∼2R.A sar e s u l t ,X - r a y sa r ee m i t t e doveralargesolidangle.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 767>>>

Eclipsing, Binary X-Ray Pulsar SystemsX-ray pulsar. Figure 23 shows the signal received from Hercules X-1, which exhibitsa pulse of X-rays every 1.245 s (the rotation period of the neutron star). Note that the broadpulse (due to the large solid angle of the emission) may occupy∼50% of the pulse period,compared to sharper radio pulses which take up only 1% to 5%of the pulse period. To date, about 20 binary X-ray pulsars have been found, with periodsFurther conﬁrmation that most X-ray pulsars are accreting neutron stars comes from theobservation that the periods of these objects are slowly decreasing. As time passes, theyspinfaster.2The time derivative of the star’s rotation period,˙P≡dP/dt, is related to therate of change of its angular momentum,L=Iω, bydLdt=Idωdt=Iddt⎡parenleftbigg2πP⎡parenrightbigg=−2πI˙PP2,
02468101214161820Counts/0.096 sec0100200300Bins/H9270– = 1.24 secSource in Hercules (2U1705+34)November 6, 1971
FIGURE 23X-ray pulses from Her X-1, with a period of 1.245 s. The peaks are the X-ray countsreceived from Her X-1 grouped in bins that are 0.096 s wide, and the heavier curve is a ﬁt to the datausing sine functions. (Figure adapted from Tananbaum et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,174, L143, 1972.)2he periods of radio pulsarsincreasewith time as they lose energy due to magneticdipole radiation.7
7TClose Binary Star SystemsIf the neutron star’s magnetic and rotation axes are not aligned, the X-ray  mitting region may be eclipsed periodically, and the result is an eclipsing, binaryranging from 0.15 s to 853 s. White dwarfs cannot rotate as rapidly as the lower end of this period range without breaking up. This is one indication that X-ray pulsars are indeed accreting neutron stars.e


<<<PAGE 768>>>

whereIis the moment of inertia of the neutron star. Near the disruption radius, the angularmomentum of the gas parcels orbiting in the accretion disk (L=mvr) is transferred tothe neutron star via magnetic torques. The time derivative of the neutron star’s angularmomentum is just the rate at which angular momentum arrives at the disruption radius, soatr=rdwe setdLdt=˙Mvrd,where the orbital velocity atr=rdisv=√GM/rd[e=0anda=rdforacircularorbit].Equating these expressions fordL/dtand using the deﬁnitionsoftheAlfvènanddisruptionradii,Eqs.(39)and(40),resultsin˙PP=−P√α2πI⎡parenleftBigg2√2πB2sR6G3M3˙M6µ0⎡parenrightBigg1/7.(41)Example 6.3.The X-ray pulsar Centaurus X-3 has a period of 4.84 s and an X-rayluminosity of aboutLx=5×1030W. Assuming that it is a 1.4 M⊙neutron star with aradius of 10 km, its moment of inertia (assuming for simplicity that it is a uniform sphere)isI=25MR2=1.11×1038kg m2.Using Eq. (24) for the accretion luminosity, we ﬁnd the mass transfer rate to be˙M=RLxGM=2.69×1014kg s−1,or 4.27×10−9M⊙yr−1. Then, for an assumed magnetic ﬁeld ofBs=108T andα=0.5,Eq. (41) gives the fractional change in the period per second and per year:˙PP=−2.74×10−11s−1=−8.64×10−4yr−1.That is, the characteristic time for the period to change isP/˙P=1160 years.The measured value for Cen X-3 is˙P /P=−2.8×10−4yr−1, smaller than our estimateby a factor of 3 but in good agreement with this simple argument. You may verify that ifa 0.85 M⊙white dwarf with a radius of 6.6×106m andBs=1000 T is used for theaccreting star, rather than a neutron star, then˙P /P=−1.03×10−5yr−1. The measuredvalue is larger by a factor of 27. A white dwarf is hundreds of times larger than a neutronstar, so it has a much larger moment of inertia and is more difﬁcult to spin up. The substan-tially better agreement between the neutron star model and the observations obtained forthese systems is compelling evidence that neutron stars are the accreting objects in binaryX-ray pulsars.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 769>>>

604020–20–40–60Time delay (sec)
Residual (msec)0.0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.0EclipseEclipseJD 2442838.628SMC X-1
Orbital phase–40–202040
FIGURE 24Measured pulse arrival times (dots) for the binary X-ray pulsar SMC X-1 as afunction of its orbital phase. The curve is for the best-ﬁt circular orbit, and the dots about the straightline show the residuals from the best-ﬁt orbit. (Figure adapted from Primini et al.,Ap. J.,217, 543,1977.)As an X-ray pulsar orbits its binary companion, the distance from the pulsar to Earthconstantly changes. This results in a cyclic variation in the measured pulse period that isanalogous to the Doppler shift of a spectral line observed for a spectroscopic binaryFigure24showstheshiftinpulsearrivaltimesasafunctionoftheorbitalphase for the X-ray pulsar SMC X-1 in the Small Magellanic Cloud. The orbit for thissystem is almost perfectly circular, with a radius of 53.5 light-seconds=0.107 AU, lessthan one-third the size of Mercury’s orbit around the Sun.A complete description of the binary system has been obtained for a small number ofeclipsingX-ray pulsars with visible companions. Such systems are analogous to double-line, eclipsing, spectroscopic binaries. For example, in the SMC X-1 system the mass of thesecondary star is 17.0 M⊙(with an uncertainty of about 4 M⊙), and its radius is 16.5 R⊙(±4R⊙). The masses of the neutron stars have also been determined for these systems. Theresults are consistent with a neutron star mass of 1.4 M⊙(±0.2M⊙), in good agreementwith the Chandrasekhar limit.X-Ray BurstersIf the magnetic ﬁeld of the neutron star is too weak (≪108T) to completely disrupt theaccretion disk and funnel the accreting matter onto its magnetic poles, these gases will settleover the surface of the star. Without an accretion column to produce a hot spot, X-ray pulsescannot be produced by the rotation of the neutron star. Instead, calculations indicate thatwhen a layer of hydrogen a few meters thick accumulates on the surface, a shell of hydrogenslowly begins burning about a meter below the surface, with a shell of helium burning ignitedanother meter below that; see Fig. 25. This fusion of helium is explosive and releases.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 770>>>

~1 m~1 m~100 m~104 mMostlyneutronsIron-peaknucleiCarbon-richlayer (?)Helium-richlayerHydrogen-richlayerHydrogen-burningShell: /H9267 ~ 108–9 kg m–3Photosphere:/H9267 ~ 103 kg m–3Helium-burningShell: /H9267 ~ 109–11 kg m–3Carbon-burningShell (?): /H9267 ~ 1012–13 kg m–3Central density~1018 kg m–3Accretion
FIGURE 25Surface layers on an accreting neutron star. (Figure adapted from Joss,CommentsAstrophys.,8, 109, 1979.)a total of∼1032J in just a few seconds, with the surface reaching a temperature of about3×107K (twice the Sun’s central temperature). The resulting blackbody spectrum peaksat X-ray wavelengths, and a ﬂood of X-rays is liberated by thisX-ray burster. Some of theX-rays may be absorbed by the accretion disk and re-emitted as visible light, so an opticalﬂash is sometimes seen a few seconds after the X-ray burst. As the burst luminosity declinesin a matter of seconds, the spectrum matches that of a cooling blackbody with a radius of∼10 km, consistent with the presence of a neutron star. After a time that can vary from afew hours to a day or more, another layer of hydrogen accumulates and another X-ray burstis triggered. More than 50 X-ray bursters have been found so far. Most are concentratednear the Galactic plane, toward the center of our Galaxy, with some 20% located in oldglobular clusters.Low-Mass and Massive X-Ray BinariesFrom these and other results, astronomers have identiﬁed two classes of binary X-raysystems. The more common type consists of those with low-mass secondary stars (latespectral-type stars withM2≤2M⊙). These systems belong to thelow-mass X-ray binaries(LMXBs). LMXBs produce X-ray bursts rather than pulses, indicating that the neutronstar’s magnetic ﬁeld is relatively weak. Because low-mass stars are small, the two starsmust orbit more closely if mass is to be transferred from one star to the other. For thisreason, the LMXBs have short orbital periods, from 33.5 days down to 11.4 minutes. AboutIt is thought that the gases accreting on X-ray pulsars are constantly undergoing fusion. However, recall fromExample 1.2 that the energy released in the accretion column will be about 30 times larger, so the energy fromfusion will be lost in the glare of the accretion energy.28
28Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 771>>>

one-quarter of these systems are found within globular clusters, where the high numberdensity of stars makes the gravitational capture of a neutron star more likely. The neutronstars in LMXBs may also have been formed by the accretion-induced collapse of a whitedwarf.Systems with higher-mass secondaries are referred to asmassive X-ray binaries(MXRBs). About half of the approximately 130 known MXRBs are X-ray pulsars. Withgiant or supergiant O and B stars available to ﬁll their Roche lobes, the separation of thestars can be larger and the orbital periods correspondingly longer, from 0.2 days up to580 days. Even if the secondary star’s envelope does not overﬂow its Roche lobe, thevigorous stellar winds of these stars may still provide the mass transfer rate needed tosustain the production of X-rays. The MXRBs are found near the plane of our Galaxy,where there are young massive stars and ongoing star formation. This is consistent with theidea that an MXRB is the product of the normal evolution of a binary system containing amassive star that survived the supernova explosion of its companion.So far, only neutron stars have been considered as the accreting object in binary X-raysystems. However, the gravitational potential well is even deeper for matter falling towarda black hole. In this case, up to about 30% of the rest energy of the falling disk materialblack hole rests on determining that the mass of a compact, X-ray-emitting object exceedsthe approximately 3 M⊙upper limit for the mass of a rapidly rotating neutron star. Thusthe procedure for detecting a black hole in a binary X-ray system is similar to that used tomeasure the masses of neutron stars in these systems.At present, there are only a handful of X-ray binaries that allow such a dynamical deter-mination of the masses involved. The best cases at the time of this writing are A0620−00,V404 Cygni, Cygnus X-1, and LMC X-3. Since none of these systems exhibit eclipses,the resulting uncertainty about their orbital inclinations means that the masses calculatedof the secondary star allows the measurement of the radial velocity ofboththe accretiondisk and the companion star. The identiﬁcation of A0620−00 as a 3.82±0.24 M⊙blackThe arguments for the other two systems, although strong, are not as conclusive. Neitherhas a fully developed accretion disk, and so the velocities of both members cannot bedetermined. Cygnus X-1, perhaps the best-known black hole candidate, is a bright MXRB.Because almost all of the light comes from the secondary, Cyg X-1 is essentially a single-line spectroscopic binary. The identiﬁcation of Cyg X-1 as a black hole therefore dependson the identiﬁcation of the secondary star (HDE 226868) as a O9.7 Iab supergiant with amass of 17.8M⊙. The most likely result, making reasonable assumptions about this binarysystem, is that the mass of the compact object in Cyg X-1 is 10.1M⊙. Even the worst-caseargument results in a secure lower limit of 3.4 M⊙, providing the evidence that Cyg X-1 isa black hole.Close Binary Star Systems
may be emitted as X-rays. In fact, these systems provide the best evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black holes. The gas spilling through the in-ner Lagrangian point is heated to millions of kelvins as it spirals down through the black hole’s accretion disk and so emits X-rays. The identiﬁcation of a
are lower limits. A0620−00 is an X-ray nova, powered by the sporadic accre-tion of material from its companion, a K5 main-sequence star. The relative faintnesshole seems secure. V404 Cyg is also an X-ray nova, where recent measurements persua-sively document the presence of a 12 M black hole.⊙


<<<PAGE 772>>>

The secondary star in the LMC X-3 system is a B3 main-sequence star that is orbitingan unseen, more massive companion. Although the lower limit on the mass of the compactcompanion is 3 M⊙, a more probable mass range is 4–9 M⊙—again, solid evidence for ablack hole. Other X-ray binary systems may contain black holes, such as Nova Mus 1991 inthe southern constellation Musca (the Fly), LMC X-3 in the Large Magellanic Cloud, andCAL 87 (in the direction of the Large Magellanic Cloud), but the evidence in these cases isnot yet as strong.SS 433One more X-ray binary and possible black hole candidate should be mentioned: SS 433,one of the most bizarre objects known to astronomers. In 1978, it was discovered that thisobject displaysthreesets of emission lines. One set of spectral lines was greatly blueshifted,another set was greatly redshifted, and a third set lacked a signiﬁcant Doppler shift. Herewas an object with three components: Two were approaching and receding, respectively,at one-quarter the speed of light while the third stayed nearly still! The wavelengths of theshifted lines vary with a period of 164 days, while the wavelengths of the nearly stationarylines show a smaller shift with a 13.1-day period. Furthermore, the position of SS 433 lies atthe center of a diffuse, elongated shell of gas known as W50, which is probably a supernovaremnant.The 13.1-day period of SS 433 describes the orbit of a compact object (most probably aneutron star, but perhaps a black hole) around the primary. The primary is thought to be a10–20 M⊙early-type star with a stellar wind that produces the broad stationary emissionlines.3Surrounding the compact object is an accretion disk that contributes to the visiblelight from the system equally with the secondary. A tidal interaction between the diskand the two stars could be responsible for a precessional wobble of the disk that has a
◦“SS” stands for the catalog of peculiar emission-line stars compiled by Bruce Stephenson and NicholasSanduleak.For example, one recent measurement of SS 433 favors a 0.8 M⊙neutron star orbiting a 3.2 M⊙companion.SomeastronomershavesuggestedthattheprimarymaybeaWolf–Rayetstartoaccountforthebroad stationary emission lines. Although a substantial percentage of Wolf–Rayet stars are found in binaries, thesestars’ own energetic winds, rather than the transfer of mass in a close binary system, seem to be responsible forremoving most of their hydrogen envelopes.29
0
2930Close Binary Star Systems
period of 164 days, analogous to Earth’s 25,770-year precessional wobble There is broad agreement that the varying Doppler-shifted emission lines, shown in Fig. 26, come from two relativistic jets that expel particles at 0.26c in opposite directions along the axis of the disk. The jets are probably powered by the accretion of matter at a rate exceeding the Eddington limit, generating X-rays at a prodigious rate. This could produce a radiation pressure sufﬁcient to expel a portion of the accreting gases at relativistic speeds in the direction of least resistance—perpendicular to the disk. As the disk precesses, two oppo-sitely directed jets sweep out a cone in space every 164 days, resulting in cyclic variations in both the radial velocity of the jets and the observed Doppler shift. The collimation of the jets could be the result of the ionized gases moving along magnetic ﬁeld lines. The axis of the precessional cone makes an angle of 79  with the line of sight; the cone’s axis is also closely aligned with the long axis of the probable supernova remnant, W50. In fact, there are two regions that have been observed to emit X-rays, presumably.


<<<PAGE 773>>>

0.80.91.01.11.2(1 + z)
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 0.2 0.4PhaseFIGURE 26Doppler shifts measured for the emission lines in SS 433.z=0.1andz=0.2correspondtospeedsof28,500kms−1and54,100kms−1,respectively.(FigureadaptedfromMargon,Grandi,andDownes,Ap. J.,241, 306, 1980.)where the jets collide with the remnant’s gases and heat them to about 107K. Figure 27shows the general features of this incredible system.The Fate of Binary X-Ray SystemsWhat is the fate of a binary X-ray system? As it reaches the endpoint of its evolution,the secondary star will end up as a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole. The effect onthe system depends on the mass of the secondary star. In low-mass systems (LMXBs), thecompanion star will become a white dwarf without disturbing the circular orbit of the system.On the other hand, the higher-mass secondary in a MXRB may explode as a supernova.If more than half of the system’s mass is retained (Eq. 35), a pair of neutron stars willcircle each other in orbits that probably have been elongated by the blast. Otherwise, thesupernova may disrupt the system and hurl the solitary neutron stars into space. This isconsistent with observations that pulsars (like MXRBs) are concentrated near the plane ofour Galaxy and may have high space velocities that can exceed 1000 km s−1.Millisecond Radio PulsarsThe principal way in which a binary system containing two neutron stars can be detectedis if at least one of them is a pulsar. Astronomers therefore search for cyclic variations inthe measured periods of radio pulsars, analogous to the effect described here for the X-raypulsars. Although half of all stars in the sky are actually multiple systems,noneof the ﬁrstone hundred pulsars discovered belonged to a binary. The ﬁrst binary pulsar, PSR 1913+16,was discovered in 1974 by American astronomers Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor, usingthe Arecibo radio telescope. The search strategy for binary pulsars changed with the 1982Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 774>>>

Accretion diskNeutron starJet
Jet164-day wobbleStars orbit each otherevery 13.1 days
FIGURE 27SS 433. The axis of the cone swept out by the precessing jets makes a 79◦anglewith the line of sight.discovery by Donald Backer of UC Berkeley and his colleagues of the then-fastest knownpulsar, PSR 1937+214. With a period of 1.558 milliseconds, this pulsar spins 642 times eachsecond.31Although this astounding rotation rate seemed to indicate a young pulsar, the verysmall value of the period derivative (˙P=1.051054×10−19) implies a weak magnetic ﬁeldfrom the secondary star could have spun up the neutron star to its present rapid rate. Theneutron star’s magnetic ﬁeld may also have been rejuvenated by this process, although thedetails of how this might occur are not yet clear.A likely evolutionary picture has emerged that brings the observations of binary X-raysources and binary pulsars together. In this scenario, there are two classes of binary pulsars.31Middle C on a piano has an audible frequency of 262 Hz. The pulsar’s rotation frequency is more than an octavehigher, between D#and E!3P/2˙Pis an estimate of a pulsar’s age only if the pulsar’s spin has not been affected by accretion.2Close Binary Star Systems
(≈ 8 . 6  × 1 04 T) and a very old pulsar. The age of the pulsar may be estimated as P/ 2 = 235 million years, an order of magnitude older than previously discovered pulsars.32 Although PSR 1937+214 is an isolated pulsar, the paradox of the oldest pulsar also being among the fastest quickly brought astronomers to a surprising conclusion: PSR 1937+214 must once have been a member of a low-mass X-ray  binary system. (Like PSR 1937+214, LMXBs have weak magnetic ﬁelds.) Accretion˙P
Those with high-mass companions (neutron stars) have shorter periods and eccentric orbits and probably result from the evolution of a massive X-ray binary system. (An


<<<PAGE 775>>>

MXRB that managed to retain more than half of its mass following the supernova of thecompanion star would produce such a pair of neutron stars with elongated orbits.) The otherclass of binary pulsars are characterized by low-mass companions (white dwarfs), longerorbital periods, and circular orbits. These are probably the descendants of low-mass X-raybinary systems.Because LMXBs are common in globular clusters, radio astronomers slued their tele-scopes toward these targets and discovered more binary and millisecond pulsars (those withperiods less than approximately 10 ms). Numerous surveys, including one conducted by theChandra X-Ray Observatory, suggest that 47 Tuc may have more than 300 neutron stars, ap-proximately 25 of which are millisecond pulsars. The mounting statistics make it clear thatmost of the globular cluster pulsars are members of binaries and that most (but not all) aremillisecond pulsars. (Conversely, most of the known millisecond pulsars have been foundin globular clusters.) If these pulsars are the evolutionary product of LMXBs, then how canthe absence of a white dwarf companion be explained for a signiﬁcant minority of them?Black Widow PulsarsAn answer may be found from observations of PSR 1957+20. It is a rarity: a binary mil-lisecond pulsar that eclipses its companion, a meager 0.025 M⊙white dwarf. However, theThe pulsar seems to beevaporatingits white dwarf companion with its energetic beam ofphotons and charged particles. Within a few million years, the white dwarf may disappear,devoured by thisblack widow pulsar; see Fig. 28.
FIGURE 28Gas being removed by the “black widow pulsar,” PSR 1957+20. The pulsar is atthe intersection of the white lines. (Photo courtesy of S. Kulkarni and J. Hester, Caltech.)Close Binary Star Systems
eclipses last for some 10% of the orbit, implying that the light is blocked by an object larger than the Sun. Signiﬁcantly, the dispersion of the pulsar signal increases just be-fore and after the eclipse, indicating that the white dwarf is surrounded by ionized gas.


<<<PAGE 776>>>

Another example of the ablation of an eclipsing millisecond pulsar’s companion hasbeen found for PSR 1744−24A in the globular cluster Terzan 5, where the eclipses last forhalf of the orbital period. It is possible that some of the evaporated material may form adisk of gas and dust around the pulsar that could eventually (after a million years or so)condense and form planets around the pulsar. Or, if the evaporation of the companion staris incomplete, a planet-size remnant could be left orbiting the pulsar.Mechanisms such as these may be responsible for the three planets thought to be travelingin circular orbits around PSR 1257+12, some 500 pc away in the constellation Virgo. Asdetermined from a careful analysis of pulse arrival times, the innermost planet has a mass of0.015 M⊕that is 0.19 AU from the pulsar, followed by a 3.4 M⊕object that is at a distanceof 0.36 AU. The outermost planet’s mass is 2.8 M⊕, and it is at a distance of 0.47 AU.As more millisecond pulsars are discovered, it should become clear whether the foregoingevolutionary picture is correct.Double Neutron Star BinariesA small number of detached binary systems are known to exist in which both both membersare neutron stars. As highly relativistic systems with no current mass exchange between thesystem members, thesedouble neutron star binariesare exquisite natural laboratories forthe testing of predictions of the General Theory of Relativity.The ﬁrst such system discovered is theHulse–Taylor pulsar, PSR 1913+16, with anorbital separation just a little larger than the Sun’s diameter. A 30-year study of this systemhas conﬁrmed the existence of gravitational waves.3Nearly everything is known about the Hulse–Taylor system with incredible precision,as can be seen by inspecting the observational data in Table 1. Because of this levelTABLE 1Data for the Hulse–Taylor Pulsar, PSR 1913+16.ParameterValueUncertaintyPulse Frequency (ω)16.94053918425292 Hz±15×10−14HzPulse Frequency Derivative (˙ω)−2.47583×10−15Hz s−1±3×10−20Hz s−1Mass (pulsar)1.4414 M⊙±0.0002 M⊙Mass (companion)1.3867 M⊙±0.0002 M⊙Eccentricity (e)0.6171338±0.0000004Period of Orbit (Porb)0.322997448930 d±4×10−13dPeriod of Oribt Derivative (˙Porb)−2.4056×10−12±0.0051×10−12Periastron shift (˙ωorb)4.226595◦yr−1±0.000005◦yr−1Notes:1. Data forωand˙ωfrom epoch January 14, 1986;seehttp://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat/2. Remaining data from J. M. Weisberg and J. H. Taylor (2005).3Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor shared the 1993 Nobel Prize for their discovery of PSR 1913+16.3
3Close Binary Star Systems
of precision, this binary system provides an ideal natural laboratory for test-ing Einstein’s theory of gravity. For example, as Mercury passes through the


<<<PAGE 777>>>

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005YearGeneral relativity prediction
–40–35–30–25–20–15–10–50Cumulative shift of periastron time (s)
FIGURE 29Observations (dots) of the delay in the time of periastron for PSR 1913+16, com-pared with the prediction of the theory of general relativity (solid line). [Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesyof J. M. Weisberg and J. H. Taylor (2005).]curved spacetime near the Sun, the position of perihelion in its orbit is shifted by 43′′peris in excellent agreement with the measurement of 4.226595±0.000005◦yr−1(35,000times Mercury’s rate of shift). This effect on the orbit is cumulative; with every orbit, thepulsar arrives later and later at the point of periastron. Figure 29 shows the incredibleagreement between theoretical and observed values of the accumulating time delay.The most spectacular aspect of the studies of PSR 1913+16 is the conﬁrmation of theexistence of gravitational radiation. As the two neutron stars move in their orbits, gravita-tional waves carry energy away from the system and the orbital period decreases. Accordingto general relativity, the rate at which the orbital period changes as a consequence of theemission of gravitational quadrupole radiation3is˙Porb=dPorbdt=−965G3M2µc5⎡parenleftbigg4π2GM⎡parenrightbigg4/3f (e)P5/3orb,(42)3The termquadrupoledescribes the geometry of the emitted gravitational radiation, just as electric dipole radiationdescribes the electromagnetic radiation emitted by two electric charges moving around each other.4
4Close Binary Star Systems
century. For PSR 1913+16, general relativity predicts a similar shift in the point of periastron, where the two neutron stars are nearest each other. The theoretical value


<<<PAGE 778>>>

whereM=M1+M2µ=M1M2M1+M2andf (e)describes the effect of the eccentricity of the orbit,f (e)=⎡parenleftbigg1+7324e2+3796e4⎡parenrightbigg⎡parenleftbig1−e2⎡parenrightbig−7/2.(There are also higher-order correction terms that have been neglected here.) Inserting thepreceding values for the masses and eccentricity, the theoretical rate of orbital period de-cay is calculated to be˙Porb,predict=−(2.40242±0.00002)×10−12, which agrees with themeasured value of˙Porb,meas=−(2.4056±0.0051)×10−12to within 0.13%. In presentingthe results of an earlier calculation of the orbital period decay in 1984, Joel Weisberg andJoseph Taylor wrote, “It now seems an inescapable conclusion that gravitational radiationexists as predicted by the general relativistic quadrupole formula.” Astronomers are fortu-nate to have caught this superb natural laboratory before it disappears. As the separation ofthe neutron stars shrinks by about 3 mm per orbit, the system will coalesce some 300 millionyears in the future.Another tremendous natural laboratory for testing general relativity was discovered in2003. This double neutron star system is actually a binary pulsar system. J0737–3039A hasa pulse period ofPA=0.02269937855615±6×10−14s, and J0737–3039B has a pulseperiod ofPB=2.7734607474±4×10−10s. As with the Hulse–Taylor pulsar, this (thusfar) unique system provides a valuable test of orbital precession and gravitational radiation.However, J0737–3039A/B can also test the prediction of delayed arrival times for signalsfrom one pulsar passing through the gravitational well of the other pulsar.As their signals interact with each other’s magnetic ﬁeld and with the plasma environment,they provide an opportunity to test theories about plasma physics as well. It may also bepossible to measure the moments of inertia of the pulsars, providing important tests of theinterior structure models of neutron stars, including their exotic equations of state.Short–Hard Gamma Ray Burstsray bursts(<2 s) are the result of the mergers of compact objects, either two neutron starsor a neutron star and a black hole.The ﬁrst clear detections of mergers of compact objects in binaries were obtained bythe Swift and HETE-2 spacecraft in 2005. The July 9, 2005, event in particular also pro-duced a visible-light afterglow that allowed astronomers to unambiguously identify the hostgalaxy. Short–hard gamma ray bursts emit about 1000 times less energy than the long–softevents do.Close Binary Star Systems
What will be the consequence of the merger of the two neutron stars?  Extensive observations have conﬁrmed that long–soft gamma ray bursts  (> 2 s) are extreme examples of core-collapse supernovae (collapsars or su-pranovas). On the other hand, it is now believed that short–hard gamma


<<<PAGE 779>>>

The Hulse–Taylor system is destined to produce a short–hard gamma ray burst, althoughit may or may not be observable from Earth, depending on the orientation of the jet.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBacker, Donald C., and Kulkarni, Shrinivas R., “A New Class of Pulsars,”Physics Today,March 1990.Cannizzo, John K., and Kaitchuck, Ronald H., “Accretion Disks in Interacting Binary Stars,”Scientiﬁc American, January 1992.Clark, David H.,The Quest for SS 433, Viking Penguin Inc., New York, 1985.Hellier, Coel,Cataclysmic Variable Stars: How and Why They Vary, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,2001.Kirshner, Robert P.,The Extravagant Universe: Exploding Stars, Dark Energy, and theAccelerating Universe, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2002.Kleppner, Daniel, “The Gem of General Relativity,”Physics Today, April 1993.Piran, Tsvi, “Binary Neutron Stars,”Scientiﬁc American, May 1995.van den Heuvel, Edward P. J., and van Paradijs, Jan, “X-ray Binaries,”Scientiﬁc American,November 1993.Wheeler, J. Craig,Cosmic Catastrophies: Supernovae, Gamma-Ray Bursts, and Adventuresin Hyperspace, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.TechnicalBacker, D. C., et al., “A Millisecond Pulsar,”Nature,300, 615, 1982.Branch, David, and Tammann, G. A., “Type Ia Supernovae as Standard Candles,”AnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,30, 359, 1992.Cowley, Anne P., “Evidence for Black Holes in Stellar Binary Systems,”Annual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics,30, 287, 1992.Damour, Thibault, and Taylor, J. H., “On the Orbital Period Change of the Binary PulsarPSR 1913+16,”The Astrophysical Journal,366, 501, 1991.Frank, Juhan, King, Andrew, and Raine, Derek,Accretion Power in Astrophysics, ThirdEdition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.Hilditch, R. W.,An Introduction to Close Binary Stars, Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge, 2001.Hillebrandt, Wolfgang, and Niemeyer, Jens C., “Type Ia Supernova Explosion Models,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,38, 191, 2000.Horne, Keith, and Cook, M. C., “UBVImages of the Z Cha Accretion Disc in Outburst,”Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,214, 307, 1985.Iben, Icko, Jr., “The Life and Times of an Intermediate Mass Star—in Isolation/in a CloseBinary,”Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society,26, 1, 1985.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 780>>>

Iben, Icko, Jr., “Single and Binary Star Evolution,”The Astrophysical Journal Supplement,76, 55, 1991.Lorimer, D. R., and Kramer, M.,Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, 2005.Lyne, A. G., et al., “A Double-Pulsar System: A Rare Laboratory for Relativistic Gravityand Plasma Physics,”Science,303, 1153, 2004.Lyne,A. G., and Graham-Smith, F.,Pulsar Astronomy, Third Edition, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, 2006.Margon, Bruce, “Observations of SS 433,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,22, 507, 1984.Niemeyer, N. C., and Truran, J. W. (eds.),Type Ia Supernovae: Theory and Cosmology,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.Petschek, Albert G.,Supernovae, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.Pringle, J. E., and Wade, R. A. (eds.),Interacting Binary Stars, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1985.Riess, Adam G., Press, William H., and Kirshner, Robert P., “A Precise Distance Indicator:Type Ia Supernova Multicolor Light-Curve Shapes,”The Astrophysical Journal,473,88, 1996.Sion, E. M., “White Dwarfs in Cataclysmic Variables,”Publications of the AstronomicalSociety of the Paciﬁc,111, 532, 1999.Verbunt, Frank, “Origin and Evolution of X-ray Binaries and Binary Radio Pulsars,”AnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,31, 93, 1993.Weisberg, J. M., and Taylor, J. H., “Observations of Post-Newtonian Timing Effects in theBinary Pulsar PSR 1913+16,”Physical Review Letters,52, 1348, 1984.Weisberg, J. M., and Taylor, J. H., “Relativistic Binary Pulsar B1913+16: Thirty Yearsof Observations and Analysis,” inBinary Radio Pulsars, Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc Conference Series, F. A. Rasio and I. H. Stairs (eds.),328, 25, 2005.Close Binary Star Systems


<<<PAGE 781>>>



<<<PAGE 782>>>

PROBLEM SET1Use the ideal gas law to argue that in a close binary system, the temperature of a star’sphotosphere is approximately constant along an equipotential surface. What effect could theproximity of the other star have on your argument?2Each of the Lagrange pointsL4andL5forms an equilateral triangle with massesM1andM2in Fig. 3. Use this to conﬁrm the value of the effective gravitational potential atL4andL5given in the ﬁgure caption.
–2–1012–2–1012
M1M2L1L2L3L4
L5y/a
x/aFIGURE  3Equipotentials forM1=0.85 M⊙,M2=0.17 M⊙, anda=5×108m=0.718 R⊙.The axes are in units ofa, with the system’s center of mass (the “×”) at the origin. Starting at the top ofthe ﬁgure and moving down toward the center of mass, the values of/Phi1in units ofG(M1+M2)/a=2.71×1011J kg−1for the equipotential curves are/Phi1=−1.875,−1.768,−1.583,−1.583,−1.768(the “dumbbell”),−1.875 (the Roche lobe), and−3 (the spheres).L4andL5are local maxima, with/Phi1=−1.431.3 (a)Consider a gas of densityρmoving with velocityvacross an areaAperpendicular to theﬂow of the gas. Show that the rate at which mass crosses the area is given by Eq. ( 11).(b)Derive Eq. ( 12) for the radius of the intersection of two identical overlapping spheres,whend≪R.Close Binary Star Systems
˙M=ρvA.(11)x=√Rd(12)From Chapter 1 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s 8,

<<<PAGE 783>>>

5Integrate Eq. ( 15) for the ring luminosity fromr=Rtor=∞[with Eq. ( 19) for thedisk temperature]. Does your answer agree with Eq. ( 23) for the disk luminosity?dLring=4πrσT4dr=Tdisk⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4⎡parenleftBig1−⎡radicalbigR/r⎡parenrightBig1/4,Ldisk=GM˙M2R.6Consider an “average” dwarf nova that has a mass transfer rate of˙M=1013.5kg s−1=5×10−10M⊙yr−1during an outburst that lasts for 10 days. Estimate the total energy released and the absolutemagnitude of the dwarf nova during the outburst. Use values for Z Cha’s white dwarf fromExample4.1stars.7Assume that the absolute bolometric magnitude of a dwarf nova during quiescence is 7.5 andthat it brightens by three magnitudes during outburst. Using values for Z Cha, estimate the rateof mass transfer through the accretion disk.8When the accretion disk in a cataclysmic variable is eclipsed by the secondary star, the blue-shifted emission line is the ﬁrst to disappear at the beginning of the eclipse, and the redshiftedemission line is the last to reappear when the eclipse ends. What does this have to say aboutthe directions of rotation of the binary system and the accretion disk?9 (a)Show that in a close binary system where angular momentum is conserved, the change inorbital period produced by mass transfer is given by1PdPdt=3˙M1M1−M2M1M2.(b)U Cephei (an Algol system) has an orbital period of 2.49 days that has increased by about20 s in the past 100 years. The masses of the two stars areM1=2.9M⊙andM2=1.4M⊙.Assuming that this change is due to the transfer of mass between the two stars in this Algolsystem, estimate the mass transfer rate. Which of these stars is gaining mass?10Algol (the “demon” star, in Arabic) is a semidetached binary. Every 2.87 days, its brilliance isreduced by more than half as it undergoes a deep eclipse, its apparent magnitude dimming from2.1 to 3.4. The system consists of a B8 main-sequence star and a late-type (G or K) subgiant;the deep eclipses occur when the larger, cooler star (the subgiant) moves in front of its smaller,brighter companion. The “Algol paradox,” which troubled astronomers in the ﬁrst half of thetwentieth century, is that according to the ideas of stellar evolution discussed in Section 10.6,the more massive B8 star should have been the ﬁrst to evolve off the main sequence. What isyour solution to this paradox? (The Algol system actually contains a third star that orbits theother two every 1.86 years, but this has nothing to do with the solution to the Algol paradox.)Algol may be easily found in the constellation Perseus (the Hero, who rescued Andromedain Greek mythology).11Consider a 10−4M⊙layer of hydrogen on the surface of a white dwarf. If this layer werecompletely fused into helium, how long would the resulting nova last (assuming a luminosityequal to the Eddington luminosity)? What does this say about the amount of hydrogen thatactually undergoes fusion during a nova outburst?12Consider a layer of 10−4M⊙of hydrogen on the surface of a white dwarf. Compare thegravitational binding energy before the nova outburst to the kinetic energy of the ejected layerwhen it has traveled far from the white dwarf and has a speed of 1000 km s−1.primary and secondaryClose Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
(15)(19)(23)of Close Binary StarSystems .“”by the4Use Eq. ( 19) to show that the maximum disk temperature is found atr=(49/36)Rand isequal toTmax=0.488Tdisk.=Tdisk⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4⎡parenleftBig1−⎡radicalbigR/r⎡parenrightBig1/4,(19)
 Neglectthesmallamountoflightcontributed


<<<PAGE 784>>>

(a)Show that the density of the expanding shell at a distancerisρ=˙Meject/4πr2v.(b)Let the mean opacity,κ, of the expanding gases be a constant. Suppose that at some timet=0, the outer radius of the shell wasR, and the radius of the photosphere, whereτ=2/3,wasR0. Show that1R=1R0−1R∞,whereR∞≡3κ˙Meject8πv.(The reason for the “∞” subscript will soon become clear.)(c)At some later timet, the radius of the shell will beR+vtand the radius of the photospherewill beR(t). Show that1R+vt=1R(t)−1R∞.(d)Combine the results from parts (b) and (c) to writeR(t)=R0+vt(1−R0/R∞)21+(vt/R∞)(1−R0/R∞),(e)Argue that terms containingR0/R∞are very small and can be ignored, and so obtainR(t)≃vt1+vt/R∞.(f)Show that the ﬁreball’s photosphere initially expands linearly with time and then ap-proaches the limiting value ofR∞, in agreement with Eq. 30).R∞=3κ˙Meject8πv.((g)Using the data given in the text following Eq. ( 31), make a graph ofR(t)vs.tfor theﬁve days after the nova explodes. The “knee” in the graphs marks the end of the linearexpansion period; estimate when this occurs. How does this compare with the duration ofthe optically thick ﬁreball phase of the nova?14Use Eq. ( 31) to estimate the photospheric temperature of a nova ﬁreball, adopting theEddington luminosity for the luminosity of the ﬁreball.T∞=⎡parenleftbiggL4πσ⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftBigg8πv3κ˙Meject⎡parenrightBigg1/2.T∞=⎡parenleftbiggL4πσ⎡parenrightbigg1/4⎡parenleftBigg8πv3κ˙Meject⎡parenrightBigg1/2.15Assuming that the hydrostatic-burning phase of a nova lasts for 100 days, ﬁnd the (constant)rate at which mass is ejected,˙Meject, for a surface layer of 10−4M⊙.16For each kilogram of a carbon–oxygen composition (30%126C) that is burned to produce iron,7.3×1013J of energy is released. Assuming an initial 1.38 M⊙white dwarf with a radius of1600 km, how much iron would have to be produced to cause the star to be gravitationallyunbound? How much additional iron would have to be manufactured to produce a Type IaClose Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
(30)
(31)(31)13In this problem, you will examine the ﬁreball expansion phase of a nova shell. Suppose thatmass is ejected by a nova at a constant rate of˙Mejectand at a constant speedv.


<<<PAGE 785>>>

17Use Eqs. (33), (34), and the equation below to derive Eq. (35), the condition for adisrupt a binary system.m1m2=v2v1.Ei=12M1v21+12M2v22−GM1M2a=−GM1M22a.MRM1+M2≤1(2+M2/M1)(1+M2/M1)<1218 (a)Show that the Alfvèn radius is given by Eq. (39).rA=⎡parenleftbigg8π2B4sR12µ20GM˙M2⎡parenrightbigg1/7(b)Show that˙P /Pfor the spin-up of an X-ray pulsar is given by Eq. (41).˙PP=−P√α2πI⎡parenleftBigg2√2πB2sR6G3M3˙M6µ0⎡parenrightBigg1/7.19Find the value of the magnetic ﬁeld for which the Alfvèn radius is equal to the radius of thewhite dwarf found in Example 2.1Do the same thing forexample.ofneutron star used in that20Estimate the lifetime of a binary X-ray system using the information in Examplethe lifetime to be the time required to transfer a mass of 1 M⊙.21The X-ray pulsar 4U0115+63 has a period of 3.61 s and an X-ray luminosity of aboutLx=3.8×1029W. Assuming that it is a 1.4 M⊙neutron star with a radius of 10 km and a surfacemagnetic ﬁeld of 108T, ﬁnd its mass transfer rate,˙M, and the value of˙P /P. Repeat thesecalculations assuming that this object is a 0.85 M⊙white dwarf with a radius of 6.6×106m anda surface magnetic ﬁeld of 1000 T. For which of these models do you obtain better agreementwith the measured value of˙P /P=−3.2×10−5yr−1?22 (a)Use Eq. (24) to show that the spin-up rate can be written asLacc=GM˙MR.Close Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
supernova to(33)(35)Ef=12MRv21+12M2v22−GMRM2a.(34)(39)(41)Close Binary StarSystems .“”the.Take
(24)−supernova with an average ejecta speed of 5000 km s1? Take the gravitational potentialenergy to be−5.1×1043J for a realistic white dwarf model, and express your answers inunits of M⊙.
2.1
log10⎡parenleftbigg−˙PP⎡parenrightbigg=log10⎡parenleftbigPL6/7acc⎡parenrightbig+log10⎡⎣√α2πI⎡parenleftBigg2√2πB2sR12µ0G3M3⎡parenrightBigg1/7⎤⎦.The term on the left and the ﬁrst term on the right consist of quantities that can be measuredobservationally. The second term on the right depends on the speciﬁc model (neutron staror white dwarf) of the X-ray pulsar.

<<<PAGE 786>>>

TABLE 2X-ray Pulsar Data for Problem 22. (Data from Rappaport and Joss,Nature,266,683, 1977, and Joss and Rappaport,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,22, 537, 1984.)PLacc−˙P /PSystem (s) (1030W) (yr−1)SMC X-1 0.714 50 7.1×10−4Her X-1 1.24 1 2.9×10−6Cen X-3 4.84 5 2.8×10−4A0535+26 104 6 3.5×10−2GX301−2 696 0.3 7.0×10−34U0352+30 835 0.0004 1.8×10−423 (a)Consider an X-ray burster that releases 1032J in 5 seconds. If the shape of its peak spectrumis that of a 2×107K blackbody, estimate the radius of the underlying neutron star.(b)sing the Stefan–Boltzmann formula to ﬁnd the radiusofacompactblackbodycanleadtoanoverestimateofitsradius.Useamoreaccuratevaluefortheradiusoftheneutronstar.Uthebelowequationto ﬁndR∞=R/radicalbig1−2GM/Rc2.24Make a scale drawing of the SMC X-1 binary pulsar system, including the size of the secondarystar. Assuming that the primary is a 1.4 M⊙neutron star, locate the system’s center of massand its inner Lagrangian point,L1. (You can omit the accretion disk.)25The relativistic (v/c=0.26) jets coming from the accretion disk in SS 433 sweep out cones inspace as the disk precesses. The central axis of these cones makes an angle of 79◦with the lineof sight, and the half-angle of each cone is 20◦. This means that at some point in the precessioncycle, the jets are moving perpendicular to the line of sight. Yet, from Fig. 26, the radialvelocities obtained from the Doppler-shifted spectral lines donotcross at zero radial velocity,but at∼10,000 km s−1. Useto explain this discrepancy in terms of aDopplershift.(YoucanignorethespeedoftheSS433binarysystemitself,whichabout 70 km s−1.)the below equation is onlytransverseClose Binary Star Systems: Problem Set(b)Make a graph of log10(−˙P /P )(vertical axis) vs. log10⎡parenleftbigPL6/7acc⎡parenrightbig(horizontal axis). Use thevalues from Example 6.3to plot two lines, one for adwarf. Let log10⎡parenleftbigPL6/7acc⎡parenrightbigrun from 25 to 29.(c)Use the data in Table 2 to plot the positions of six binary X-ray pulsars on your graph.(You will have to convert−˙P /Pinto units of s−1.)(d)Which model of a binary X-ray pulsar is in better agreement with the data? Comment onthe position of Her X-1 on your graph.ofstar and one for a whiteClose Binary StarSystems“”neutron


<<<PAGE 787>>>

26The distance to SS 433 is about 5.5 kpc, and the angular separation of SS 433 and the X-rayemitting regions (where the jets interact with the gases of W50) extends as far as 44′. Estimatea lower limit for the amount of time the jets have been active.27PSR 1953+29 is a millisecond pulsar with a period of 6.133 ms. The measured period derivativefor PSR 1953+29 is˙P=3×10−20.stimate the age of this millisecondassumingthatnoaccretionhasoccurredtoalterthepulsar’sspin.Also,usetoestimatethevalueofthispulsar’smagneticﬁeld.Ethe belowequation   pulsar,B=12πR3sinθ/radicalBigg3µ0c3IP˙P2π.28Integrate Eq. ( 41) for the spin-up of an X-ray pulsar to estimate the time for a millisecondpulsar to be spun up to a ﬁnal period of 1 ms from an initial period of 100 s (longer than thelongest known pulsar period of 11.7 s, and within the range of X-ray pulsar periods). Assumea 1.4 M⊙neutron star with a radius of 10 km. UseBs=104T for the magnetic ﬁeld and˙M=1014kg s−1for the mass transfer rate. How much mass is transferred in that time (inkilograms and in solar masses)?29The three planets orbiting PSR 1257+12 have orbital periods of 25.34 d, 66.54 d, and 98.22 d.Verify that these objects obey Kepler’s third law.30 (a)Use Kepler’s third law to ﬁnd the semimajor axis of the orbit of the binary pulsarPSR 1913+16.(b)What is the change in the semimajor axis after one orbital period of the pulsar?COMPUTER PROBLEMS3 (a)Use theStatStarmodel dataand Eq. ( 14) to make a graph of log10˙M(vertical axis) vs. log10d(horizontal axis). Use the slope of your graph to ﬁnd how themass transfer rate,˙M, depends ond. b e l o w1Close Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
0.80.91.01.11.2(1 + z)
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 0.2 0.4PhaseFIGURE 26Doppler shifts measured for the emission lines in SS 433.z=0.1andz=0.2correspondtospeedsof28,500kms−1and54,100kms−1,respectively.(FigureadaptedfromMargon,Grandi,andDownes,Ap. J.,241, 306, 1980.)νobs=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+(u/c)cosθ=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+vr/c,


<<<PAGE 788>>>

TABLEA1M⊙StatStarModel for Problem 28.Te=5504 K.ir(m)T(K)ρ/parenleftbigkg m−3/parenrightbigκ/parenleftbigm2kg−1/parenrightbig0 7.100764E+08 0.000000E+00 0.000000E+00 0.000000E+001 7.093244E+08 3.379636E+03 2.163524E−08 2.480119E+012 7.092541E+08 3.573309E+03 3.028525E−08 2.672381E+013 7.091783E+08 3.826212E+03 4.206871E−08 2.737703E+014 7.090959E+08 4.133144E+03 5.814973E−08 2.708765E+015 7.090062E+08 4.488020E+03 8.015188E−08 2.625565E+016 7.089085E+08 4.887027E+03 1.103146E−07 2.517004E+017 7.088019E+08 5.329075E+03 1.517126E−07 2.399474E+018 7.086856E+08 5.815187E+03 2.085648E−07 2.281158E+019 7.085588E+08 6.347784E+03 2.866621E−07 2.165611E+0110 7.084205E+08 6.930293E+03 3.939580E−07 2.054686E+0111 7.082697E+08 7.566856E+03 5.413734E−07 1.948823E+0112 7.081052E+08 8.262201E+03 7.439096E−07 1.848131E+0113 7.079259E+08 9.021603E+03 1.022171E−06 1.752513E+0114 7.077303E+08 9.850881E+03 1.404459E−06 1.661785E+0115 7.075169E+08 1.075642E+04 1.929644E−06 1.575731E+0116 7.072843E+08 1.174520E+04 2.651111E−06 1.494128E+0117 7.070306E+08 1.282486E+04 3.642174E−06 1.416754E+0118 7.067540E+08 1.400375E+04 5.003513E−06 1.343396E+0119 7.064524E+08 1.529096E+04 6.873380E−06 1.273849E+0120 7.061235E+08 1.669643E+04 9.441600E−06 1.207917E+0121 7.057649E+08 1.823102E+04 1.296880E−05 1.145414E+0122 7.053741E+08 1.990656E+04 1.781279E−05 1.086165E+0123 7.049480E+08 2.173599E+04 2.446473E−05 1.030001E+0124 7.044836E+08 2.373341E+04 3.359882E−05 9.767631E+0025 7.039774E+08 2.591421E+04 4.614038E−05 9.263005E+0026 7.034259E+08 2.829519E+04 6.335925E−05 8.784696E+0027 7.028250E+08 3.089468E+04 8.699788E−05 8.331344E+0028 7.021704E+08 3.373266E+04 1.194469E−04 7.901659E+0029 7.014574E+08 3.683096E+04 1.639859E−04 7.494416E+0030 7.006810E+08 4.021337E+04 2.251132E−04 7.108452E+0031 6.998356E+08 4.390583E+04 3.089976E−04 6.742665E+0032 6.989155E+08 4.793666E+04 4.240980E−04 6.396010E+0033 6.979141E+08 5.233670E+04 5.820105E−04 6.067495E+0034 6.968247E+08 5.713961E+04 7.986295E−04 5.756179E+0035 6.956399E+08 6.238205E+04 1.095736E−03 5.461170E+0036 6.943518E+08 6.810401E+04 1.503169E−03 5.181621E+0037 6.929517E+08 7.434904E+04 2.061803E−03 4.916730E+0038 6.914307E+08 8.116461E+04 2.827602E−03 4.665735E+0039 6.897790E+08 8.860239E+04 3.877181E−03 4.427914E+0040 6.879861E+08 9.671869E+04 5.315384E−03 4.202584E+0041 6.860411E+08 1.055748E+05 7.285639E−03 3.989094E+00˙M≈πRdρ⎡radicalBigg3kTmH,(b)Use Eqs. (L.1) and (L.2) to show that˙M∝d4.75near the surface, and so verify that themass transfer rate increases rapidly with the overlap distancedof two stars. Note that youranswer to part (a) will be slightly different from this because of the density-dependenceoftogbf(the ratio of the guillotine factor to the gaunt factor) calculated in theOpacityroutine.Close Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
(14)

<<<PAGE 789>>>

3Use Eq. ( 19) and Wien’s law to make two log-log graphs: (1) the disk temperature,T (r),and (2) the peak wavelength [λmax(r)] of the blackbody spectrum, for the accretion disk aroundthe black hole A0620−00 as a function of the radial positionr. For this system, the mass ofthe black hole is 3.82 M⊙, the mass of the secondary star 0.36 M⊙, and the period of the orbitis 0.3226 day. Assume˙M=1014kg s−1(about 10−9M⊙yr−1), and use the Schwarzschildradius,RS,f o rt h er a d i u so ft h eb l a c kh o l e .( O ny o u rg r a p h ,p l o tr/RSr.) For a nonrotating black hole, the last stable orbit for a massive particle is at 3RS,as the inner edge of the disk. Let the outer edge of the disk be determined bylaw along with Eqs. ( 25) and ( 26). On your log-log graph ofλmaxvs.r/RS,regions of the disk that emit X-ray, ultraviolet, visible, and infrared radiation.thebelow equation=Tdisk⎡parenleftbiggRr⎡parenrightbigg3/4⎡parenleftBig1−⎡radicalbigR/r⎡parenrightBig1/4,rcirc=a⎡parenleftbiggℓ1a⎡parenrightbigg4⎡parenleftbigg1+M2M1⎡parenrightbigg=a⎡bracketleftbigg0.500−0.227 log10⎡parenleftbiggM2M1⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg4⎡parenleftbigg1+M2M1⎡parenrightbigg.Rdisk≈2rcircRS=2GM/c2,Close Binary Star Systems: Problem Set
rather thanso use thisKepler’s thirdidentify the(19)(25)(26)2


<<<PAGE 790>>>

Physical Processes
in the Solar System
From Chapter 1  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, 'ale A. Ostlie. Cop yright  2007 
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 9 ,


<<<PAGE 791>>>

Physical Processes
in the Solar System
1 A Brief Survey
2 Tidal Forces
3 The Physics of Atmospheres
1 A BRIEF SURVEY
in some detail, namely our own. We will also consider the growing body of information
regarding extrasolar planets. However, it is beyond the scope of this text to describe all
of the fascinating details of each of the planets in our Solar System and their moons, not
to mention the meteorites, asteroids, comets, .uiper Belt objects, and interplanetary dust
that is left to the many excellent books dedicated to the subject. Rather, we will consider
the basic features of these objects and extrasolar planets in the context of stellar evolution,
together with some of the underlying physical processes that have helped to shape them.
General Characteristics of the Planets
The planets have long been studied from Earth, ﬁrstwith the naked eye and later with
telescopes. Since the advent of space ﬂight, we have sent manned and unmanned spacecraft
to our Moon, and, with the exception of Pluto, we have visited (with unmanned probes)
each of the other planets in the Solar System.
Each of the planets (excluding Pluto, 2003 8B313,1and other members of the .uiper
belt) can be thought of as belonging to one of two major groups. The rocky terrestrial
12003 8B313 was discovered in January 200, based on images obtained in 2003. As of May 2006, an
ofﬁcial classi ﬁcation of 2003 8B313 as a major planet or a minor planet had not yet been made, nor has
a formal name been given to the object. These of ﬁcial designations are made by the International Astronomical
8nion.Based on the observations of protostars and very young stars (e.g., HH 30, 
Vega, β Pictoris, and the proplyds in the Orion Nebula), it is evident that a natu-
ral extension of the formation of many stars includes the accompanying forma-
tion of planetary systems that develop within equatorial disks of material that 
 orbit the newborn stars. In fact the ﬁrst conﬁrmation of an extrasolar planet 
around a main-sequence star (1 Pegasi) was announced in 199. After that initial 
 announcement, a total of 1 extrasolar planets were discovered in just the next 
ten years alone. We will now study one well-known example of a planetary system


<<<PAGE 792>>>

TABLE 1General Characteristics of the Planets. The range of values for some features of theterrestrial and giant planets (M⊕and R⊕represent the mass and radius of Earth, respectively).CharacteristicTerrestrial GiantBasic formRock GasIceRockMean orbital distance (A8) 0.39–1.2 .2–30.0Mean ³surface´ temperature (.) 21–733 70–16Mass (M⊕)0.0–1.0 14.–318Equatorial radius (R⊕)0.38–1.0 3.88–11.2Mean density (kg m−3)3933–1 687–1638Sidereal rotation period (equator) 23.9 h–243 d 9.9 h–17.2 hNumber of known moons0–213–63Ring systemsnoyes
FIGURE 1The relative si]es of the Sun and the planets. From left to right are the Sun, Mercury,Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, 8ranus, Neptune, and Pluto (with Charon, one of its moons).A tenth planet, 2003 8B313, which is believed to be slightly larger than Pluto, is not shown in thismontage. The distances between objects are not to scale.(or Earth-like) planets include Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, and thegiantplanets(sometimes calledJovian, or Jupiter-like) include Jupiter, Saturn, 8ranus, and Neptune.The giant planets are also further separated into the gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn) and theice giants (8ranus and Neptune). The two major groups have a number of very strikingdifferences, as can be seen by looking through Table 1. The relative si]es of the planetsand the Sun are illustrated in Fig. 1.Many of the differences noted in Table 1 are directly related to the distances of theplanets from the Sun and their corresponding temperatures. In fact, as we shall see, thistemperature effect profoundlyinﬂuencedthe evolution of the terrestrial and giant planetsby determining the extent of ice formation in the early solar nebula.Moons of the PlanetsThe number of moons orbiting each planet also variessigniﬁcantlybetween the terrestrialsand the giants. Neither Mercury nor Venus has any moons, Earth has one relatively largemoon, and Mars has two tiny satellites. On the other hand, Jupiter, Saturn, 8ranus, andPhysical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 793>>>

Neptune are known to have at least 63, 47, 27, and 13 moons, respectively. Combined withtheir ring systems, each of the giant planets possesses a complex orbital system.With the exception of Pluto2and its largest moon, Charon, by far the largest moon inthe Solar Systemrelative toits parent planet is our own Moon. However, three of the fourGalilean moons of Jupiter (Io, Ganymede, and Callisto)3and the giant satellite of Saturn(Titan) are physically larger and more massive. In addition, both Ganymede and Titanhave radii that are slightly larger than the planet Mercury’s even though their masses aresomewhat lower.In some respects, many of the characteristics of the giant moons of the Solar System aresimilar to those of the terrestrial planets, including active volcanoes on Io and the existenceof an atmosphere on Titan. Some of the moons have features unlike anything seen on theplanets, however, including the bi]arre topography on the surface of Miranda (one of themany moons of 8ranus).The Asteroid BeltIn 1766, before the discoveries of 8ranus, Neptune, and Pluto, Johann Titius (1729–1796)uncovered a simple mathematical sequence representing the orbital distances of the planetsfrom the Sun. The sequence was populari]ed several years later by Johann Elert Bode (1747–1826) and is now known as theTitius–Bode rule, or simplyBode’ s rule(see Table 2).When Bode’s rule was proposed, it was reali]ed that the rule ³predicted´ the existenceof an object at a distance of 2.8 A8, between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. It was after adeliberate search that an Italian monk, Giuseppe Pia]]i (1746–1826), discovered theﬁrstTABLE 2Predictions of the Titius–Bode Rule. A comparison of the Titius–Bode rule withactual mean orbital distances.Titius–Bode Actual MeanPlanet'istance (A8) 'istance (A8)Mercury(4+3×0)/10=0.4 0.39Venus(4+3×20)/10=0.7 0.72Earth(4+3×21)/10=1.0 1.00Mars(4+3×22)/10=1.6 1.2Ceres(4+3×23)/10=2.8 2.77Jupiter(4+3×24)/10=.2 .20Saturn(4+3×2)/10=10.0 9.88ranus(4+3×26)/10=19.6 19.20Neptune(4+3×27)/10=38.8 30.0Pluto(4+3×28)/10=77.2 39.482003 8B313(4+3×29)/10=14.06 72If it were orbiting one of the other planets rather than the Sun, Pluto would be only the eighth largest moon inthe Solar System.3Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto were the four moons discovered by Galileo to be orbiting Jupiter.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 794>>>

asteroidat approximately that location on January 1, 1801, and named it Ceres, for thepatron goddess of Sicily. Today many thousands of asteroids are known, although Ceresis the largest, containing some 30 of the entire mass of the group and having a diameterAlthough Bode’s rule agrees reasonably well with the orbits of most of the planets, andit did lead to the ³prediction´ of Ceres, it fails miserably for objects beyond 8ranus. It iswidely believed today that Bode’s rule is not based on any fundamental physical processand is only a mathematical coincidence. Historically, Bode’s rule has often been referredto as Bode’slaw, even though astronomers generally believe today that it is not associatedwith any basic ³law of nature.´ It is interesting to note, however, that a variation of Bode’srule also works for some of the moons of Jupiter, Saturn, and 8ranus.While many of the larger moons were certainly formed with their parent planet, othersare little more than large rocks that may have been caught in the planet’s gravitationalﬁeldas they wandered by. Many of these rocks are probably captured asteroids.The Comets and Kuiper Belt ObjectsAnother important class of objects that orbit our Sun are thecomets. Once thought to beatmospheric phenomena, and even harbingers of doom, comets are now known to be dirtysnowballs of ices and dust. Their spectacular, long tails are simply the escaped dust and gasof the evaporating ball of ice, being driven away from the Sun by radiation pressure andthe solar wind. Some comets, like the famous Halley’s comet, have relatively short orbitalperiods of less than 200 years, whereas the long-period comets can take over one millionyears to orbit the Sun.From their orbital characteristics, it seems very likely that the present-day source of theshort-period comets is theKuiper belt, a collection of icy objects located predominantlynear the plane of the ecliptic and beyond the orbit of Neptune, typically ranging from 30 A8to perhaps 1000A8 or more from the Sun. It is now reali]ed that Pluto and its moon Charon,2003 8B313, Sedna, and 4uaoar are among the largest known members of the family ofKuiper belt objects(.BOs), also referred to asTrans-Neptunian Objects(TNOs). Thelong-period comets apparently originate in theOort cloud, an approximately sphericallysymmetric cloud of cometary nuclei with orbital radii of between 3000 and 100,000 A8.Having spent most of their existence in ³deep free]e´ at the outer reaches of the SolarSystem, comets and .uiper belt objects appear to be ancient remnants of its formation,although perhaps not entirely unaffected by nearly 4.6 billion years of exposure to theenvironment of space.MeteoritesWhen asteroids collide with one another, they can produce small fragments known asmeteoroids. If a meteoroid should happen to enter Earth’s atmosphere, the heat generatedPhysical Processes in the Solar Systemof roughly 1000 km. Even though there are important exceptions, most asteroids orbit the Sun near the ecliptic plane at distances between 2 and 3. A8, a region referred to as the asteroid belt.


<<<PAGE 795>>>

by friction results in a glowing streak across the sky, referred to as ameteor. If the rocksurvives the trip through the atmosphere and strikes the surface, the remnant is known as ameteorite. By analy]ing the composition of meteorites, we can learn a great deal about theenvironment in which they originated.Another source of meteoritic material is the slow disintegration of comets exposed tothe heat of the inner Solar System. When Earth encounters the debris left in a comet’sorbit, the result is ameteor showerof micrometeorites raining down through the planet’satmosphere.Finally, the dust remaining in orbit about the Sun due to the disintegration of asteroidsand comets produces a faint glow fromreﬂectedsunlight. 8nfortunately, even the lights ofa small town are sufﬁcientto obscure thiszodiacal light.Solar System Formation: A Brief OverviewAll of these features of the Solar System can be understood in terms of its initial formationand subsequent evolution. Our present understanding of Solar System evolution is based onthe hypothesis that as the Sun was forming from the gravitational collapse of the originalsolar nebula, the decreasing radius of the cloud resulted in an increasing rate of spin and theaccompanying formation of a disk of material. Within thisaccretion diskthe temperaturevaried with distance from the protosun in such a way that rocks were able to consolidatethroughout the disk while ices (primarily water) were able to develop only at distancesbeyond the outer part of the present-day asteroid belt. As a result, the terrestrial planetsaccreted from collisions of small preplanetary chunks of material, known asplanetesimals,that were composed exclusively of rock, while the much larger giantsbeneﬁtedfrom theadditional presence of ices in the planetesimals.The higher temperatures in the inner portionsof the disk and the lower masses of the terrestrials also inhibited the capture of lightergases around those planets, while the cooler, more massive giants were able to accumulatesigniﬁcantand, in the cases of Jupiter and Saturn, very massive primordial atmospheres.Around the newly formed giant planets, smaller local accretion disks were forming someof the moons seen today. Other moons appeared when planetesimals and fragmented aster-oids were captured while wandering through the Solar System. In a different mechanism,it appears that our own Moon was produced when a relatively large planetesimal approxi-mately the si]e of the present-day Mars collided with the young Earth.After the formation ofthe planets and their moons, the ³rain´ of remnant material led to heavy cratering. Althoughthe rate of crater formation has decreasedsigniﬁcantlysince the time of the early SolarSystem, the process remains ongoing. Evidence of that violent beginning is still readilyapparent on many worlds today.Most of the icy objects that were drifting among the giant worlds without directly collid-ing with or being captured by one of the giant planets had their orbits dramatically alteredthrough gravitational interactions. Some of the cometary nuclei passing near 8ranus orNeptune were catapulted into much larger orbits, characteristic of the present-day Oortcloud, while those that ventured near Jupiter or Saturn were ejected from the Solar Systementirely. Other planetesimals that passed near the giant planets were sent inward to collidewith the terrestrial planets or the Sun. The icy bodies that formed beyond the orbit of Nep-tune remain in that region today, constituting the .uiper belt. Closer to the Sun, just insidePhysical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 796>>>

the region of ice formation, rocky remnants of the Solar System’s formation still reside inthe asteroid belt.As a direct consequence of tidal and viscous interactions with the accretion disk, alongwith the scattering of planetesimals, Jupiter migrated closer to the Sun than where it initiallybegan forming, whereas Saturn, 8ranus, and particularly Neptune migrated farther fromthe Sun.As the discussion of this section indicates,signiﬁcantprogress has been made in un-derstanding the makeup and evolution of our local part of the universe.Solar System, togetherwith many of the physical processes that have shaped them.2TIDAL FORCESside of a moon is closer to its parent planet than is the opposite side, the planet’s gravitationalforce on a small test mass must be greatest on the moon’s near side. This has the effect ofelongating the instantaneous shape of the moon. According to Newton’s third law, the samesituation must also apply to the near and far sides of the planet because of the gravitationalinﬂuenceof its moon. Thisdifferentialforce on an object due to its non-]ero si]e is knownas atidal force. The resulting nonspherical shapes of the planet and its moon can actuallyinﬂuencetheir rotation rates by creating torques. If this tidal force is sufﬁcientlygreat, it iseven possible that the smaller world could be disrupted.The existence of tides on Earth’s surface is well known, particularly for those wholive near an ocean. There are two high tides approximately every 24 hours, 3 minutes,depending on local coastal features. Less well known are the tidal bulges of the solid Earth,which measure only about 10 cm in height. Since Earth issigniﬁcantlymore massive thanthe Moon (approximately 81 times), the bulges on the Moon are much larger, resulting innearly 20 m of deformation at its surface.The Physics of TidesTo better understand how tides arise on Earth, consider the force on a test massm1locatedwithin the planet at a distancerfrom the Moon’s center of mass,Fm=GMm1r2,whereMis the mass of the Moon (see Fig. 2). Now consider a second massm2=m1=m, located at a distancedrfromm1along a line connecting Earth and the Moon. TheWe will beinvestigating in more detail the objects that populate ourPhysical Processes in the Solar System
The force of gravity governs the orbits of the planets and their moons in the form of .epler’s laws. In that study we treated those objects as point masses,  under the assumption that they are spherically symmetric. Important consequenc-es arise from relaxing the constraint of spherical symmetry, however. Since one


<<<PAGE 797>>>

m2m1EarthMoondrrFIGURE 2The tidal force on Earth due to the Moon arises because of the varying values forthe Moon’s gravitational attraction at different locations inside the planet.
EarthMoon/H9258/H9278/H9278CRmPsrxyFp,yFPFP,x
FIGURE 3The geometry of the tidal force acting on Earth due to the Moon.difference in forces (the differential force) between the two test masses is thendFm=/parenleftbiggdFmdr/parenrightbiggdr=−2GMmr3dr,(1)wheredris taken to be the separation between their centers. Note that the differential forcedecreases more rapidly with distance than does the force of gravity itself, meaning that thecloser the test masses are to the Moon, the more pronounced the effect.The shape of the tidal bulges on Earth can be understood by analy]ing the differencesin the gravitational force vectors acting at the center of the planet and at some point onits surface (see Fig. 3). For simplicity, we will consider only forces in thex–yplane.Neglecting rotation, the effects are symmetric about thex-axis (the line between the cen-ters of Earth and the Moon). At the center of the planet, thex- andy-components of thegravitational force on a test massmdue to the Moon are given byFC,x=GMmr2,FC,y=0,while at pointPthe components areFP,x=GMms2cosφ, FP,y=−GMms2sinφ.The differential force between Earth’s center and its surface is/Delta1F=FP−FC=GMm/parenleftbiggcosφs2−1r2/parenrightbiggˆi−GMms2sinφˆj.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 798>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 4(a) The gravitational force of the Moon on Earth. (b) The differential gravitationalforce on Earth, relative to its center.Next, to simplify the solution somewhat, we writesin terms ofr,R, andθ,s2=(r−Rcosθ)2+(Rsinθ)2≃r2/parenleftbigg1−2Rrcosθ/parenrightbiggwhere terms of orderR2/r2≪1 have been neglected. Substituting, and recalling that forx≪1,(1+x)−1≃1−x, weﬁndthat the differential force becomes/Delta1F≃GMmr2/bracketleftbiggcosφ/parenleftbigg1+2Rrcosθ/parenrightbigg−1/bracketrightbiggˆi−GMmr2/bracketleftbigg1+2Rrcosθ/bracketrightbiggsinφˆj.(2)Finally, using theﬁrst-orderrelations cosφ≃1 and sinφ≃(Rsinθ)/r, we have/Delta1F≃GMmRr3/parenleftBig2 cosθˆi−sinθˆj/parenrightBig.(3)Notice the extra factor of 2 in thex-component when compared with they-component.<ou should also compare this result with the expression for the differential force given inEq. ( 1), noting that hereR(the distance between the center and the surface) has re-placeddr.The situation described by Eq. ( 3) is illustrated in Fig. 4. The actual gravitationalforce vectors due to the Moon are directed toward the center of mass of the Moon, but thedifferentialforce vectors act to compress Earth in they-direction and elongate it along theline between their centers of mass, producing tidal bulges. It is the symmetry of the bulgesthat produces two high tides in a 2-hour period as Earth rotates under an orbiting Moon.The Effects of TidesIn reality, Earth’s tidal bulges are not directly aligned with the Moon. This is because therotation period of Earth is shorter than the Moon’s orbital period and frictional forces onthe surface of the planet drag the bulge axis ahead of the Earth–Moon line. Because frictionis a dissipative force, rotational kinetic energy is constantly being lost and Earth’s spin rateis continually decreasing. At the present time, Earth’s rotation period is lengthening at therate of 0.0016 s century−1, which, although slow, is measurable.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 799>>>

BAEarthMoonFIGURE 5Earth’s bulge A is closer to the Moon than is bulge B, resulting in a net torque onthe planet. Note that the diagram is not to scale.The Moon is also known to be drifting away from Earth by 3 to 4 cm yr−1. The increasingEarth–Moon distance is determined by bouncing laser beams off the mirrors left on the Moonby the Apollo astronauts in the early 1970s and measuring the round-trip light-travel time.To see how the decrease in Earth’s rotation rate and the increase in the Earth–Moondistance are related, we need only consider the torque exerted on Earth by the Moon’sinteraction with Earth’s tidal bulges. In Fig. , bulge A leads the Moon and is closer to itthan is bulge B. As a result, the force exerted on bulge A by the Moon is greater, resulting ina net torque that is slowing Earth’s rotation. At the same time, bulge A is pulling the Moonforward, causing the satellite to move farther out. This complementary behavior is just aconsequence of the conservation of angular momentum. Neglecting the dynamicalinﬂuenceof the Sun and the other planets on the Earth–Moon system, no external torques exist toalter its total angular momentum. If Earth’s rotational angular momentum is decreasing, theorbital angular momentum of the Moon must necessarily increase.Because of tidal effects, given sufﬁcienttime Earth will slow its rotation enough thatthe same side of the planet will always face the Moon, just as the Moon now keeps thesame ³face´ toward Earth. In the distant future, if inhabitants on Earth’s far side want totake romantic moonlight walks, they will need to take vacations halfway around the world.Calculations indicate that this will happen when the length of the day is about 47 currentdays long.Synchronous RotationIn the past the Moon was much closer to Earth than it is today, perhaps taking as little as oneweek to orbit the planet. It is also probable that the Moon’s rotation period was once shorterthan its orbital period. The Moon’s present1-to-1 synchronous rotationis due to the sametidal dissipation that is occurring on Earth today. Its rotational period became synchroni]edwith its orbital period more rapidly than Earth’s has, simply because it is much smaller andbecause Earth produces much larger tidal deformations on the Moon than does the Moonon Earth.Synchronous rotation is common throughout the Solar System. The two moons of Mars,the four Galilean moons of Jupiter (along with Amalthea, a small moon inside Io’s orbit),Some binary star systems are also known to be in synchronous rotation.44Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 800>>>

and most of the moons of Saturn are in synchronous rotation, as are many of the othermoons associated with the outer planets. In addition, Pluto and its largest moon, Charon,have reached theﬁnalstage of tidal evolution they are in mutual synchronous rotation,with the same side of Pluto constantly turned toward the same face of Charon.An interesting and unusual case of tidal evolution is that of Triton, the giant moon ofNeptune. Triton is in synchronous rotation and orbits the planet in a retrograde fashion. Inthis instance, the tidal bulges in Neptune actually work to cause that moon to spiraltowardthe planet rather than away from it. Apparently it will take billions of years before anycatastrophic interaction occurs. On the other hand, Phobos (one of the Martian moons) isin a prograde orbit, but with an orbital period of 7h39mthat isshorterthan the rotationperiod of Mars (24h37m). This means that Phobos is inside the planet’ssynchronous orbit,deﬁnedto be where the planet’s rotation period and the satellite’s orbital period are equal.Consequently, it is ³outrunning´ the tidal bulge axis, and the resulting forces are causingthe moon to spiral inward. Phobos’s orbit is decaying rapidly enough that if it were to stayintact, it would hit the planet in about 0 million years. The other Martian moon, 'eimos,is outside the synchronous orbital radius and is spiraling outward, just as our Moon is.Additional Tidal Effects from the SunOf course, the Earth–Moon system is not in strict isolation. For instance, the Sun alsoproduces tidal forces that act on Earth. When the Sun, Earth, and the Moon are all aligned(at full Moon or new Moon), the differential forces due to the Sun and the Moon add tocreate unusually large tidal bulges on Earth, calledspring tides. Atﬁrstquarter or thirdquarter, the Sun, Earth, and Moon form a right angle. In thisconﬁgurationthe tides producedby the Sun and the Moon tend to cancel, and unusually lowneap tidesresult.The Roche LimitIt is unlikely that Phobos will actually remain intact long enough to strike the planet.Recall that the differential tidal force is proportional tor−3 as a moon gets closer to itsparent planet, tidal effects become more severe. This means that the shape of a moon insynchronous rotation becomes increasingly elongated. Neglecting any internal cohesionforces (i.e., assuming an ideali]edﬂuidobject), when the orbital distance has decreasedsufﬁciently, it becomes no longer possible todeﬁnea shape for the moon such that theforce of gravity is perpendicular to the surface at every point. As a result, the surface willcontinuallyﬂowin the direction of the net gravitational force vector. Oscillations will thendevelop in the extended structure, and the moon will come apart. The maximum orbitalradius for which tidal disruption occurs is known as theRoche limit, named for EdouardRoche (1820–1883), whoﬁrstcarried out the analysis in 180. In his study Roche took intoconsideration orbital and rotational motion, and he assumed aﬂuid,prolate spheroid (i.e.,a football-shaped moon).To make an order-of-magnitude estimate of the orbital radius at which a moon willbreak apart, assume (incorrectly) that this happens when the differential force exceeds theEarth’s synchronous orbit is sometimes referred to as geosynchronous orbit.Artiﬁcialsatellites placed in geosyn-chronous equatorial orbits remainﬁxedover the same geographic point on the surface. Communications satellitesare generally placed in such orbits.
Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 801>>>

self-gravitational force holding the moon together. Furthermore, assume for simplicity thatthe moon and the planet are spherical, and neglect any centrifugal effects. In this case, ifthe moon is to be tidally disrupted, the inward gravitational acceleration produced by themoon at a point located on its surface closest to the planet must be smaller than the outwarddifferential gravitational acceleration produced by the planet, orGMmR2m<2GMpRmr3,whereMpandMmare the masses of the planet and moon, respectively,Rmis the radiusof the moon, andris the distance between the centers of the two worlds. SubstitutingMp=4πR3pρp/3 andMm=4πR3mρm/3, whereρpandρmare the average densities ofthe planet and moon, respectively, and solving forr, weﬁndthat a moon will be tidallydisrupted if its orbit is less thanr<fR/parenleftbiggρpρm/parenrightbigg1/3Rp,(4)where, in our case,fR=21/3=1.3. In his more careful analysis, Roche found a largervalue for the leading constant offR=2.46. The fact that our result gave too small a valuefor the radiusreﬂectsthe incorrect assumption that it is the differential force exceeding self-gravity that is ultimately responsible for the disintegration of the satellite. Since oscillationsin the body will develop at greater radii, self-gravity is stillsigniﬁcantlygreater than thedifferential term at the true Roche limit. (Although not considered in this analysis, self-cohesion of an object that is provided by the electromagnetic force, such as molecularbonds or the formation of a crystal lattice, can also decrease the point at which an objectwill be disrupted.)Example 2.1.The average density of Saturn is 687 kg m−3and its planetary radius is6.03×107m. 8sing a value offR=2.46, the Roche limit for a moon having an averagedensity of 1200 kg m−3is 1.23×108m. Much of the ring system of Saturn lies within thisorbital radius given by the Roche limit, and all of Saturn’s large moons are farther out. Thematerial within ring systems may be the result of disintegrating or tidally disrupted moonsthat wandered within the Roche limit.3THE PHYSICS OF ATMOSPHERESOur Solar System today is the result of billions of years of ongoing evolution caused by ahost of physical processes. Subtle differences in initial conditions of neighboring planetshave led to the very different worlds we see today. We will discuss some of the morefrequently encountered atmospheric processes in this section and then, in later chapters,describe the unique characteristics of each planet.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 802>>>

The Temperatures of the PlanetsAs has already been mentioned, the temperatures of the planets played a key role in theirformation and evolution. 'uring the formation stage, the temperature structure of thesolarnebula inﬂuenced whether a planet would become a terrestrial or a giant.Temperature also helped to determine the currentcomposition of each planet’s atmosphere.absorbed by the planet must be re-emitted if this were not so, the planet’s temperaturewould change with time.To estimate a planet’s equilibrium temperature, assume that the planet is a sphericalblackbody of radiusRpand temperatureTpin a circular orbit a distanceDaway from theSun. For simplicity, we will assume that the planet’s temperature is uniform over its surfaceand that the planetreﬂectsa fractionaof the incoming sunlight (ais known as the planet’salbedo). From the condition of thermal equilibrium, the sunlight that is notreﬂectedmustbe absorbed by the planet and subsequently re-emitted as blackbody radiation. Of course,we will also treat the Sun as a spherical blackbody having an effective temperatureT⊙=Teand radiusR⊙. It is left as an exercise to show that the temperature of the planet is given byTp=T⊙(1−a)1/4/radicalbiggR⊙2D.()Note that the temperature of the planet is proportional to the effective temperature of theSun and does not depend on the si]e of the planet.Example 3.1.8sing Earth’s average value ofa=0.3 in Eq. ( ), the temperatureof a blackbody Earth isT⊕=2 .=−19◦C=−1◦F.This value is substantially below the free]ing point of water and (fortunately) is not thecorrect temperature at the surface of the planet. This analysis neglected thegreenhouseeffect,asigniﬁcantwarming due largely to the water vapor in Earth’s atmosphere. Ac-wavelengths. This infrared radiation is absorbed and then re-emitted by the atmosphericgreenhouse gases, which act as a thermal blanket to warm Earth’s surface by about 34◦C.Greenhouse warmingon Venus has been much more dramatic.This assumption is a reasonable approximation if the planet is rapidly rotating or has a circulating atmosphere.Carbon dioxide, methane, andchloroﬂuorocarbonsalso contribute to the greenhouse effect.6
7
67Physical Processes in the Solar System
The Stefan–Bolt]mann equation is the most signiﬁcant factor in determining the present-day temperatures of the planets in the Solar System. 8nder equilibrium condi-tions, a planet’s total energy content must remain constant. Therefore, all of the energy
cording to Wien’s law, Earth’s blackbody radiation is emitted primarily at infrared


<<<PAGE 803>>>

The Chemical Evolution of Planetary AtmospheresThe evolution of a planetary atmosphere is a complex process that depends on the localtemperature of the solar nebula during the time of the planet’s formation, together with theplanet’s temperature, gravity, and local chemistry following the formation process. In thecase of the terrestrial planets, outgassing from rocks and volcanos also played a role afterthe development of the initial, primordial atmosphere. On Earth, the development of lifehas also contributedsigniﬁcantlyto the evolution of its atmosphere. Impacting comets andmeteorites affect planetary atmospheres as well.among gas particles become negligible, particles moving upward will travel only under theinﬂuenceof gravity, following trajectories described by simple projectile motion. Thoseatoms or molecules that are not moving rapidly enough to escape, or that do not have thecorrect trajectories, will fall back down into the denser layers and undergo collisions withthe gas. On the other hand, particles that are moving upward and have velocities that aresufﬁcientlygreat will be able to escape the gravitational pull of the planet altogether andmove out into interplanetary space. It is this process that can allow the atmospheres of someplanets (or at leastspeciﬁcchemical components of those atmospheres) to ³leak off.´ Theregion in an atmosphere where the mean free path of the particles becomes long enough forthem to travel without appreciable collisions is referred to as theexosphere.Because of the high-velocity tail of the Maxwell–Bolt]mann distribution, and because ofthe amount of time that has elapsed since the Solar System formed, if a particular componentof the atmosphere is going to escape, it is not necessary that the root-mean-square averagevelocity of those particles be greater than the escape speed. It is only necessary that asufﬁcientlylarge number of particles have speeds greater thanvesc. As a rough estimate, aplanet will have lost a particular component of its atmosphere by now if, for that component(either molecular or atomic),vrms>16vesc.mto escape a planet of massMpandradiusRpis approximatelyTesc>14GMpmkRp.(6)Example 3.2.Earth has an atmosphere composed of approximately 78 N2and 21O2by number, while the Moon, which is on average the same distance from the Sun, hasnosigniﬁcantatmosphere. From Example 3.1, the blackbody equilibrium temperatureof anairlessEarth should be 2 .. Since the Moon’s albedo is only 0.07, its blackbodyThe temperature required for a gas of particles of massPhysical Processes in the Solar System
A critical component in the development of an atmosphere is the abil-ity of the planet to retain speciﬁc atoms or molecules. For a gas in thermal equi-librium, the number of particles having velocities between v and v  dv is  given by the Maxwell–Bolt]mann velocity distribution. At some critical height in an atmosphere, when the number density is low enough that collisions


<<<PAGE 804>>>

temperature is somewhat higher (274 .). In reality, the vertical temperature structure ofEarth’s atmosphere is very complex and depends on its hydrodynamic motions togetherwith the ability of various atoms and molecules to absorb radiation. Near the top of theatmosphere, the temperature is also strongly dependent on the amount of solar activity.Within the exosphere the characteristic temperature is about 1000 ..Consider Earth’s ability and the Moon’s inability to retain molecular nitrogen. The massof an N2molecule is approximately 28 u=4.7×10−26kg, the mass and radius of Earthare .9736×1024kg and 6.378136×106m, respectively, and the mass and radius offrom Eq. ( 6), givingTesc,⊕>3900 . andTesc,Moon>180 .. Since Earth’s exospherictemperature is cooler and the Moon is warmer than these values, Earth has been able toretain its molecular nitrogen, whereas the Moon could not.Since O2is more massive (32 u), even higher temperatures are required for that moleculeto escape.The Loss of Atmospheric Constituentstherefore have the best chance of escaping. The number of particles with velocities betweenvandv+dvpassing through a hori]ontal slab of cross-sectional areaAand vertical thicknessdzduring a time intervaldtis given bydNvdv=(nvdV)dv=Adznvdv=Avzdt nvdv=CgAv dt nvdv,whereCgis a geometrical factor that takes into consideration the requirement that, of all thevelocity components of the randomly moving particles, only positive vertical componentswill be considered. 'ividing through by the time interval, we obtain therateat whichparticles with velocities betweenvandv+dvare crossing the surface. Furthermore, if weassume that the atmosphere is spherical at the location of the exosphere, so thatA=4πR2,then the number of particles per second with speeds betweenvandv+dvmoving verticallyupward through the entire exosphere is given by˙Nvdv≡dNvdtdv=4πR2Cgvnvdv.Finally, to determine the number of particles per second leaving the atmosphere, it is nec-essary only to consider those particles with sufﬁcientlyhigh velocities, namelyv>vesc.e have˙N=nπR24/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2/integraldisplay∞vesc4πv3e−mv2/2kTdv,(7)WPhysical Processes in the Solar System
the Moon are 7.349 î 1022 k g  a n d  1 . 7 3 7 1  î  1 06 m ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y .  T h e  t e m p e r a-tures required for the nitrogen to escape from each world can now be estimated
The loss of speciﬁc components of an atmosphere can be understood in more detail by ap-pealing directly to the Maxwell–Bolt]mann distribution, nv dv. As particles move about randomly in the gas, some of them are traveling approximately vertically upward and
where Cg h a s  b e e n  s e t  e q u a l  t o  1  1 6 ,  b a s e d  o n  a  c a r e f u l  a n a l y -sis of the geometry of the problem. At some height z i n  t h e  a t m o s p h e r e ,


<<<PAGE 805>>>

where the particle number density isn(z), Eq. ( 7) reduces to˙N(z)=4πR2νn(z),(8)whereν≡18/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig1/2/parenleftbiggv2esc+2kTm/parenrightbigge−mv2esc/2kT(9)is anatmospheric escape parameterthat has units of velocity.νdescribes the rate at which gas particles of massmescape across a unit area for aspeciﬁednumber densityn(z)in the exosphere. The atmospheric escape parameter can alsobe thought of as theeffective thicknessof the atmosphere of a certain species that evaporatesaway (or ³leaks off´) per second. In Fig. 6, log10νis plotted as a function of the massofspeciﬁccomponents in Earth’s atmosphere, where a temperature of 1000 . has beenused, characteristic of a mean value in the exosphere. For comparison, log10νhas also beenplotted for the same species using the Moon’s escape velocity and a typical temperatureof 274 .. Note that of the components listed, only molecular hydrogen and helium haveessentially completely escaped Earth’s atmosphere, whereas the Moon has lost all of itsatmosphere, including the heavier molecules listed.Moon (T = 274 .)HHeH2CH4H2ON2O2CO2NH3Earth (T = 1000 . exosphere)
0 10 20 30 40 0Mass (u)–160–140–120–100–80–60–40–200Log10/H9263 (m s–1)
FIGURE 6The logarithm of the atmospheric escape parameter,ν, as a function of atomic weightfor various chemical species in Earth’s atmosphere and on the surface of the Moon. Note that Earthhas lost most of its atomic and molecular hydrogen and its helium, while retaining the other moleculeslisted. The Moon has lost all of its atmosphere.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 806>>>

Example 3.3.Equations ( 8) and ( 9) can be used to estimate the amount of timerequired for molecular nitrogen to escape from Earth’s atmosphere. A rough calculationof the total number of N2molecules in the atmosphere can be made by assuming that thenumber density decreases approximately exponentially with height, just as the pressuredoes if the atmosphere is nearly isothermal. Thenn(z)=n0e−z/HPwheren0is the number density at the surface andHPis the pressure scale height.8sing the ideal gas law (Eq. 10.11) with the mass of the nitrogen molecule(MN2) beingused forµmH, the pressure scale height may be written asHP=Pρg=kTgMN2.(10)Notice that the pressure scale height is different for particles of different masses. 8singcharacteristic values at Earth’s surface (T=288 . andg=9.80 m s−2),HP=8.7 km formolecular nitrogen.Making the rough assumption that the pressure scale height remains constant with alti-tude, and neglecting the slight change inrrelative to Earth’s surface, the number densitycan now be integrated over the volume of the atmosphere, givingN=4πR2⊕n0HP.Taking the number density of nitrogen molecules near the surface to ben0=2×102m−3,the total number of nitrogen molecules in the atmosphere isN=9×1043.From Eq. ( 9) and Fig. 6, the atmospheric escape parameter for nitrogen moleculesfrom Earth’s exosphere isν=4×10−88ms−1. Also, at the height of the exosphere (ap-proximately 00 km), the mean number density of N2is 2×1011m−3. 8sing Eq. ( 8),weﬁndthat the rate at which nitrogen molecules are escaping Earth’s atmosphere is ap-proximately˙N=4×10−62s−1. 'ividing the total number of available molecules by therate of loss, the time required to dissipate the nitrogen in Earth’s atmosphere is estimatedto betN2=N˙N=2×1010s=6×1097yr.It is safe to say that Earth’s atmospheric nitrogen is not going to escape any time soonThe situation is very different for atomic hydrogen in Earth’s atmosphere, however.Earth’s atmosphere actually differs appreciably from an isothermal approximation. As a result, the estimate ofn(z)used here would need to bemodiﬁed signiﬁcantlyin a more careful analysis. Nevertheless, this ³back-of-the-envelope´ calculation illustrates many of the basic physical principles involved and yields the correct generalconclusion.8
8Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 807>>>

Besides the loss of high-velocity particles from the exponential tail of the Maxwell–Bolt]mann distribution, other factors also contribute to the dissipation of an atmosphere.Molecularphotodissociation, caused by the absorption of 8V photons in the upper atmo-sphere, breaks down some molecules into atoms or lighter molecules, with the result thatH2+γ→H+H.Gravitational Separation of Atmospheric ConstituentsAnother feature of atmospheric physics that can affect the loss of certain components isthegravitational separation(also known aschemical differentiation) of constituents ofan atmosphere by weight. In the absence of the continual mixing caused by convection atlower altitudes, composition differences develop with height in the upper atmosphere. Thiseffect can be understood by referring to the expression for the pressure scale height in theform of Eq. ( 10). For a given temperature, the pressure scale height increases as themass decreases, meaning that the number densities of lighter particles do not diminish asrapidly withz. As a result, lighter particles become relatively more abundant in the upperatmosphere, enhancing the likelihood of their escape.Circulation Patternsregions at high latitudes, where it sinks back down again. The cycle closes when the gasreturns to the warmer regions near the equator. If the warm air were able to migrate all theway from the equator to the poles before sinking, the global pattern illustrated in Fig. 7(a)would occur. This hypothetical circulation pattern is known asHadley circulation.In reality, the warmer air at higher altitudes is undergoing radiative cooling as it migratestoward the poles. At about 30◦N and S latitude, the air has given up enough heat that itsinks and returns to the equator, where it is reheated again. Similarly, the colder air thatis migrating from the poles toward the equator at lower altitudes heats and rises at about◦N and S latitude, returning to the poles where it sinks again. This breaks up the globalHadley circulation pattern into three ]onal components, as shown in Fig. 7(b).These general ]onal weather patterns are further complicated by the planet’s rotation.Since a rotating body does not constitute an inertial reference frame, pseudo-forces, suchas theCoriolis force, are present.Assume for simplicity that Earth is perfectly spherical. At a latitudeL, a point on thesurface is located a distancerLfrom the rotation axis, given byrL=R⊕cosL.Letting the angular rotation speed of Earth beω, the eastward speed of the surface at thePhysical Processes in the Solar System
As is the case with stars, convection in planetary atmospheres is driven largely by steep temperature gradients. Near the equator, where the intensity of the sunlight is great-est, the atmosphere heats up and the warm gas rises. The gas then migrates to coolerthe individual particles have greater speeds. For instance,   The solar wind can also contribute to the loss of particles through collisions in the upper atmosphere, causing direct ejection, or molecular dissociation and subsequent escape. Even heating caused by impacting meteorites and comets can accelerate the loss of atmospheric con-stituents.


<<<PAGE 808>>>

N
SN
S(a)(b)FIGURE 7(a) The pattern of hypothetical Hadley circulation, caused by warm air rising nearthe equator and cool air sinking near the poles. (b) General weather circulation on Earth caused bythe Hadley cells being broken up by radiative cooling of the warm air migrating toward the poles.latitudeLis justvL=ωr=ωR⊕cosL.At the equator (L=0◦), this speed is approximately 46 m s−1=1670 km h−1. However,at a latitude ofL=40◦, the speed is reduced to 1300 km s−1. As a result, according to anobserver in an inertial reference frame, a person standing still on the surface of Earth atthe equator is moving approximately 370 km h−1faster than someone standing still on thesurface at a latitude of 40◦. This velocity difference with latitude affects weather circulationpatterns.As an illustration of the effect of the Coriolis force, consider the apparent motion of aprojectileﬁrednearly hori]ontally from the equator northward, as shown in Fig. 8(a).Also assume that the elevation of the projectile above the surface of Earth is essentiallyconstant during itsﬂight.From the point of view of an observer on Earth’s surface located atthe origin of the projectile’s motion, the projectileinitially appearsto be traveling straightnorth since the observer has the same easterly speed as the easterly component of theprojectile’s velocity vector at the time of launch. However, from the point of view of anobserver in an inertial reference frame far above the planet, the direction of the projectile’smotion will be northeast precisely because it has an eastward component to its velocityvector.As the projectile travels north, it will appear to an observer on the ground that the path willdeﬂecttoward the east due to some undetected ³force´ >Fig. 8(b)@. However, the observerin an inertial frame understands this observation as being due to the velocity difference ofEarth’s surface with latitude the easterly component of the projectile’s velocity vector willcause it to ³outrun´ observers at progressively more northerly latitudes on Earth.It can be shown that the value of the Coriolis force as measured in a noninertial referenceframeﬁxedto the surface of Earth is given byFC=−2mω×v,(11)Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 809>>>

/H9275vNvEEquatorLaunchpointSNN
EConstant    longitudeProjectilepathLater positionof observerObserverApparent pathof projectile
(b)(a)FIGURE 8A projectile launched from the equator northward will curve toward the east as seenby an observer on Earth. (a) The view from an observer in an inertial frame above Earth. (b) Theapparent trajectory as seen from an observer at rest on the surface of Earth.whereωis the angular velocity vector of the planet andvis the velocity of the projectilewith respect to the noninertial reference frame. Clearly, as the velocity of the particleor the angular velocity of the planet increases, the effect of the ³force´ increases. OnEarth, the presence of the Coriolis force causes the large-scale north–south circulationpatterns to develop global east–west ]onalﬂows>recall Fig. 7(b)@. Nearest the equator,the circulation patterns are generally easterly and are known as the trade winds. In the ]onalregions between about 30◦and ◦, the prevailing winds are the westerlies, and near thepoles, theﬂowis again generally easterly. The Coriolis force is also responsible for themotions of clouds around high- and low-pressure systems.The Complexities of Weather SystemsAs anyone who has watched weather forecasts knows, weather circulation patterns onEarth are much more complex than has been described above. Effects such as moisturein the atmosphere, the diversity of land forms, the transport of heat by ocean currents,temperature differences between oceans and land, and even frictional effects between theatmosphere and the surface of the planet all contribute to the complexity of Earth’s weathersystems.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBeatty, J. .elly, Petersen, Carolyn Collins, and Chaikin, Andrew (eds.),The New SolarSystem, Fourth Edition, Cambridge 8niversity Press and Sky Publishing Corporation,Cambridge, MA, 1999.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 810>>>

Booth, Nicholas,Exploring the Solar System, Cambridge 8niversity Press, Cambridge,1999.Consolmagno, Guy J., and Schaefer, Martha W.,Worlds Apart: A Textbook in PlanetarySciences, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1994.Morrison, 'avid, and Owen, Tobias,The Planetary System, Third Edition,Addison-Wesley,San Francisco, 2003.Treﬁl,James,Other Worlds: Images of the Cosmos from Earth and Space, National Geo-graphic Society, Washington, '.C., 1999.TechnicalAtreya, S. .., Pollack, J. B., and Matthews, M. S. (eds.),Origin and Evolution of Planetaryand Satellite Atmospheres, The 8niversity of Ari]ona Press, Tucson, 1989.de Pater, Imke, and Lissauer, Jack J.,Planetary Sciences, Cambridge 8niversity Press,Cambridge, 2001.Fowles, Grant R., and Cassiday, George L.,Analytical Mechanics, Seventh Edition, Thom-son BrooksCole, Belmont, CA, 200.Holton, James R.,An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology, Fourth Edition, Elsevier Aca-demic Press, Burlington, MA, 2004.Houghton, John T.,The Physics of Atmospheres, Third Edition, Cambridge 8niversity Press,Cambridge, 2002.Lewis, John S.,Physics and Chemistry of the Solar System, Academic Press, San 'iego,199.Lodders, .atharina, and Fegley, Jr., Bruce,The Planetary Scientist’ s Companion, Oxford8niversity Press, New <ork, 1998.Manning, Vincent, Boss, Alan P., and Russell, Sara S. (eds.),Protostars and Planets, IV,The 8niversity of Ari]ona Press, Tucson, 2000.Seinfeld, John H., and Pandis, Spyros N.,Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: From AirPollution to Climate Change, John Wiley 	 Sons, Inc., New <ork, 1998.Taylor, Stuart Ross,Solar System Evolution, Second Edition, Cambridge 8niversity Press,Cambridge, 2001.Physical Processes in the Solar System


<<<PAGE 811>>>



<<<PAGE 812>>>

PROBLEM SET1 (a)Based on the data given in Appendix: Solar System Data, express the massesGanymede, Callisto, Titan, Triton, and Pluto in units(b)Express the radii of these moons and Pluto in units of the radius of Mercury.2A second version of Bode’s rule (the Blagg–Richardson formulation) is given byrn=r0An,wherenis the number of the planet in order from the Sun outward (e.g.,n=1 for Mercury)andr0andAare constants.Physical Processesin the Solar System
(a)Plot the position of each planet and that of Ceres on a semilog graph of log10rnvs.n.(b)Draw the best-ﬁt straight line through the data on your graph and determine the constantsr0andA.(c)Compare the “predictions” of your ﬁt with the actual values for each planet by calculatingthe relative error,rn−ractualractual.3Repeat Problem 2 for the Galilean moons of Jupiter (Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto).Express their orbital distances in units of the radius of Jupiter. The data for Jupiter and itsmoons are found in Appendix: Solar System Data.4Starting from Eq. (2) and using the geometry in Fig. 3, derive Eq. (3)./Delta1F≃GMmr2/bracketleftbiggcosφ/parenleftbigg1+2Rrcosθ/parenrightbigg−1/bracketrightbiggˆi−GMmr2/bracketleftbigg1+2Rrcosθ/bracketrightbiggsinφˆj./Delta1F≃GMmRr3/parenleftBig2 cosθˆi−sinθˆj/parenrightBig.of the mass of Mercury.of the Moon, Io, Europa, 
(2)(3)
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.19,

<<<PAGE 813>>>

6 (a)Make a rough estimate of how long it will take for Earth’s rotation period to reach 47 days,at which time it will be synchronized with the Moon’s orbital period.(b)Based on what you know about the evolution of our Sun, will future inhabitants of Earthever get the opportunity to see the Earth–Moon system completely synchronized (Earthalways keeping the same “face” toward the Moon)? Why or why not?7 (a)Using Kepler’s laws, estimate the distance of the Moon from Earth at some time in thedistant future when the Earth–Moon system is completely synchronized at 47 days.(b)As seen from Earth, what will the angular diameter of the Moon be at that time?(c)Assuming that the Sun’s diameter is the same as the present-day value, would a total eclipseof the Sun be possible? Why or why not?8 (a)Calculate the ratio of the tidal forces on Earth due to the Moon and the Sun.(b)With the aid of vector diagrams, explain the cause of the strong spring tides and therelatively weak neap tides.9Explain the almost complete lack of any tides in the Arctic Ocean at the latitude of Barrow,Alaska (71.3◦N).10UsingthedatainAppendix: Solr System Data,estimatetheRochelimitfortheMars–PhobosPhobos’smean density is 2000 kg m−3and it orbits at a distance of 9.4×106m. Explainthat Mars may develop a small ring system in the future.11Why aren’t spacecraft tidally disrupted when they pass near the giant planets?system.the suggestion5 (a)Assuming for simplicity that Earth is a sphere of constant density, compute the rate ofchange in rotational angular momentum of Earth due to the tidal inﬂuence of the Moon.Is the change positive or negative?(b)Treating the Moon as a point mass, estimate the rate of change in orbital angular momentumof the Moon. Is this change positive or negative?(c)Comparing your crude answers to parts (a) and (b), what can you say about the total angularmomentum of the Earth–Moon system over time?EarthMoon/H9258/H9278/H9278CRmPsrxyFp,yFPFP,x
FIGURE 3The geometry of the tidal force acting on Earth due to the Moon.
12Including rotation, rederive Eq. ( 4) for the case of a spherical moon in synchronous rotationabout a planet. What is your new value forfR?Hint:You may ﬁnd Kepler’s third law helpful.r<fR/parenleftbiggρpρm/parenrightbigg1/3Rp,Physical Processes in the Solar System: Problem Set
(4)a


<<<PAGE 814>>>

(c)Based on your answer in part (b), what would you expect the dominant component of theatmosphere to be? Why?Tesc>154GMpmkRp.(b)Imagine the greenhouse gases in Earth’s atmosphere to be a single layer that is completelytransparent to the visible wavelengths of light received from the Sun, but completelyopaque to the infrared radiation emitted by the surface of Earth. Assume that the top andbottom surface areas of the layer are each equal to the surface area of the planet and thatthe temperature at the top of this atmospheric layer,T⊕, is just the blackbody temperaturefound in Example 3.1 in Physical Process in the Solar System. Show that the blackbodylayer results in a warming of Earth’s surface toathis result with Earth’s average surfacetemperature14Using Eq. ( 6), estimate the temperature that would be required for all of theatomichydrogento escape Earth’s atmosphere. Is this consistent with the lack of signiﬁcant amounts of atomicor molecular hydrogen in the atmosphere? Why or why not?15 (a)Estimate the equilibrium blackbody temperature of Jupiter. Use the data found inAp-
pendix: Solar System Data.radiation emitted by this atmospherictemperature ofTsurf=21/4T⊕. Compareof 15◦C=59◦F.Tesc>154GMpmkRp.(b)Using Eq. ( 6), estimate the temperature that would be required for all of the hydrogenmolecules to escape Jupiter’s atmosphere since the planet’s formation.13 (a)Use the equation below and simple geometry to derive Eq. ( 5) for the temperatureTpDfrom the Sun.of a planet at a distanceTp=T⊙(1−a)1/4/radicalbiggR⊙2D.L=4πR2σT4e.
“”
16Using integration by parts, show that Eqs. (8) and (9) follow directly from Eq. (7).˙N=nπR24/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig3/2/integraldisplay∞vesc4πv3e−mv2/2kTdv,˙N(z)=4πR2νn(z),ν≡18/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig1/2/parenleftbiggv2esc+2kTm/parenrightbigge−mv2esc/2kTPhysical Processes in the Solar System: Problem Set
(5)
(6)(6)(7)(8)(9)


<<<PAGE 815>>>

(b)Using a procedure identical to that of Problem 18, estimate the number density ofhydrogen atoms in the primordial exosphere.(c)What would have been the rate of loss of hydrogen atoms from the exosphere?(d)Assume that the number of atomic hydrogen atoms in the atmosphere was essentially thesame as the number of nitrogen molecules today. Approximately how long would it takefor the hydrogen to escape from the planet’s atmosphere? Express your answer in yearsand compare it to the age of Earth. (Note:unlikely that Earth ever had asubstantialhydrogenatmosphere.)20Calculate the atmospheric escape parameterνfor atomic hydrogen in Jupiter’s exosphere (useT∼1200 K). Compare your result with the value obtained for Earth (see Fig. 6 or theresult of Problem 19a).Hint:Because of numerical limitations on most calculators, youmay ﬁnd it necessary to ﬁrst determine log10νrather than determiningνdirectly.ν≡18/parenleftBigm2πkT/parenrightBig1/2/parenleftbiggv2esc+2kTm/parenrightbigge−mv2esc/2kT
It appears17Taking the density of air to be 1.3k gm−3near the surface of Earth, show that the numberdensity of nitrogen molecules is approximately 2×1025m−3, as given in Example 3.3 in18Assuming that the mean free path of molecules in Earth’s exosphere is sufﬁciently long (∼500 km) to allow them to escape into interplanetary space, use the below equation to estimate theestimateoftheircollisioncrosssections.CompareyourresultwiththenumberdensityofnitrogenmoleculesquotedinExample3.3 in Explainanysigniﬁcantdifferencesbetweenthetwo values.19 (a)Suppose that Earth once had an atmosphere composed entirely of hydrogen atoms, ratherthan the molecular nitrogen and oxygen of today. Using Eq. ( 9), calculate the atmo-spheric escape parameterνin this case if the temperature of the exosphere was 1000 K.Physical Process in the Solar System.number densityofmoleculesintheexosphere.Notethatyouwillneedtomakeanorder-of-magnitudeℓ=vtnσvt=1nσ.“”Physical Processes in the Solar System: Problem Set
Physical Process in the Solar System.“”
(9)


<<<PAGE 816>>>

22Suppose that a ball of massmis thrown with a velocityv=vxˆi+vyˆj+vzˆk,whereˆi,ˆj, andˆkare unit vectors pointing directly east, north, and upward, respectively, at thepoint where the ball is thrown. The latitude of the ball isLwhen it is thrown.(a)Show that the components of the Coriolis force on the ball are given byFC=−2mω[(vzcosL−vysinL)ˆi+vxsinLˆj−vxcosLˆk].Hint:Be sure to represent the components of the vectorωin terms of the coordinate systemon the surface of Earth deﬁned byˆi,ˆj, andˆk, with the origin of the system at the positionwhere the ball was thrown.(b)What is the value ofωfor Earth?(c)If the ball is thrown eastward with an initial velocity vectorv=30 m s−1ˆion the surfaceof Earth at a latitude of 40◦, what are the components of the acceleration vector that aredue to the Coriolis force?(d)If the ball is thrown northward withv=30 m s−1ˆj, what are the components of theacceleration vector?(e)If the ball is thrown straight up withv=30 m s−1ˆk, what are the components of theacceleration vector? Give a simple physical explanation for the result.(b)Recalling that a projectile launched from the equator toward the North Pole is also deﬂectedtoward the right (eastward), show that the circulation around low-pressure systems iscounterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere.(c)Which way do low-pressure systems circulate in the Southern Hemisphere?Moon (T = 274 K)HHeH2CH4H2ON2O2CO2NH3Earth (T = 1000 K; exosphere)
0 10 20 30 40 50Mass (u)–160–140–120–100–80–60–40–200Log10/H9263 (m s–1)
FIGURE 6The logarithm of the atmospheric escape parameter,ν, as a function of atomic weightfor various chemical species in Earth’s atmosphere and on the surface of the Moon. Note that Earthhas lost most of its atomic and molecular hydrogen and its helium, while retaining the other moleculeslisted. The Moon has lost all of its atmosphere.21 (a)Consider the case of a projectile launched from the North Pole toward the equator. Withthe aid of a diagram, show that the projectile is deﬂected westward (to the right as viewedfrom the launch point).Physical Processes in the Solar System: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 817>>>



<<<PAGE 818>>>

The Terrestrial Planets
1 Mercury
2 Venus
3 Earth
4 The Moon
5 Mars
1 MERCURY
The four terrestrial planets have a number of characteristics in common, such as being
The 3-to-2 Spin–Orbit Coupling of Mercury
The ﬁrst hint that Mercury’s orbit also exhibits another curious feature came in 1965 when
Rolf B. Dyce and Gordon H. Pettengill successfully bounced radar signals off the planet
using the Arecibo radio telescope. The reﬂected signals had a spread of wavelengths that
revealed Mercury’s rotation speed; because of the Doppler effect, radio waves that hit the
approaching limb were blueshifted and those that struck the receding limb were redshifted.
These observations indicated that Mercury’s rotation period was approximately 59 days.
More precise measurements made by the Mariner 10 spacecraft during its repeated ﬂybys
of the planet in 1974 and 1975 showed that the rotation period was actually 58.6462 days,
exactly two-thirds the length of its sidereal orbital period of 87.95 days.
How this peculiar 3-to-2 relationship between rotation and orbital periods developed
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 
Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by 20 ,small, rocky, and slowly rotating. Our own Moon and several of the moons of the giant 
planets also share many of those same characteristics. In this chapter we shall focus 
our attention on the terrestrial planets and their moons.
The innermost planet, Mercury (Fig.  1), orbits so close to the Sun (0.39 AU) that 
 Kepler’s laws begin to break down. The reason is that spacetime in the vicinity of 
massive objects is affected in such a way that Newton’s familiar inversesquare law is 
no longer a completely adequate description of gravity. It was the slow advance of the 
perihelion point of Mercury’s rather eccentric orbit ( e = 0.2056) that presented one of 
the ﬁrst tests of Einstein’s general theory of relativity.
can be understood in light of the process of tidal evolution. At perihelion, Mercury 
experiences the strongest tidal force, causing the planet to try to align its bulge axis 
along the line connecting the planet’s center of mass to the center of mass of the


<<<PAGE 819>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 1(a) Mercury, as seen by Mariner 10 when it was 200,000 km from the planet onMarch 29, 1974. (b) A portion of Caloris Basin can be seen near the terminator (the line separatingday and night). Notice the semicircular rings of mountains centered on the impact point at the left-handedge. (Courtesy NASA/JPL.)Sun. As a result, due to the tremendous energy dissipation from friction that accompaniestidal distortions, Mercury’s spin slowed to the point where the alignment ultimately didoccur at perihelion during each orbit; see Fig. 2.The Surface of the PlanetPictures returned by Mariner 10 revealed a planet that bears a strong superﬁcial resemblanceto the Moon (compare Figs. 1 and 6). Mercury is a world that is heavily cratered,indicating that it underwent extensive bombardment during its nearly 4.6-billion-year his-tory. Such evidence of violent collisions is commonplace on many worlds, giving us a hintof the Solar System’s history. One impact (at what is now known as Caloris Basin) was solarge that it created ripples that traveled across the planet and converged on the oppositeside to produce a jumbled collection of hills.A careful comparison of images of the Moon and Mercury shows that Mercury’s cratersare often separated by regions that are largely devoid of signiﬁcant cratering. Assuming thatthe rate of impact was roughly the same on both worlds throughout their histories, and thatthey formed at approximately the same time, Mercury’s surface must have been refreshedThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 820>>>

12345
6
78910111213Sun
FIGURE 2The 3-to-2 spin–orbit coupling of Mercury.more recently (meaning it must be somewhat younger) than most of the Moon’s surface.This is consistent with the conclusion that since Mercury is larger and closer to the Sun, itwould have cooled off more slowly after formation, and hot, molten material would havebeen more likely to reach the surface to cover older impact sites.Given the planet’s size and its proximity to the Sun, it is not surprising that Mercury hasatmosphere it does possess (number densities are less than 1011m−3) is due to chargednuclei of hydrogen and helium from the strong solar wind that become trapped in its weakmagnetic ﬁeld, together with atoms of oxygen, sodium, potassium, and calcium that haveescaped the surfaceregolith(or soil) of the planet. The atoms that leave the regolith mayhave been liberated by impacting solar wind particles or the vaporization of regolith materialby micrometeorites.Ironically, radar data suggest that this closest planet to the Sun possesses highly reﬂec-tive volatile material, probably water ice, in permanently shadowed craters near the polarcaps.1Because tidal interactions have forced the planet’s rotation axis to be almost exactlyperpendicular to its orbital plane, the polar regions never get more than a very small amountof sunlight. Moreover, with virtually no atmosphere to speak of, Mercury cannot efﬁcientlytransport heat away from the equatorial regions. As a result, temperatures near the polesprobably never exceed 167 K, and in shadows within craters near the poles, temperatures1The NASA 70-m tracking station at Goldstone, California, was used to send the nearly 500-kW signal at awavelength of 3.5 cm, and the VLA received the reﬂected beam.The Terrestrial Planets
only a very tenuous atmosphere. Because of Mercury’s high tempera-ture on the subsolar side (reaching 825 K) and its relatively low  escape  velocity (4.3 km s−1), atmospheric gases quickly evaporate into space. In fact, its exosphere reaches down to the surface of the planet. What


<<<PAGE 821>>>

may be as low as 60 K. These temperatures are low enough that any water ice that mayhave been deposited there by a process such as cometary collisions would sublimate onlyover very long time scales.The InteriorMercury’s relatively high average density (5427 kg m−3), when compared to that of theMoon (3350 kg m−3), indicates that it must have lost most of its lighter elements andundergone enough gravitational separation to create a fairly dense core. Based on computersimulations ﬁrst performed in 1987 by Willy Benz, Wayne Slattery, and Alastair G. W.Cameron (1925–2005), it appears that Mercury may have experienced a major collision witha large planetesimal early in its history. The collision was sufﬁciently energetic that muchof the outer, lighter silicate material was removed, leaving behind the iron and nickel thathad previously settled to the center of the planet. As a result, after the collision the planet’saverage density was substantially increased. Estimates place the mass of the impactor atabout one-ﬁfth Mercury’s current mass, and the speed of the impact at perhaps 20 km s−1.Prior to the collision, Mercury’s mass may have been twice its present value. Although thismay seem to be an ad hoc explanation for Mercury’s unusual density, we will soon learnthat the early Solar System was a violent place and that massive collisions were simply apart of its evolution.Mercury’s Weak Magnetic FieldMercury’s rotation, together with its large conducting metallic core, may be responsible forits magnetic ﬁeld. The maximum strength measured by Mariner 10 was about 4×10−7Tat an altitude of 330 km, about 100 times weaker than the magnetic ﬁeld measured nearis that aliquid metallicconducting core replaces the ionized gas in stars as the source of theﬁeld. To date, the details of planetary dynamos are not well understood. In Mercury’s case,the fact that the rotation is so slow seems to contradict the idea that a magnetic dynamois currently in operation. Furthermore, the relatively small size of the planet suggests thatits core should have cooled to the point that any molten core would be too insigniﬁcant togenerate a measurable ﬁeld. As a result, opponents of a present-day dynamo mechanismsuggest that Mercury’s magnetic ﬁeld may be a “frozen-in” remnant of its past, when theplanet may have been rotating faster and when it was warmer.2VENUSVenus, the second planet from the Sun, is sometimes referred to as Earth’s sister planetbecause its mass (0.815 M⊕) and radius (0.9488 R⊕) are comparable to Earth’s. Despitethese basic similarities, the two planets are markedly different in many of their fundamentalfeatures.The Terrestrial Planets
Earth’s surface. The mechanism for generating this and other planetary magnetic ﬁelds is believed to be the magnetic dynamo, essentially the same process responsible for the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld. The difference between the planetary and stellar mechanisms


<<<PAGE 822>>>

Retrograde RotationIn the 1960s, one of the many unusual features of Venus was discovered. Astronomerslearned that the atmospheric circulation was retrograde (the direction opposite its orbitalmotion), with speeds near 100 m s−1at the cloud tops close to the equator; see Fig. 3(a).This inference was based initially on observations of the clouds in its atmosphere; it wasconﬁrmed later by measurements of the Doppler shift of spectral lines from sunlight reﬂectedoff the clouds. Later, Earth-based radar Doppler measurements of the surface (like thosemade of Mercury) revealed that the planet itself also rotates retrograde, but 60 times moreslowly than its upper atmosphere. The sidereal rotation period of Venus is a very sluggish243 days; this compares to its orbital period of 224.7 days.The retrograde rotation of the planet is an interesting puzzle. All of the planets in theSolar System orbit prograde, as do most of their moons. This means that these worlds orbitin a counterclockwise direction as seen from a vantage point above Earth’s north pole.Furthermore, with the exceptions of Venus, Uranus, and Pluto, all of the other planets andmost of their moons also rotate prograde, just as the Sun does. This agrees with what onewould expect from the development of the Solar System out of a spinning disk of materialthat formed when the Sun did.Based on detailed analytical and numerical studies of the interactions among Venus, theSun, and the other planets in the Solar System, Alexandre Correia and Jacques Laskar wereable to show that Venus’s retrograde rotation can be explained in terms of gravitationalperturbations. The many perturbations acting on Venus from the other bodies in the Solar
(a)(b)FIGURE 3(a) An ultraviolet image of Venus obtained in 1995 by WF/PC 2 onboard the HubbleSpace Telescope. Note the “Y”-shaped cloud features at the top of the planet’s thick atmosphere. Nosurface features can be seen in visible or ultraviolet light. (Courtesy of L. Esposito, University ofColorado, Boulder, and NASA.) (b) A composite radar image of the surface of Venus obtained by theMagellan spacecraft that orbited the planet from 1990 to 1994. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 823>>>

System lead to a chaotic zone in the tilt of the axis between 0◦and 90◦. As gravitationalperturbations cause Venus to pass through that zone, the tilt of its rotation axis can varydramatically. Within the ﬁrst several million years following the planet’s formation, its verythick atmosphere develops and also starts to inﬂuence the outcome of the planet’s rotation.This occurs because the thick atmosphere can be signiﬁcantly affected by tidal forces, andthe thick atmosphere can also produce a damping effect. Numerical simulations based onvarious initial conditions for the rotation period and tilt of Venus’s axis most often led to thevery slow, retrograde rotation of Venus that is observed today. However, the path to this ﬁnalstate could be through either the ﬂipping of the rotation axis to near 180◦or the slowing ofthe spin rate to zero at an axis tilt of 0◦, and then tides producing a slow retrograde rotation.the cloud cover circles the planet in just four days, producing the “Y”-shaped cloud patternsevident in Fig. 3(a). Such high-speed motions are common in high-altitude jet streams(narrow rivers of air) but are unusual for the bulk of the atmosphere, particularly with suchslow underlying rotation.The Lack of a Magnetic FieldOne consequence of the planet’s slow rotation that does agree with expectation is the lack ofany measurable magnetic ﬁeld. The currents within a molten, conducting core are generatedby planetary rotation; therefore, one crucial component of the magnetic dynamo mechanismis absent in Venus. Because there is no magnetic ﬁeld to protect the planet via the Lorentzforce,supersonicionsinthesolarwinddirectlystriketheupperatmosphere,causing collisional ionization and a standing shock wave at the location where the solarwind particles are abruptly slowed to subsonic speeds.The Hot, Thick Atmosphere of VenusAnalysis of the composition of the dense atmosphere, made ﬁrst by ground-based telescopesand later by Soviet andAmerican probes, revealed that its chief constituent is carbon dioxide(CO2), which makes up about 96.5% of the total number of atoms or molecules, withmolecular nitrogen (N2) making up most of the remainder (3.5%). Traces of other moleculesare also present, most notably argon (70 ppm),2sulfur dioxide (SO2, 60 ppm) carbonmonoxide (CO, 50 ppm), and water (H2O, 50 ppm). The probes even detected thick cloudsof concentrated sulfuric acid. At the base of the atmosphere the temperature is 740 K,sufﬁcient to melt lead, and the pressure is 90 atm, equal to the pressure at a depth of over800 m below the surface of Earth’s oceans.3The very high surface temperature far exceeds what is expected from a simple blackbodyanalysis,suchastheoneperformedinExample3.1.Itisthelargeamountofcarbon2ppm represents parts per million.31 atm=1.013×105Nm−2.The Terrestrial Planets
The dynamical behavior of Venus’s atmosphere is also a puzzle. Probes that entered the atmosphere measured the presence of two large Hadley cells, one in each hemisphere, consistent with the planet’s slow rotation rate and the cor-responding lack of any signiﬁcant Coriolis force. However, near the equator


<<<PAGE 824>>>

dioxide (a greenhouse gas) in the atmosphere that is responsible for the extreme conditionsat the surface. The atmosphere is so thick that the optical depth at infrared wavelengthsis approximatelyτ=70, meaning that the temperature is increased over the blackbodytemperature that would be predicted for anairlessplanet at the location of Venus by a factorof nearly(1+τ)(1/4)=2.9.How could Earth’s sister planet have developed an atmosphere so different from ourown? The formation of terrestrial atmospheres is still not well understood and is an area ofactive research. However, based on the direct evidence we have of outgassing from Earth’svolcanoes and the discovery of volcanoes on both Venus and Mars, it seems likely that atleast a portion of a terrestrial planet’s atmosphere may arise from volcanic activity. It hasalso been suggested that signiﬁcant fractions of the atmospheres of these planets may havebeen delivered by comets and meteorites. If the later suggestion is true, then understandingthe atmospheric evolution of the terrestrial worlds requires a greater understanding of thecomposition of comets and meteorites, as well as the frequency with which they collidewith the worlds of the inner Solar System.Whatever the source of Venus’s primordial atmosphere, carbon dioxide is the dominantconstituent today, and very little water is present. Conversely, water is abundant in Earth’soceans, but there is very little atmospheric carbon dioxide. What happened to change therelative abundances of those molecules on the two planets? If the two worlds began withsimilar compositions, as seems likely, given that they formed near one another in the solarnebula and have comparable sizes, then water was probably much more abundant on Venusin the past. In fact, since the luminosity of the zero-age main sequence Sun was only about0.677 L⊙,muchlessthanitistoday,Venusmayhaveevenhadhotwateroceans on its surface early in its history.As the Sun’s luminosity increased and the planet wasbombarded by planetesimals, the surface temperature began to rise and the oceans started toevaporate. The addition of more infrared-absorbing water vapor in the atmosphere triggeredarunaway greenhouse effect, causing the surface temperature to climb to near 1800 K, hotenough to vaporize the remainder of the water and even melt rock. At the same time, theatmospheric pressure at the surface reached 300 atm. Since H2O is lighter than CO2, thewater migrated to the top of the atmosphere where it was dissociated by solar ultravioletradiation through the reaction H2O+γ→H+OH. This UV photodissociation processliberated the lighter hydrogen atoms, allowing most of them to escape from the planet. Sincethe carbon dioxide remained, it became the dominant species in the atmosphere of Venus.As is true of any viable scientiﬁc theory, it is important that the theory make testablepredictions. In the evolutionary scenario for the atmosphere of Venus just described, thephotodissociation of water should have left behind altered isotope ratios of hydrogen. Hy-drogen has two stable isotopes,11H (or simply hydrogen, H) and21H (deuterium, D), whichare chemically identical but differ in mass by a factor of two. On Earth the ratio of thenumbers of deuterium atoms to hydrogen atoms is D/H=1.57×10−4. However, withinthe atmosphere of Venus the ratio is closer to D/H=0.016. The factor-of-100 increasein the atmospheric D/H ratio for Venus relative to Earth is due to the more massive iso-tope’s slower rate of escape.Apparently our understanding ofthe runaway greenhouse effect on Venus is essentially correct.The Terrestrial Planets
therunawaygreenhouse


<<<PAGE 825>>>

Studying the SurfaceBecause of the thick cloud cover and inhospitable climate, it has been a difﬁcult job gatheringinformation about the surface of Venus. The SovietVeneramissions in the late 1960sthrough early 1980s were able to descend into the atmosphere of the planet and in somecases land on the surface, operating for short periods of time before succumbing to theenvironment found there. While on the surface, they returned pictures of their immediatevicinity. The landers also sampled the composition of the atmosphere and surroundingrock, conﬁrming the presence of sulfur in the atmosphere and ﬁnding rock of volcanicorigin on the surface. Variations in sulfur dioxide content over timescales of decades and thedetection of radio bursts characteristic of lightning in the atmosphere support the suggestionof recent volcanic activity. In particular, observations by various spacecraft and ground-based telescopes indicate that the sulfur dioxide content in the atmosphere of Venus hasdecreased by more than an order of magnitude, with some intermittent ﬂuctuations since thelate 1970s. Since ultraviolet radiation converts SO2to sulfuric acid in the upper atmosphere,the observed decrease in the sulfur dioxide concentration has led some scientists to suggestthat a major eruption may have occurred sometime during the 1970s, with a smaller eventoccuring around 1992.By far the greatest amount of information about the surface of Venus has come fromradar imaging, because radio signals can easily penetrate the atmosphere even though vis-ible and ultraviolet light cannot. Radar studies have been carried out using Earth-basedtelescopes such as Arecibo, and from orbiters, including the Venera andPioneerseries,and most recently from theMagellanspacecraft. Launched from the Space ShuttleAtlantisin 1989, Magellan’s very successful mission lasted until 1994, when it was intentionallysent diving into the atmosphere to gather information about the density structure of theplanet’s atmosphere. During Magellan’s operational lifetime, it mapped 98% of the surfaceat resolutions of between 75 m and 120 m. A Magellan mosaic of one hemisphere of Venusis shown in Fig. 3(b).During roughly one-half of its mission, Magellan sent back a continuous radio signalto Earth so that scientists could monitor the variation in the signal’s wavelength caused bythe Doppler effect. As Magellan passed over regions of higher average density, the localgravitational pull would speed up the spacecraft slightly and the wavelength of the signalreceived at Earth would change. In this way, Magellan was used to generate a detailedgravity map of the planet, covering approximately 95% of its surface.4By combining images of a given region made from two different locations, together withgravity information, scientists have been able to produce detailed three-dimensional imagesof much of the planet’s surface. Figure 4 shows Maat Mons, a volcano 8 km high located0.9 degrees north of the equator. In this image the vertical relief has been exaggerated bya factor of 22.5 to bring out important features. Based on changes in surface reﬂectivity,variations in rock characteristics become evident. Apparent in the image of Maat Mons arelava ﬂows that extend for hundreds of kilometers from the volcano. Estimates place the ageof the surface rock around Maat Mons at less than 10 million years, and it may be muchyounger.4To increase the resolution of the gravity data, ﬂight controllers lowered Magellan’s orbit using the previouslyuntried technique of aerobraking; Magellan dipped down into the atmosphere slightly, causing the spacecraft tolose orbital energy via atmospheric drag.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 826>>>

FIGURE 4Maat Mons is believed to be the tallest volcano on Venus, measuring 8 km in height.The vertical scale has been increased over the horizontal scale by a factor of 22.5. (Courtesy ofNASA/JPL.)It appears that the entire surface of the planet may have been refreshed relatively recentlycompared to the age of the Solar System. This estimate comes from the number of impactcraters found on the surface (e.g., see Fig. 5). If we assume that Venus has been struck byimpacts at about the same rate as other worlds in the inner Solar System (such as Mercury orour Moon), then from the relatively low number of craters found on the surface of Venus wecan conclude that large-scale lava ﬂows must have occurred about 500 million years ago.5In support of this conclusion, nearly one thousand volcanic features have been identiﬁedon the surface of the planet.3EARTHThe planet for which we have the greatest amount of information by far is of course ourEarth (see Fig. 6). We have studied its atmosphere, its oceans, and its active geology witha great deal of speciﬁcity. We have been able to carefully investigate its extensive biology,from the smallest microbes to the largest plants and animals, and to study the evolutionaryprocesses that have led to our planet’s great biodiversity. We have also been able to extendour knowledge by developing follow-up experiments based on information gained fromprevious studies. This makes investigating our own planet signiﬁcantly more robust andinteractive than investigating other bodies in our Solar System to date.65Absolute age estimates of the Moon will be discussed in detail in Section 4.6However, as we will see when we discuss Mars in Section 5, humans have begun to conduct extensive roboticstudies of that planet based directly on information returned from previous and ongoing missions.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 827>>>

FIGURE 5The impact crater Cunitz is visible in this image, with the volcano Gula Mons inthe background. The vertical scale has been increased over the horizontal scale by a factor of 22.5.(Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)
(a)(b)FIGURE 6(a) Earthrise over the limb of the Moon on December 22, 1968. This picture wastaken by the astronauts ofApollo 8. (b) Earth as seen by theApollo 17astronauts while traveling tothe Moon on December 7, 1972. Visible are most of Africa, Saudi Arabia, and the south polar ice cap.(Courtesy of NASA.)Our AtmosphereBeginning early in its history, the bulk of Earth’s water condensed to form its oceans.UnlikeVenus,however,givenEarth’sslightlygreaterdistancefromtheSun,ourplanetnevergothotenoughtoturnmuchoftheliquidtovapor.Therefore, theensuing runaway greenhouse effect described in Section 2 never developed. Instead, thecarbon dioxide in the atmosphere was dissolved into water, where it became chemicallybound up in carbonate rocks such as limestone. If all of the carbon dioxide trapped withinThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 828>>>

The present-day atmosphere of Earth is made up of (by number) 78% N2, 21% O2,1% H2O, and traces of Ar, CO2, and other constituents. The atmosphere owes its currentcomposition in part to the development of life on the planet. For instance, plants processcarbon dioxide into oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis.The Greenhouse Effect and Global WarmingSerious concern now exists over the effects of artiﬁcially introducing carbon dioxide andother greenhouse gases into Earth’s atmosphere by industrial means. To complicate matters,we are simultaneously destroying vast regions of vegetation, such as theAmazon rain forests,that could recycle CO2. The commonly used technique of slash-and-burn clearing of therain forests also releases tremendous quantities of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.To illustrate the problem, recent changes in the abundance of carbon dioxide over MaunaLoa, Hawaii, are shown in Fig. 7; the oscillations are due to the annual growing season.
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005Year310320330340350360370380390CO2 (ppm)
FIGURE 7The amount of carbon dioxide in parts per million by volume (ppm) over MaunaLoa, Hawaii, as a function of time. (Data from C. D. Keeling, T. P. Whorf, and the Carbon DioxideResearch Group, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California.)The Terrestrial Planetsrock today were released into Earth’s atmosphere, the amount would be comparable to that currently contained in the atmosphere of Venus. However, it is also important to know that the Sun was signiﬁcantly less luminous in the early Solar System than it is today. This implies that Earth’s surface would have been cooler in the past and its water should have been in the form of ice, even as recently as 2 billion years ago. However, geologic evidence, including fossil records, suggests that Earth’s oceans were liquid as early as 3.8 billion years ago. This puzzle has become known as the faint ancient Sun paradox. The resolution of this paradox probably lies in details of the greenhouse effect and a different atmospheric composition than exists at the present time.


<<<PAGE 829>>>

–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.5Northern hemisphere temperature anomaly (ºC)1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000YearFIGURE 8Monthly average temperature deviations in the Northern Hemisphere of Earth from1881 to 2003. The deviations are measured from a 25-year average between 1951 and 1975. (Datafrom K.M. Lugina, P.Ya. Groisman, K.Ya. Vinnikov, V.V. Koknaeva, and N.A. Speranskaya, 2004.In Trends Online: A Compendium of Data on Global Change.Carbon Dioxide Information AnalysisCenter, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, U.S.A.)Because of the nonlinear behavior of the greenhouse effect and the very complicated physics,chemistry, and meteorology that are involved, accurate computer models are only slowlybecoming available. However, despite current limitations in the predictive power of thesemodels, the basic effects of greenhouse gases are understood. As we have learned fromVenus, increasing the content of greenhouse gases in an atmosphere will raise its averagetemperature. The questions are by how much the temperature will increase, and how rapidlyit will occur.Figure 8 shows the average temperature deviations in the Northern Hemisphere ofEarth between 1881 and 2003 with respect to a 25-yr average of temperatures computedfrom 1951 through 1975. Evident is a consistently upward trend in the average temperaturesince about 1970. Whether this upward trend is the start of a long-term steady increase ora fairly short-term ﬂuctuation has been a matter of some debate. However, it is clear thata signiﬁcant upward trend is currently under way; in fact, seven of the ten hottest years inthe twentieth century occurred in the 1990s.Associated with the effects ofglobal warmingis evidence that Earth’s glaciers arereceding world wide. In addition, the Arctic ice cap has thinned signiﬁcantly since 1970and Earth’s ocean levels have risen. Also supporting the conclusion that human-drivenglobal warming is occurring is the increase in the average ocean surface temperature byapproximately 0.5◦C since the late 1960s, with warming extending down to depths ofseveral hundred meters. Since the oceans eventually absorb some 84% of the excess heatin the atmosphere, the observation of this temperature increase is signiﬁcant. The oceantemperature increase also agrees with computer modeling of global climate changes thatinclude the inﬂuence of increased greenhouse gas emissions.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 830>>>

Another environmental concern about human activity is the release of chloroﬂuorocar-bons into the atmosphere. These molecules migrate into the upper atmosphere above theNorth and South Poles, where they are destroying the ozone (O3). Ozone is known to be amajor absorber of ultraviolet radiation, and as such, it plays an important role in protectinglife on Earth’s surface.Much more research is necessary before we can hope to understand the magnitude of theenvironmental consequences of human behavior. Unfortunately, by the time more detailedpredictions are available, it may not be possible to reverse the trend.In recognition of the importance of global warming to the inhabitants of our planet, theﬁrst-ever “Earth Summit” was held in 1992, involving most of the nations of the world.Ofﬁcially known as the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,its purpose was to discuss global environmental concerns. The treaty that came from thatsummit is the Framework Convention on Climate Change. Then, in December 1997, morethan 160 nations met in Kyoto, Japan, to negotiate binding limitations on greenhouse gasesfor the developed nations. After much debate and compromise, resolutions regarding suchthings as the emissions of greenhouse gases were ﬁnally agreed on. The Kyoto Protocolcame into force on February 16, 2005, after being ratiﬁed by 157 countries. However,the United States, the world’s largest producer of greenhouse gases at the time the KyotoProtocol went into effect, did not ratify the agreement, citing concerns over its impact onthe nation’s economy.Seismology and Earth’s InteriorThe structure of Earth’s interior can be derived by analyzing the seismic waves generated byearthquakes. Two principal types of waves are produced by earthquakes:P waves(pressureorprimary) are longitudinal waves capable of traveling through both liquids and solids, andS waves(shear orsecondary) are transverse waves that are restricted to traveling throughsolids only (see Fig. 9). Since the velocities and paths of both P and S waves dependon the medium through which they are moving, their detection around the world enablesgeologists to deduce the structure of our planet.7For instance, in regions where only Pwavesare measured, the absence of S waves implies that there must have been intervening liquidin the path of the wave (see Fig. 10). Furthermore, because of the refraction that occursat boundary interfaces (much like the refraction of light rays at the boundaries betweenmedia of differing indices of refraction),shadow zonesexist where neither type of wavecan be detected. Thus, using the data from P and S waves, geologists can map the interiorof the planet. Such maps yield information about the depth of the surfacecrustand revealthe existence of a solidinner core, a moltenouter core, and a thickmantle.The behavior of P waves in the outer core implies that its composition is predomi-nantly iron and nickel. This also agrees with the fact that the average density of Earth is5515 kg m−3, greater than the density of surface rocks (typically 3000 kg m−3) and water(1000 kg m−3).8It is the combination of high temperature (>4000 K) and compositionthat results in aliquid outer core. The transition back to asolid inner coreoccurs becauseof the extreme pressures found there.7An analogous procedure is used to study the interiors of many stars.8Gravitational compression also contributes to the higher value for the average density, relative to surface material.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 831>>>

S waveWave directionP waveWave direction
OscillationdirectionOscillationdirection
FIGURE 9P waves are longitudinal pressure waves capable of traveling through both liquidsand solids. S waves are transverse shear waves that can travel only through solids.
InnercoreMantleEarthquake site
PPPPPPPPPPPSSSSSSOutercoreP onlyShadowzoneShadowzoneP and SP and S
FIGURE 10Generated by earthquakes, P and S waves travel through Earth’s interior. S wavesare unable to traverse the molten outer core. Furthermore, the refraction of P waves at the interfacebetween the outer core and the mantle produces shadow zones.Plate TectonicsAlthough the presence of volcanos is a feature that Earth shares with Venus and Mars,Earth’s present-daytectonic activityappears to be unique among the terrestrial planets.This activity has its origin in the dynamic interior of Earth, depicted in Fig. 11. Earth’ssurface layer, known as thelithosphere, encompasses both the oceanic and continental crustas well as the outer portion of the mantle. The lithosphere is fractured intocrustal platesThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 832>>>

CrustMantleOutercoreInnercoreLithosphereAsthenosphere
FIGURE 11The interior structure of Earth is composed of an inner solid core, an outer liquidcore, a mantle, and surface crust. The crust and the outer portion of the mantle make up the lithosphere(containing the surface plates) and the underlying convective asthenosphere. The diagram is not toscale.(see Fig. 12) and rides on the convective, somewhat plasticasthenosphere, which isalso part of the mantle. As the plates move across the surface of the planet, they crash intoor grind against one another, carrying the continents with them.9Because of these motions,the Atlantic Ocean is widening at the rate of approximately 3 cm yr−1, spreading away froman underwater mountain range that runs the length of the ocean ﬂoor. This mid-Atlanticridge is the location where material from the interior rises to the surface, generating newsea ﬂoor as the continents separate (see Fig. 13).Extrapolating the motions of the plates backward in time, geologists believe that therewas once one giant supercontinent, known as Pangaea, that broke apart some 200 millionyears ago into two smaller supercontinents, Laurasia and Gondwanaland. Gondwanaland inturn separated into South America and Africa, and Laurasia divided into Eurasia and NorthAmerica.Earth’s plate boundaries are generally the sites of active volcanism, mountain building,and frequent earthquakes. For example, when two plates collide, the lighter continentalcrust overrides the heavier oceanic crust and asubduction zonedevelops, as illustrated inFig. 13. One such location is along the coast of Japan, where its volcanic islands werecreated as a result of the heat generated by friction as the oceanic crust descended into theinterior of Earth. It is at the location of these subduction zones that deep oceanic trenchesalso develop. If two plates collide that contain continental crust, neither plate will overrunthe other; instead, buckling occurs and a mountain range such as the Himalayas is generated.9For example, the Paciﬁc and North American plates are currently sliding past one another. The famous SanAndreas fault is located on the boundary between these two plates.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 833>>>

South AmericanplateNorth AmericanplateEurasian plate
IndianAustralian plateSan AndreasfaultAfrican plateIcelandReykjanesridgePacificplateCocosplateEast PacificriseNazcaplateWest ChileridgeScotiaplateAntarctic plateMacquarieridgeMid-IndianridgeMid-IndianOcean ridge
SouthwestIndianOceanridgeSouthwestIndianOceanridgePhilippineplateCarlsbergridgeArabianplateCaribbeanplateMid-Atlanticridge
FIGURE 12The lithosphere is divided into crustal plates that travel across Earth’s surface.
OceaniccrustMountainrangeMid-oceanridgeTrenchContinentalcrustSubductionzoneLithosphereAsthenosphereFIGURE 13The motions of the plates are driven by convection zones in the asthenosphere. Amid-ocean ridge (a rift) occurs where material from below is pushed up to the surface. A subductionzone develops when the lighter continental crust overrides the heavier oceanic crust of two collidingplates.Sources of Internal HeatAll of this activity requires one or more sources of energy to sustain itself. Heat is knownto be escaping into space through the surface of Earth at a rate of 4×1013W, implyingan average ﬂux of 0.078 W m−2. If the only source of energy in the interior were theheat left over from the formation of the planet almost 4.6 billion years ago, plate tectonicactivity would have long since ceased. Other sources of heat augment theenergy budgetofEarth, including the tidal dissipation of its rotational kinetic energy,possibleongoinggravitationalseparation(releasinggravitationalpotentialenergyasheavierThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 834>>>

constituents sink toward the center of the planet), and the continual radioactive decay ofunstable isotopes (believed to be the primary source of the heat).10This allows much ofthe interior to remain somewhat plastic, supporting the large, sluggish convection cells thatdrive the motions of the crustal plates.Earth’s Variable Magnetic FieldThe presence of a molten iron–nickel outer core together with Earth’s relatively rapidrotation rate is consistent with the observation that the planet possesses a global magneticﬁeld, assuming that a dynamo is in operation in the planet’s interior. The existence of Earth’smagnetic ﬁeld serves to protect the planet from incoming charged particles in the solar wind,as well as other ionized cosmic rays. Instead of striking the surface, these particles becometrapped in the dipole ﬁeld and bounce back and forth between the North and South poles(Fig. 14). Three regions of trapped particles have been identiﬁed and are known as theVan Allen radiation belts. The innermost belt is composed of protons and is at a height ofroughly 4000 km above Earth’s surface. Overlapping a portion of the inner belt is a secondbelt composed of atomic nuclei that were once part of the interstellar medium. The outermostbelt is composed of electrons at an altitude of approximately 16,000 km. Particles in thebelts that are energetic enough to enter Earth’s upper atmosphere near the poles strike atomsand molecules there, causing collisional excitation, ionization, and dissociation. When theatoms or molecules recombine, or when the electrons drop back down to lower energylevels, the subsequent emission of light is observed as theaurora borealis(northern lights)andaurora australis(southern lights); see Fig. 15.Interestingly, geologic evidence indicates that Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld weakens, reversespolarity, and reestablishes itself on an irregular time scale of some 105years. This can beseen in the orientation of magnetic minerals trapped in molten rock that later solidiﬁed,
Belt ofinterstellarnucleiOuter beltof electronsInner beltof protons
FIGURE 14The Van Allen radiation belts arise from charged particles becoming trapped in themagnetic ﬁeld of Earth.10In the mid-1800s, Lord Kelvin argued that Earth could not be more than about 80 million years old. His argumentwas based on the amount of gravitational potential energy the planet could release and the rate at which heat escapedover time. However, his calculation was made before the discovery of radioactivity.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 835>>>

FIGURE 15The aurora are due to the collision of high-speed particles with atoms and moleculesin Earth’s upper atmosphere. (Courtesy of the Geophysical Institute, University ofAlaska, Fairbanks.)such as those sampled on either side of the spreading mid-Atlantic ridge (Figs. 12 and13). In this way, a “fossil record” of the direction of the local magnetic ﬁeld is created.The behavior of Earth’s ﬁeld is not unlike the solar cycle, the ﬂipping of the Sun’s magneticﬁeld roughly every 11 years.Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is known to be weakeningtoday.4THE MOONDespite the proximity of the Moon to Earth, the two worlds are very different (see Fig. 16).Because of its low surface gravity, the Moon has been unable to retain a signiﬁcant atmo-sphere. Without a protective atmosphere, the Moon has suffered impacts by meteoritesthroughout its history. Along with a large number of smaller impacts, a signiﬁcant numberof very large collisions occurred approximately 700 million years after the Moon formed.These impacts were powerful enough to penetrate its thin crust, allowing molten rock inthe interior to ﬂow across the surface. The result was the formation of the many smooth,roughly circularmaria(or “seas”) that can be seen on the surface of the Moon facing Earth.It is the distribution of these maria that has led humans to imagine seeing the face of the“man in the Moon.”The Moon’s Internal StructureMajor advances in our understanding of the Moon’s internal structure and evolutionaryhistory have occurred as a result of intense exploration from 1959 through the early 1970s.When theApolloastronauts landed on the Moon, they left seismic detectors designed tomeasure anymoonquakesthat may be occurring. Many of the very weak quakes that weredetected (about magnitude 1 on the Richter scale) were triggered by the tidal strain generatedby Earth’s gravitational pull. Another class of vibrations has been attributed to the Moon’sThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 836>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 16(a) The surface of the Moon contains heavily cratered highland regions and nearlycircular maria that are much less heavily cratered. The portion of the Moon facing Earth is on theleft side of the image. (b) A portion of the far side of the Moon showing the extensive crateringfound there. The diameter of the large crater is approximately 80 km. This view was obtained by theApollo 11astronauts in 1969. (Courtesy of NASA.)Mare
Iron-richcore?ToEarthSolidlithosphereCrustPlasticasthenosphereFIGURE 17The interior structure of the Moon.“ringing” after being struck by meteorites. Just as with the analysis of seismic activityon Earth, moonquakes have allowed scientists to develop an understanding of the Moon’sinterior.Many of the moonquakes appear to have originated, not at tectonic plate boundaries,but at the interface between the solid, brittle lithosphere and the plastic asthenosphere (seeFig. 17). It also appears likely that below the asthenosphere, a small iron-rich core existsas well. This structure is consistent with measurements of the small amount of heat stillﬂowing outward from the Moon’s interior, which is responsible for maintaining the plasticThe Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 837>>>

nature of the asthenosphere. However, based on the data provided by this seismic activity,Earth-like tectonic activity appears to be absent on the Moon today.Interestingly, only one mare was seen on the side of the Moon farthest from Earth.11This is not because collisions were preferentially occurring on the side of the Moon facingEarth; rather, the crust is actually thinner on the near side. Consequently, impacts on thethin-crust side were more likely to penetrate the crust, allowing interior molten rock to ﬂowover the surface. Because the crust is less dense than material in the Moon’s interior, tidalforces have caused the heavier near side to permanently “hang down” toward Earth.The Absence of a Global Magnetic FieldUnlike Earth, our Moon has no measurable global magnetic ﬁeld, apparently because theMoon is small enough to have cooled off much more rapidly than Earth. This evolutionhas left the Moon as a geologically inactive world today. Furthermore, the Moon’s rotationperiod is more than 27 times longer than Earth’s. As a result, there is no evidence of anysigniﬁcant magnetic dynamo in operation, suggesting that if a molten core is present, it islikely to be quite small.12are comparable in mass and radius (the Moon’s mass and radius are 23% and 71% of thevalues for Mercury, respectively), while Mercury’s rotation rate is slower by a factor oftwo. Clearly, much work remains to be done in understanding the details of magnetic ﬁeldproduction.Moon RocksDuring the 1960s and 1970s, six manned United States Apollo missions returned 382 kgof surface rocks and regolith from the Moon’s surface. In addition, three unmanned SovietUnionLunamissions returned an addition 0.3 kg of material. The samples were collectedfrom both the maria and thehighland(or mountainous) regions between the maria. Thesesamples represent the most detailed information we have about the nature of our closestneighbor.Composition analysis of samples returned from the maria conﬁrm that they are in factvolcanic in origin. The rocks arebasalts, similar to the kind of volcanic rock found on Earth.The lunar basalts are rich in iron and magnesium, and they also contain glassy structures thatare characteristic of rapid cooling. However, unlike Earth basalts, the lunar samples containno water and a lower percentage ofvolatiles(elements or compounds with low melting andboiling temperatures) relative torefractories(higher melting and boiling temperatures).Radioactive DatingPerhaps the most eagerly awaited results of the analysis of the lunar samples were thedeterminations of their ages. The process is based on measuring the abundances of certain11The ﬁrst observations of the far side of the Moon were made by the Soviet Luna 3 mission in 1959.12Based on the natural remnant magnetization of returned lunar samples and the patchy magnetization detectedby satellites, it appears that the Moon once had a global magnetic ﬁeld. However, there is no evidence of a globalﬁeld today.The Terrestrial Planets
The lack of a global magnetic ﬁeld on the Moon makes the detec-tion of a weak ﬁeld around Mercury even more puzzling. The two worlds


<<<PAGE 838>>>

80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92205210215220225230235
ZAU Th Pa Th Ac Ra Fr Rn At Po At Po Bi Bi Pb Pb Tl  /H9251 decay/H9252 decay FIGURE 18The23592U decay sequence.radioactive isotopes and comparing them with the abundances of stable end products ofthe decay sequence. In this technique ofradioactive dating, we assume that the “clock”started ticking when the rock solidiﬁed, trapping the isotopes inside.If the half-life of one step in the decay sequence is signiﬁcantly longer than any of theothers, it can be assumed that the original isotope decays directly into the ﬁnal productwith a half-life approximately equal to that of the longest one. For instance, in the decaysequence depicted in Fig. 18, which begins with23592U and ends with20782Pb, the ﬁrst step,the alpha particle13decay23592U→23190Th+42He, has a half-life of 7.04×108years, whilethe next slowest step,23191Pa→22789Ac+42He, has a half-life of only 3.276×104years. Asa result, to a good approximation, the half-life of the entire sequence can be taken to be7.04×108years. This means that by measuring the relative abundances of the uranium andlead isotopes, we can determine the time required for the transformation.Some radioactive isotopes that are useful for dating Moon rocks, as well as Earth rocksand meteorites, are given in Table 1. Note that the stable products are not necessarily thedirect result of a single decay but may be produced after a succession of decays, the longestof which has the quoted half-life.To understand the method of radioactive dating more fully, suppose that isotopeAdecaysinto isotopeB(which is stable), either directly or indirectly through a series of steps.Ain the sample was initiallyNA,i, thenafter some timet, the number remaining isNA,f=NA,ie−λt,1342He) are often referred to as alpha particles (α).We know that if the number of atoms ofHelium nuclei (The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 839>>>

TABLE 1Radioactive Isotopes with a Half-Life Useful for Determining Geologic Ages.Radioactive Stable Half-LifeParent Product (109yr)12953I12954Xe 0.01623592U20782Pb 0.7044019K4018Ar 1.28023892U20682Pb 4.46823290Th20882Pb 14.0117671Lu17672Hf 37.88737Rb8738Sr 47.514762Sm14360Nd 106.0whereλ=ln 2τ1/2is the decay constant andτ1/2is the half-life. Because the total number of atoms ofAandBmust remain constant over time (even thoughAis ultimately being converted intoB), itis necessary thatNA,f+NB,f=NA,i+NB,i.Solving forNA,i, substituting into the decay equation, and rearranging, we have an expres-sion for thechangein the number of atoms ofBwithin the sample since it formed:NB−NB,i=/parenleftbigeλt−1/parenrightbigNA,whereNA≡NA,fandNB≡NB,fare the numbers of atoms of speciesAandBrespec-tively, remaining today. When comparing one sample with another, it is more accurate toevaluate the compositions by using ratios of isotopes: the isotopes of interest relative to astable third isotope. Representing this third (constant) abundance asNC, we arrive at therelationNBNC=/parenleftbigeλt−1/parenrightbigNANC+NB,iNC.(1)Equation ( 1) is used to determine the age of a sample by plotting relative abundancesof the stable product versus the relative abundances of the radioactive isotope in the sequenceat various locations in the rock. The slopem=eλt−1 of the best-ﬁt line is directly relatedto the age of the sample.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 840>>>

Example 4.1.Data for one sample obtained in the lunar highlands, based on the betadecay14of rubidium-87 to strontium-87,8737Rb→8738Sr+e−+ν, are shown in Fig. 19.From Eq. ( 1) and Fig. 19,m=eλt−1=0.0662,whereλ=0.0146×10−9yr−1for8737Rb. Solving fort, we ﬁnd that the age of the sampleis 4.39×109yr.It is important to point out that this procedure assumes that the initialratio8738Sr/8638Sr isa constant throughout the sample, whereas the initial ratio8737Rb/8638Sr may vary somewhat(i.e., the sample is not perfectly homogeneous). This is because8638Sr and8738Sr are chemicallyidentical, allowing them to be bound up in minerals in the same proportions, whereas theproportion of8737Rb/8638Sr need not be constant throughout.from the Sea of Tranquility by theApollo 11astronauts in 1969, the ages of the maria(typically 3.1 to 3.8×109years) are signiﬁcantly less than those of the highlands. This isconsistent with the observation, noted earlier, that relatively few craters can be found in themaria compared to the highland regions.In sharp contrast, the oldest rocks ever found on Earth date to 3.8 billion years, whereas90% of the planet’s crust is younger than 600 million years. Plate tectonic activity is con-stantly recycling the surface, carrying old crust down into the mantle and forming new crustto replace it.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.250.6980.7000.7020.7040.7060.7080.7100.7120.71487Sr/86Sr
87Rb/86SrFIGURE 19Relative abundance determinations for a sample obtained in the lunar highlands.(Data from D. A. Papanastassiou and G. J. Wasserburg,Proc. Seventh Lunar Sci. Conf., PergamonPress, New York, 1976.)14β).An electron is also referred to as a beta particle (The Terrestrial Planets
The results of radioactive dating are consistent with the view that the lunar maria have relatively young surfaces. For one sample returned


<<<PAGE 841>>>

Late Heavy BombardmentIt is the dating of lunar samples that implies that a spike oflate heavy bombardment(LHB) occurred roughly 700 million years after the Moon formed. It was during that timethat the majority of the cratering occurred in the lunar highlands. During the LHB phase,a small number of very large collisions produced the maria. Over the last 3.8 billion yearsmeteorite impacts have continued, but at a signiﬁcantly reduced rate. In this way the fairlysmooth, relatively uncratered surfaces of the maria have been maintained.The “time stamp” provided by Moon rocks not only plays an important role in ourunderstanding of the evolution of the Moon but is also crucial in developing a picture ofevolution for other planets, as well as an overall formation theory for the Solar System.Forinstance,therecognitionofanLHBepisodefollowedbymeteoriteimpacts at roughly a constant rate has helped scientists to conclude that the surface of Venuswas refreshed within approximately the last 500 million years. This scenario also suggeststhat the surface of Mercury is, in general, quite ancient.The Formation of the MoonThe question of the Moon’s formation has been widely debated. Prior to theApollo and Lunamissions, several models had been proposed. Theﬁssion model(also sometimes called thedaughter model), ﬁrst suggested in 1880 by George Darwin15(1845–1912), contendedthat the Moon was “torn off” from Earth at a time when Earth was spinning more rapidlythan it is today. However, the orientation of the Moon’s orbital plane is close to the ecliptic(tilted 5.1◦), rather than along the plane of Earth’s equator as would be expected if theMoon broke away. Furthermore, the lack of any water in the lunar samples, together withthe underabundance of other volatiles relative to surface rock on Earth, also contradicts thisproposal.Theco-creation model(also known as thesister model) suggested that the Moon andEarth formed simultaneously, with the Moon coalescing from a small disk of material thatdeveloped around the proto-Earth. This idea also fails to explain the composition differencesfound in the lunar samples.Athird model, thecapture model, proposed that the Moon was actually formed elsewherein the solar nebula and was caught in Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld as it drifted by. However,in this scenario the composition differences are not great enough; the Moon and Earth aretoo similar. For instance, the ratios of stable isotopes of oxygen are nearly identical withinlunar and terrestrial samples despite signiﬁcant differences found in meteorites. Also, thedynamics of such a capture seem unlikely. Since the Moon is fairly large compared to Earth,a third, similarly sized body would need to have been present to take up much of the system’ssurplus energy, as required for a capture. Having three large objects in close proximity atjust the right time seems highly improbable. On the other hand, capture seems to be alikely mechanism for some of the many small moons found throughout the Solar System.In these cases, energy may have been lost through a many-body interaction with othermoons already present. Alternatively, orbital energy may have been lost by aerobrakingif the captured moon passed through a portion of the planet’s atmosphere, much like the15George Darwin was the son of Charles Darwin (1809–1882), the author of the theory of Darwinian biologicalevolution.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 842>>>

maneuver performed with the Magellan spacecraft around Venus. However, our Moon ismuch too large for any of these mechanisms to work.In 1975 a fourth model, now known as thecollision model, was proposed by WilliamK. Hartmann and Don R. Davis. Since that time numerous computer simulations haveveriﬁed its plausibility (e.g., Fig. 20). This model seems to explain many of the problemsencountered by the three previous scenarios. The model suggests that a giant object, perhaps
1 Minute after contact10 Minutes
1Hour2.3 Hours
4 Hours24 HoursImpactorCoreCoreMantleMantleEarth
Impactor mantleImpactorcore
ImpactorcoreEarthProto-MoonFIGURE 20A computer simulation of the formation of the Moon according to the collisionmodel. The Earth–Moon system is shown at different times during the simulation. (Figure courtesyof A. G. W. Cameron and W. Benz, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.)The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 843>>>

twice the mass of the present-day Mars, collided with Earth almost 4.6 billion years ago,vaporizing much of the impactor and causing a portion of Earth’s surface to be ripped away.The pulverized material then formed a disk around Earth that coalesced over a relativelyshort period of time (estimates range from months to about 100 years). Due to the hightemperatures generated during the collision, many of the volatiles present in Earth’s crustwould have been absent in the condensing debris. Assuming that there had been sufﬁcienttime prior to the collision for some gravitational separation to occur within Earth and theimpactor, the crusts of the two objects would also have been somewhat deﬁcient in iron,leaving less iron available to form the Moon. The simulations suggest that most of thepresent-day Moon was produced by silicate-rich material from the mantle of the impactor,and that the impactor’s iron-rich core became a part of Earth. This model effectively explainswhy the Moon’s average density is comparable to the density of Earth’s uncompressedmantle (i.e., the density that would be measured if the compressional effect of gravity wereremoved). In this model the collision would have also preserved the similar oxygen-isotoperatios seen on the two worlds.The collision model is considered by most researchers as the preferred model for theformation of our Moon. Although it appears on ﬁrst inspection to be a highly unique andperhaps ad hoc way to explain the characteristics of our Moon, recall that a similar scenarioalso appears to explain the highly dense structure of Mercury. The existence ofPluto’smoonCharonmayrequirealarge-scalecollisionaswell.From our investigation of the Moon, it appears that its formation was a violent pro-cess. However, numerous questions about the Moon’s structure and evolution remain unan-swered. It is also apparent that careful studies of our nearest neighbor can shed light onimportant questions regarding the formation and evolution of Earth and the rest of the SolarSystem. Perhaps future missions to the Moon would further clarify our understanding ofthe Solar System.5MARSOnly one-tenth the mass of Earth, the planet Mars has touched our imagination. In 1877the astronomer Giovanni Virginio Schiaparelli (1835–1910) reported seeing a series of darklines on the surface of the planet and referred to them ascanali(naturally occurring channelsof water). The term was later misinterpreted to imply that the markings were actually animmense network of artiﬁcialcanalsbuilt by an intelligent civilization to irrigate a dyingworld. In support of this argument is the existence of the seasonally varying polar ice caps,visible in the Hubble Space Telescope image shown in Fig. 21(a). It is not difﬁcult toimagine that using smaller telescopes, which were peering at the red planet through Earth’sobscuring atmosphere, would have led to the conclusion that canali were present. In an effortto verify these features, Percival Lowell (1855–1916) built an observatory near Flagstaff,Arizona, to carry out a series of careful observations of this nearby world. Other astronomerswere somewhat more skeptical of the existence of intelligent life on Mars, and even of thecanali. However, the general public seized on the possibility that Martians do (or at leastdid) live there, leading to a wealth of science ﬁction literature and ﬁlms.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 844>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE 21(a)An image of Mars obtained using WF/PC 2 onboard the Hubble Space Telescope.The north polar ice cap is clearly visible. (Courtesy of Philip James, University of Toledo; Steven Lee,University of Colorado; and NASA.) (b) A mosaic of 102 Viking Orbiter images obtained in 1976.This perspective places the viewer 2500 km above the surface of the red planet. Valles Marineris(a 3000-km-long canyon system) can be seen near the equator. On the left side of the image, threegiant shield volcanos are evident as dark, circular regions. Each volcano is approximately 25 km tall.(Courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey and NASA/JPL.)Exploration of the Red PlanetThere have been many attempts to study Mars by robotic missions. Early efforts includedtheMarinerﬂyby missions in the 1960s. In 1975 theVikingmissions included two orbitersand partnered landers that contained cameras and internal laboratories for the study of Marssurface chemistry. Since the landers did not have any ability to move across the surface,their studies were restricted to the locations where they set down on the planet. TheMarsGlobal Surveyor, with its very high-resolution camera entered Mars orbit in 1997 andcontinues to operate successfully at the time of this writing, as does theMars Odyssey,which arrived in 2001, and theMars Express Orbiter, an ESA mission that reached thered planet in 2003. Another spacecraft, theMars Reconnaissance Orbiter, also began itswork around the planet in 2006.TheSojourner Roverof theMars Pathﬁndermission (1997) was the ﬁrst truly mobilelander, able to move short distances across the surface in the vicinity of its lander, theCarlSagan Memorial Station.16Then in January 2004, two golf-cart-sized rovers successfullylanded on the surface and began extensive exploration of the regions around their landingareas. TheMars Exploration Rovers,SpiritandOpportunity, were originally expectedto operate for several months, but they continued to move across the surface of the planet aslate as May 2006. The Mars Orbiter has been able to image both rovers from its vantage pointin orbit around the planet. Other missions are also planned, including additional orbitersand landers and possible human-crewed missions to Mars.16The stationary lander base was renamed the Carl Sagan Memorial Station after landing in honor of Carl Sagan(1934–1996), Solar System researcher, Pulitzer-prize-winning author, and popularizer of astronomy.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 845>>>

Evidence of Water on MarsDespite the many studies of Mars from Earth, from Mars orbit, and from its surface, nosign of life has been found on the planet. At ﬁrst inspection, the images returned by Spiritand Opportunity (see Fig. 22), along with images obtained from the Viking landers, givethe impression of a dry, dusty world. However, on closer inspection of data returned bySpirit and Opportunity, along with information from the orbiters, research has revealed afascinating world that, although dry today, once clearly had water ﬂowing across its surface.Apparent in images of the surface from the Mars Orbiter (see Fig. 23) are channels thatare characteristic of water erosion found on Earth. There is also evidence that huge ﬂashﬂoods may have occurred on the surface of the planet. It appears that lakes of water mayhave been present on Mars in the distant past as well (Fig. 24).With present-day surface temperatures varying between−140◦C(−220◦F) and 20◦C(70◦F), combined with the very low atmospheric pressure found near the surface (typically0.006 atm), it appears that the liquid water that was present on Mars is now either trappedin a layer of permafrost or frozen in its polar ice caps [Fig. 21(a)]. In fact, it is the lowatmospheric pressure that makes the existence of persistent water in liquid form impossibleon the surface today.ALH84001, A Martian MeteoriteIronically, even though the intense investigations of Mars by robotic spacecraft and landershave thus far failed to identify any evidence that life exists on Mars today or existed therein the past, a meteorite discovered in Allan Hills, Antarctica, in 1984 led to speculation that
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 22(a) A panoramic view of the Bonneville crater obtained by Mars Exploration RoverSpirit. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.) (b) A panoramic view of interesting rock features at MeridianiPlanum, near the landing site of Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 846>>>

(a)(b)
FIGURE 23(a) A portion of Valles Marineris [recall Fig. 21(b)] showing evidence of water-caused erosion. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL/Malin Space Science Systems.) (b) Erosion channels seenin an impact crater in Newton Basin in Sirenum Terra, located in the southern hemisphere of Mars.(Courtesy of NASA/JPL/Malin Space Science Systems.)
FIGURE 24An impact crater in the southern hemisphere of Mars. The dark material at thebottom is believed to be sediment deposits from an ancient Martian lake. Seepage into the crater isalso evident near the rim of the crater. Dunes are visible in the dark regions as well. (Courtesy ofNASA/JPL/Malin Space Science Systems.)The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 847>>>

(a)(b)
FIGURE 25(a) ALH84001 is a Martian meteorite found in Allan Hills, Antarctica, in 1984.(Courtesy of NASA.) (b) An electron microscopy view of a portion of ALH84001 showing tube-likestructures less than 1/100 the size of a human hair. Some scientists have argued that these structuresrepresent nanofossils of ancient microbial life on Mars. (Courtesy of NASA.)evidence existed in that rock from space [Fig. 25(a)].ALH84001is the oldest meteoriteever found that originated from the surface of Mars. After forming on Mars 4.5 billionyears ago, it was ejected from the surface of the planet 16 million years ago by an energeticcollision. After traveling through the inner Solar System, it struck Earth 13,000 years agoand became trapped in the Antarctic ice sheet.17Conﬁrmation that the meteorite did indeedoriginate on Mars comes from comparing its chemical composition with the results ofcompositional studies conducted by robotic landers.It was the examination of small amounts of carbonate grains in the meteorite that has ledsome researchers to suggest that ancient, fossilized Martian microbes may be contained inthe rock [Fig. 25(b)]. The grains themselves measure less than 200µm in size, and whatappear to be fossilized microbes are smaller than 1/100 the size of a human hair. In supportof the hypothesis that the “nanofossils” are due to ancient microbial life is the presence oforganic PAHs in the carbonate, along with oxide and sulﬁde biominerals. The carbonategrains also appear to have formed in fractures in the rock, possibly in the presence of liquidwater.Most researchers now believe that, although ALH84001 is a fascinating rock that clearlyoriginated on Mars, the evidence is weak that it contains samples of primitive fossilizedlife. Rather, it could be that the features formed by some inorganic mechanism(s) or thatthe rock became contaminated as a result of the 13,000 yr it spent on Earth before it wasdiscovered.The Polar CapsAlthough water ice is certainly present today in the polar caps, the caps are composedprimarily of dry ice (frozen carbon dioxide). Mars’s axis tilt of 25◦and its orbital periodof 1.88 yr means that the planet’s seasonal variations are similar to Earth’s but are roughlytwice as long. Consequently, Mars experiences winter and summer seasons correspondingto observed variations in the sizes of the ice caps. It is the dry ice that sublimates during the17The ejection and landing ages were determined through cosmic ray exposure that the meteoroid received priorto hitting Earth.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 848>>>

Martian summer and freezes back out again during the winter. The small residual cap thatremains during the summer is composed of water ice.Chaotic Fluctuations in Mars’s Rotation AxisFrom numerical simulations designed to investigate the long-term stability of planetarymotions, it appears that the orientation of Mars’s spin axis ﬂuctuates wildly (chaotically)between about 0◦and 60◦over time scales as short as a few million years; the variations aredue to gravitational interactions with the Sun and the other planets. If Mars has experiencedsuch large ﬂuctuations in its axis tilt in the past, this would imply that at various times thepolar ice caps could completely melt (high tilt angle), whereas at other times the planet’satmosphere might actually freeze out (low tilt angle).The time-variability of the tilt of Mars’sspin axis also implies that its current tilt, which is similar to Earth’s, is only coincidental.Interestingly, these simulations of the ﬂuctuations imply that the chaotic behavior doesnot develop if the effects of general relativity are neglected. It seems that the effects ofspacetimecurvatureplayanimportantroleinthelong-termbehaviorofplanetaryorbitsandtheirrotations,evenatthedistanceofMars’sorbit.Even though it is closer to the Sun, Earth has not experienced the same dramatic oscil-lations in its axis tilt that Mars seems to have gone through. Apparently Earth’s rotationaxis is stabilized by our planet’s strong tidal interaction with its relatively large moon. Con-sequently, our planet’s climatic variations have been much less pronounced than those onMars. Amazingly, this seems to imply that the presence of Earth’s moon (apparently theresult of an accidental collision) is in part responsible for the stable environment that led tothe evolution of life on the third planet from the Sun.The Thin Atmosphere of MarsMars’s very thin atmosphere is composed of 95% carbon dioxide and 2.7% molecularnitrogen, by number—percentages very similar to those in the atmosphere of Venus. Unlikethe case of Venus, however, the greenhouse effect has very little inﬂuence on the currentequilibrium temperature of Mars; there simply are not enough molecules present to absorba signiﬁcant amount of infrared radiation (the atmospheric pressure at the surface of Venusis 90 atm, 13,000 times greater than the atmospheric pressure at the surface of Mars). Inthe past, the atmosphere of Mars may have been much more dense, causing the greenhouseeffect to be more efﬁcient than it is today. The water that is currently trapped in the ice capsand permafrost would then have been ﬂowing freely, maybe even resulting in rainfall. Thewater that was present in the atmosphere and on the surface would have absorbed muchof the atmospheric carbon dioxide, subsequently locking the CO2in carbonate rocks. Asa result, the greenhouse effect diminished, the global temperature dropped, and the waterfroze, leaving the dry world we ﬁnd today.Shortly after the two Viking landers arrived at Mars in 1975, they began to measurean appreciable drop in atmospheric pressure. This was because winter was coming to theSouthern Hemisphere, and carbon dioxide was freezing out of the atmosphere. When springreturned to the south, the atmospheric pressure went back up again. The same behavior wasrepeated when winter arrived in the Northern Hemisphere.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 849>>>

Dust StormsEven though the atmospheric density is quite low near the surface, it is sufﬁcient to producehuge dust storms that sometimes cover the entire surface of Mars. The seasonal storms aredriven by high winds and are responsible for the variations in surface hues that can be seenfrom Earth.18It was during the Viking missions in 1976 that two such major dust storms occurred.Since that time, much of the dust has settled out of the planet’s atmosphere, resulting innoticeable changes in its climate. (The absorption of light by dust is the primary source ofatmospheric heating.) In fact, the Hubble Space Telescope recorded a decline in the averageglobal temperature of the planet. With the decrease in average temperature, ice-crystalclouds have become more prominent in the planet’s lower atmosphere than they were at thetime of the Viking missions.The Abundance of IronThe dust on the surface (recall Fig. 22) appears reddish in color and contains a rela-tively high abundance of iron, which oxidizes (rusts) when exposed to the atmosphere.Apparently Mars did not undergo the same degree of gravitational separation that Earthdid, possibly because the smaller, more distant planet cooled more rapidly following itsformation. However, averaging over the volume of the entire planet reveals that iron isactually underabundant on Mars relative to the other terrestrial planets, as evidenced by itslower average density of 3933 kg m−3. The reason for this is not yet understood.The lack of signiﬁcant gravitational separation is also consistent with the absence of anappreciable global magnetic ﬁeld. If an iron core is present, presumably it is quite smalland probably not molten.Evidence of Past Geological ActivityEven if Mars may not be geologically active today, it certainly has been in the past. Fig-ure 21(b) shows Valles Marineris, a 3000-km-long network of canyons near the planet’sequator. It appears that Valles Marineris, which is up to 600 km wide in some places andcan reach a depth of 8 km, was formed fromfaulting(or fracturing of the crust) in order torelieve stresses that built up in the interior.Olympus Mons, shown in Fig. 26, is a shield volcano that covers an area roughlythe size of Utah. The volcano rises 24 km above the surrounding surface and has a hugecaldera (a volcanic crater). Geologists believe that Olympus Mons owes its enormous sizeto a process known ashot-spot volcanism, where a weak spot in the crust has allowedmolten material to rise to the surface. It is hot-spot volcanism on Earth that is responsiblefor the creation of the Hawaiian islands.19However, in the case of the Hawaiian islandchain, motion of the tectonic plate on which the chain rides carries each newly formedvolcano away from the hot spot, allowing another one to be created. Today the chain of18These seasonal variations were once thought by some astronomers to be evidence of vegetation growing cycles.19The tallest mountain on Earth, measured from its base to its summit, is the Hawaiian Island of Mauna Loa, witha vertical rise above the sea ﬂoor of 9.1 km.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 850>>>

FIGURE 26Olympus Mons is a shield volcano rising 24 km above the surrounding surface.Measured at its base, the diameter of the volcano is more than 500 km. The cliff that rings the volcanoin this perspective image is 6 km high. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)mountains that contains the Hawaiian islands actually stretches nearly all the way to Japan,although over time the oldest mountains have undergone signiﬁcant erosion.20The situation was somewhat different for Olympus Mons. Since Mars has apparentlynot developed a system of moving tectonic plates, the volcano was not carried off the hotspot where it formed. As a result, it has grown larger and larger as more molten materialhas made its way to the surface.21Two Tiny Moonsogy. Knowing that there were no moons in orbit about Venus, that Earth had one satellite,and that Galileo had recently discovered four moons orbiting Jupiter, Kepler decided itseemed reasonable that Mars ought to have two!In 1726, 150 years before Hall’s actual discovery, Jonathan Swift (1667–1745) wrote inhis bookGulliver’ s Travelsthat astronomers had discovered two satellites orbiting the redplanet. His ﬁctitious scientists found that the orbital periods of these moons were 10 hoursand 2112hours, “so that the squares of their periodical times are very near in the sameproportion with the cubes of their distance from the centre of Mars, which evidently showsthem to be governed by the same law of gravitation that inﬂuences the other heavenlybodies.” Apparently Swift, who was not a scientist, was aware of scientiﬁc discoveries20The Yellowstone region, with its geysers, hot springs, and mud volcanoes, is another example of hot-spotvolcanism on Earth.21The large volcanos discovered on Venus may have been formed in much the same way as Olympus Mons.The Terrestrial Planets
Although they the two moons of Mars, Phobos and Deimos (Fig. 27), were dis-covered by Asaph Hall (1829–1907) in 1877, Kepler had postulated their  existence centuries earlier. His “prediction” was based solely on numerol-


<<<PAGE 851>>>

(a)(b)
FIGURE 27The two moons of Mars, (a) Phobos and (b) Deimos, are very similar to asteroidsand were probably captured by the planet. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)such as Kepler’s third law. The actual orbital periods of Phobos and Deimos are 7h39mand30h17m, respectively, remarkably close to the values determined by Swift’s astronomers.Both Phobos and Deimos are small, heavily cratered, elongated rocks. Phobos’s longestdimension is a mere 28 km, and Deimos’s is even smaller (16 km). It appears likely thatthe moons are captured asteroids.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBeatty, J. Kelly, Petersen, Carolyn Collins, and Chaikin, Andrew (eds.),The New SolarSystem, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press and Sky Publishing Corporation,Cambridge, MA, 1999.Cooper, Henry S. F. Jr.,The Evening Star: Venus Observed, Farrar, Staus, and Giroux, NewYork, 1993.Goldsmith, Donald, and Owen, Tobias,The Search for Life in the Universe, Third Edition,University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2002.Jeanloz, Raymond, and Lay, Thorne, “The Core-Mantle Boundary,”Scientiﬁc American,May 1993.Kargel, Jeffrey S.,Mars—A Warmer, Wetter Planet, Praxis Publishing Ltd., Chichester, UK,2004.Morrison, David, and Owen, Tobias,The Planetary System, Third Edition,Addison-Wesley,San Francisco, 2003.Stofan, Ellen R., “The New Face of Venus,”Sky and Telescope, August 1993.TechnicalAtreya, S. K., Pollack, James B., and Matthews, Mildred Shapley (eds.),Origin and Evolu-tion of Planetary and Satellite Atmospheres, The University of Arizona Press, Tucson,1989.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 852>>>

Canup, R. M., and Righter, K. (eds.),Origin of the Earth and Moon, The University ofArizona Press, Tucson, 2000.Correia, Alexandre C. M., and Laskar, Jacques, “The Four Final Rotation States of Venus,”Nature,411, 767, 2001.de Pater, Imke, and Lissauer, Jack J.,Planetary Sciences, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Hartmann, W. K., and Davis, D. R., “Satellite-Sized Planetesimals and Lunar Origin,”Icarus,24, 504, 1975.Houghton, John T.,The Physics of Atmospheres, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2002.Taylor, Stuart Ross,Solar System Evolution, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.The Terrestrial Planets


<<<PAGE 853>>>



<<<PAGE 854>>>

PROBLEM SET1Assume that radar signals of 10 GHz are used to measure the rotation rates of Mercury andVenus. Using the Doppler effect, determine the relative shifts in frequency for signals returningfrom the approaching and receding limbs of each planet.2What is the ratio of the Sun’s tidal force per unit mass on Mercury at perihelion to the Sun’s tidalforce per unit mass on Earth? How has this difference in tidal effects contributed to differencesin the orbital and/or rotational characteristics of the two planets?3For Mercury, a slowly rotating planet with no appreciable atmosphere, the below  equation  for(a)Assuming (incorrectly) that Mercury is in synchronous rotation about the Sun, show thatthe temperature at a latitudeθnorth or south of thesubsolar point(the point on the equatorclosest to the Sun) is given byT=(cosθ)1/4(1−a)1/4T⊙/radicalbiggR⊙D.Since the planet is actually in a 3-to-2 resonance, this expression is only an approximatedescription for the temperature at Mercury’s surface.(b)Make a graph ofTvs.θ.Mercury’salbedois0.06.(c)What is the approximate temperature of the planet at the subsolar point?(d)At what latitude does the temperature drop to 273 K? This is the freezing point of waterat the surface of Earth.(e)Would you expect to ﬁnd ice on Mercury at a temperature of 273 K? Why or why not?4 (a)Estimate the angular resolution of the 70-m radio dish of the NASA Goldstone trackingstation mentioned in footnote 1 on page 739. Assume that it is operating at a wavelengthof 3.5 cm.(b)What is the angular size of Mercury at inferior conjunction? Assume (incorrectly) for thisproblem that the planet’s orbit is circular.(c)If the power in the radar signal was approximately uniformly distributed across the cone-shaped beam, how much power actually arrived at the surface of Mercury?The Terrestrial Planets
Tp=T⊙(1−a)1/4/radicalbiggR⊙2D.a planets surfacetemperaturemustbemodiﬁed.Inparticular,theassumptionthatthetem-perature is approximately constant over the entire surface of the planet is no longer valid.
(d)Suppose that all of the radar energy striking the surface of Mercury were reﬂected isotrop-ically back into a hemisphere. What would be the signal ﬂux received at the VLA?5 (a)From the data presented in the text, estimate the kinetic energy of the impact that mayhave been responsible for stripping off the outer layers of Mercury early in the history ofthe Solar System.(b)If, prior to the collision, Mercury had twice as much mass as it does today, how much energywould have been required to lift that additional mass off the present planet? Assume thatFrom Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 byPearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.20’
, 

<<<PAGE 855>>>

the extra mass had the density of Earth’s present-day Moon and that the material wasuniformly distributed in a spherical shell around the present-day Mercury. Don’t forget toinclude the energy required to eject the mass of the impactor as well.(c)Solely on the basis of energy considerations comment on the feasibility of this scenariofor the origin of Mercury as we observe it today.6Assuming that the atmosphere of Venus is composed of pure carbon dioxide, estimate thenumber density of molecules at the planet’s surface. How many times larger is this value thanthe number density of nitrogen molecules at the surface of Earth?7 (a)Modeling the greenhouse effect using one atmospheric layeris equivalent to assuming that the optical depth is about one. If the optical depth isτ, andif we can neglect circulation in the atmosphere, show that the surface temperature shouldbe approximatelyTsurf=(1+τ)1/4Tbb,whereTbbis the blackbody temperature of anairlessplanet.(b)The optical depth of Venus’s atmosphere is approximatelyτ=70. Make an estimate ofits surface temperature using this crude greenhouse model. Take the average albedo tobe 0.77.8Based on the observed rate at which North America and Eurasia are separating from each other,when were the two continents joined together as Laurasia? Assume that the Atlantic Ocean isroughly 4800 km (3000 miles) wide.9Using the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium the below equation , estimate the pressure at the.7×106atm.10 (a)rateat which rotational energy is beingdissipated by tidal friction for the case of Earth.Hint:This terrestrial problem is similarto the loss of rotational kinetic energy in pulsars; see the equation below.center of Earth. Detailed computer simulations suggest that the central pressure is 3Estimate the
11Referringtothe equation below fortheLorentzforceandFig.14,explainwhymostchargedparticlesbounce back and forth between the North and South Poles of Earth, rather than striking thesurface. Use a diagram if necessary.Hint:The converging magnetic ﬁeld lines form magneticmirrorsnear the North and South Poles. (Magnetic “bottles,” which are based on the sameprinciple, are used to conﬁne high-temperature plasmas in laboratories.)dKdt=−4π2I˙PP3.The Terrestrial Planets: Problem Set
(b)What fraction of the total energy being lost from Earth’s interior can be accounted for bytidal dissipation of its rotational kinetic energy?F=q(E+v×B),dPdr=−GMrρr2=−ρg,


<<<PAGE 856>>>

(a)Using the average density of the entire Earth, determine the radius of the core. Expressyour answer in units of Earth’s radius.(b)Calculate themoment-of-inertia ratio(I/MR2) for the “two-zone” Earth (the actual value is0.3315). The moment of inertia for a spherically symmetric mass shell of constant densityρ, having inner and outer radiiR1andR2, respectively, is given byI≡/integraldisplayvola2dm=8πρ15/parenleftbigR52−R51/parenrightbig.ais the distance of the mass elementdmfrom the axis of rotation.(c)Compare your answer in part (b) with the value expected for a solid sphere of constantdensity. Why are the two values different? Explain.13The moment-of-inertia ratio of the Moon is 0.390 (see Problem 12).(a)What does this say about the interior of the Moon?(b)Is this consistent with the lack of any detectable magnetic ﬁeld? Why or why not?14 (a)TheApollo 11astronauts, after landing on the Moon on July 20, 1969, returned rocks fromthe Sea of Tranquility, one of the maria on the near side. Upon their return, the analysis ofone rock (basalt 10072) yielded the relative abundances at various locations in the sample;see Table 2. Graph the abundance data as14360Nd/14460Nd vs.14762Sm/14460Nd. (Note that theuncertainties listed correspond to the last two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.)TABLE 2Results from the Analysis of Basalt 10072, Returned from the Sea of Tranquility bytheApollo 11Astronauts in 1969. (Data from D. A. Papanastassiou, D. J. DePaolo, and G. J.Wasserburg, “Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd Chronology and Genealogy of Mare Basalts from the Sea ofTranquility,”Proceedings of the Eighth Lunar Science Conference, Pergamon Press, New York,1977.)14762Sm/14460Nd14360Nd/14460Nd0.1847 0.511721±180.1963 0.511998±160.1980 0.512035±210.2061 0.512238±170.2715 0.513788±150.2879 0.514154±1712The moment of inertia of a planet is used to evaluate its interior structure. In this problem youwill construct a simple “two-zone” model of the interior of Earth, assuming spherical symmetry.Take the average densities of the core and mantle to be 10,900 kg m−3and 4500 kg m−3,respectively (neglect the thin surface crust).Belt ofinterstellarnucleiOuter beltof electronsInner beltof protons
FIGURE 14The Van Allen radiation belts arise from charged particles becoming trapped in themagnetic ﬁeld of Earth.The Terrestrial Planets: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 857>>>

(b)Considering the tilt of the planet’s rotation axis, describe the seasonal behavior of the twopolar ice caps.18Assuming that the two moons are in circular orbits, determine the orbital radii of Phobos andDeimos. Express your answers in units of the radius of Mars.19Suppose you lived on Mars and watched its moons. If Phobos and Deimos were next to eachother one night, what would you see the next night (one Martian day later)? Describe theapparent motions of the two moons. (Both Phobos and Deimos orbit prograde, approximatelyabove the planet’s equator.)15Estimate the initial rotation period of Earth if the Moon were torn from it, as suggested by theﬁssion model.16Estimate the Roche limit for the Earth–Moon system. Express your answer in units of theradius of Earth. Is the Moon in any danger of becoming tidally disrupted?17Mars is at its closest approach to the Sun during the summer months in its southern hemisphere.(a)Using the equation below, estimate the ratio of the average temperatures on Mars whenit is at perihelion and aphelion.(b)Determine the slope of the best-ﬁt straight line drawn through the data and estimate theage of the lunar sample. Compare your answer with the age of the lunar highland sample,determinedinExample4.1in  fromthedatainFig.19.The Terrestrial Planets: Problem Set
Tp=T⊙(1−a)1/4/radicalbiggR⊙2D.“”TheTerrestrialPlanets
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.250.6980.7000.7020.7040.7060.7080.7100.7120.71487Sr/86Sr
87Rb/86SrFIGURE19Relative abundance determinations for a sample obtained in the lunar highlands.(Data from D. A. Papanastassiou and G. J. Wasserburg,Proc. Seventh Lunar Sci. Conf., PergamonPress, New York, 1976.)


<<<PAGE 858>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets1The Giant Worlds2The Moons of the Giants3Planetary Ring Systems1THE GIANT WORLDSExcluding the Sun, by far the largest member of the Solar System isJupiter, 317.83times more massive than Earth. Jupiter and the other three giants,Saturn,Uranus, andNeptune, together contain 99.5% of the entire mass of the planetary system (see Fig. 1).Consequently, if we hope to understand the development and evolution of our Solar System,it is vital that we understand these distant worlds.The Discovery of the Galilean MoonsNaked-eye observations of Jupiter and Saturn began when human beings ﬁrst started gazingup at the heavens. But it was in 1610 that Galileo became the ﬁrst person to look at theseplanets through a telescope. In so doing, he detected the four large moons of Jupiter, nowcollectively known as theGalilean moons.1Galileo also saw Saturn’s rings, but becauseof his telescope’s low resolution, he thought that the rings were two large satellites situatedon either side of the planet.The Discoveries of Uranus and NeptuneIt wasn’t until 1781 that William Herschel (1738–1822), a German-born musician living inEngland, made the chance discovery of Uranus. By considering gravitational perturbationsaffecting the orbit of Uranus, John Couch Adams (1819–1892), a graduate student at Cam-bridge University, proposed in October 1845 that another planet must exist even farther fromthe Sun. Using Bode’s rule to guess at the distance of this unknown planet from the Sun,Adams predicted its position in the heavens. Unfortunately, when he submitted his work toSir George Airy, the Astronomer Royal of England, Airy did not believe the conclusions. InJune 1846, Urbain Leverrier (1811–1877), a very well-respected French scientist, indepen-dently made the same prediction, agreeing with Adams’s position to within 1◦. Learning ofthe agreement between the two predictions, Airy began to search for the object. However,1The four Galilean moons were also discovered independently by Simon Marius (1570–1624) in 1610.From Chapter 2  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,1

<<<PAGE 859>>>

(a)(b)
(c)(d)FIGURE 1The four giant planets. (a) Jupiter and its largest moon, Ganymede. (b) Saturn,with two of its moons, Rhea and Dione, seen near the bottom and right-hand side of the image,respectively. (c) Uranus. (d) Neptune. The images were taken by the V oyager 1 and 2 spacecraft.Notice the oblateness caused by rapid rotation. The image sizes do not correspond to the actualrelative sizes of the planets. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)Johann Gottfried Galle (1812–1910) of the Berlin Observatory found Neptune on Septem-ber 23, 1846, the night after receiving a letter from Leverrier suggesting that he too shouldlook for this new planet. In a very real sense, Neptune was discovered in the mathematicalcalculations of Adams and Leverrier; Galle merely conﬁrmed their work.Missions to the Giant PlanetsSince the ﬁrst observations of these worlds, the efforts of Earth-based astronomers haveprovided important information about the giant planets and their many satellites. However,many of the data now available have come from spacecraft missions. The ﬁrst such missionsThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 860>>>

were thePioneer 10andPioneer 11ﬂybys of Jupiter (1973, 1974) and the Pioneer 11ﬂyby of Saturn (1979). Later,Voyager 1andVoyager 2embarked on their spectacularlysuccessful “Grand Tour” missions. Both V oyagers, launched from Earth in 1977, visitedJupiter (1979) and Saturn (1980, 1981), and V oyager 2 continued on to Uranus (1986) andNeptune (1989). In each case the encounters with the planets were brief ﬂybys. Today thePioneer2and V oyager spacecraft are on their way out of the Solar System. The V oyagerspacecraft (renamed theVoyager Interstellar Missions) continue to send back informationover immense distances with ever-weakening signals, providing data about the outer reachesof the Solar System, including the interaction between the solar wind and the winds fromother stars. In early 2006, V oyager 1 was 8.7 billion miles (14 billion kilometers) from Earth,traveling at a speed of 3.6 AU per year, and V oyager 2 was 6.5 billion miles (10.4 billionkilometers) away, traveling at a speed of 3.3 AU per year. It is believed that V oyager 1passed the solar wind’s termination shock in December 2004, as evidenced by an increasein the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld in the vicinity of the spacecraft by a factor of 2.5.The Hubble Space Telescope has also been used to observe the outer planets from Earthorbit. HST has documented signiﬁcant changes in the planets since the ﬂyby missions ofthe 1970s and 1980s.An extended and detailed investigation of the Jovian system began in 1995 when theGal-ileospacecraft (launched in 1989) entered into orbit around Jupiter. In addition to observingthe planet carefully, Galileo completed numerous ﬂybys of the Galilean moons during theeight years it spent in the Jovian system. As a part of the mission, a probe descended intothe planet’s atmosphere by parachute, sampling the atmosphere’s composition and physicalconditions.TheCassini–Huygensmission, launched in 1997, entered the Saturnian system July 1,2004. This dual mission is composed of the Cassini orbiter, which was built by NASAwith the high-gain antenna system provided by the Italian Space Agency (ASI), and theHuygens probe, which was built by the European Space Agency (ESA). At the time of thiswriting in 2006, Cassini is exploring the Saturnian system at length during its four-yearmission, including the planet, its moons, and its rings. Huygens descended into the thickatmosphere of Titan, the largest of Saturn’s moons on January 14, 2005. Like the Galileoprobe, Huygens used a parachute during part of its descent while it made measurementsof composition, wind speed, atmospheric structure, and surface features. At an altitude of40 km, the parachute was be released and the probe fell to the surface. The descent took twohours and 27 minutes, and the probe remained operational on the surface for an additionalone hour and 10 minutes, while further observations were made.Composition and StructureHowever,thegroupcanbefurthersubdivided.ThegasgiantsofJupiter(317.83 M⊕)and Saturn (95.159 M⊕) have average compositions that are quite similar to the Sun’s,2The last signal received from Pioneer 10 occurred on January 23, 2003, almost 31 years after the spacecraft’slaunch. Pioneer 10 is now more than 8 billion miles from Earth, headed in the general direction of Aldebaran, inthe constellation of Taurus, and will be in that star’s vicinity in about 2 million years. Pioneer 11 was last heardfrom in 1995 and is headed in the direction of Aquila.Asaclass,thegiantplanetsdiffermarkedlyfromtheterresThe Realms of the Giant Planets
trials.


<<<PAGE 861>>>

while the much smaller and more distant ice giants, Uranus (14.536 M⊕) and Neptune(17.147 M⊕), have higher proportions of heavier elements. Because each of the giant plan-ets is capable of retaining all of the lighter elements in its atmosphere, this compositiondifference suggests important differences in their formation.This conclusion is supported by direct observations of the composition of each giantplanet near the cloud tops. Table 1 gives the relative number densities of constituents inthe giant planet atmospheres; the Sun’s photospheric composition is given for comparison.(Note that it is the percentage of atoms or molecules bynumberthat is being quoted, not theUranus and Neptune are overabundant in methane relative to solar by a factor of 10 ormore. Although these studies hint that differences may exist in the interiors of these planets,other observational data and theoretical investigations give us even more information aboutwhat is going on inside.Figure 2 shows each planet’s radius as a function of its mass. Also plotted are aseries of theoretical curves for various mixtures: “H” for pure hydrogen; “H–He” for ahydrogen–helium mixture appropriate for Jupiter and Saturn; “Ice” for a composition ofH2O (water), CH4(methane), and NH3(ammonia) ice; and “Rock” for a composition ofmagnesium, silicon, and iron. The dashed lines correspond to models that follow adiabatictemperature gradients. In particular, the gas models (H, H–He) incorporate the polytropicrelationship,P∝ρ2, appropriate for Coulomb-force pair interactions (recall the discus-
Notice in Fig. 2 that even though Jupiter is more than three times as massive as Saturn,it is only slightly larger than its more distant neighbor. This is because the increased massTABLE 1Composition of the Atmospheres of the Giant Planets. All values are given as afractional number density of particles. Jupiter data are from the Galileo probe. Solar photosphericdata are provided for comparison. (Data from Table 4.5 of de Pater and Lissauer,PlanetarySciences, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.)Gas SunJupiterSaturnUranus NeptuneH2H: 0.835 0.864±0.006 0.963±0.03 0.85±0.05 0.85±0.05He He: 0.195 0.157±0.004 0.034±0.03 0.18±0.05 0.18±0.05H2OO : 1.70×10−32.6×10−3>1.70×10−3?>1.70×10−3?>1.70×10−3?CH4C: 7.94×10−4(2.1±0.2)×10−3(4.5±2.2)×10−30.024±0.01 0.035±0.010NH3N: 2.24×10−4(2.60±0.3)×10−4(5±1)×10−4<2.2×10−4<2.2×10−4H2SS : 3.70×10−5(2.22±0.4)×10−4?(4±1)×10−4?3.7×10−4?1×10−3The Realms of the Giant Planets
mass fraction that.) Jupiter’s hydrogen content is somewhat greater than the Sun’s, while its helium content is slightly less than solar. Saturn’s upper atmosphere is  noticeably deﬁcient in helium (96% H2, 3% He), while the other percentages are simi-lar to those of Jupiter. Observations also indicate that whereas their hydrogen and  helium contents are intermediate between the Sun and Jupiter, the atmospheres of both
sion of polytropes).  is a reasonable approximation when electron–ion pair inter-actions are important, because F  q2 and the number of charges is proportional to the density of the gas. The solid lines in Fig.  2 represent zero-temperature models, corre-sponding to complete degeneracy.P∝ρ2∝It seems that hydrogen and helium dominate in Jupiter and Saturn, while ices are likely to play key roles in determining the interior structures of Uranus and Neptune.


<<<PAGE 862>>>

HH–HeSJ
IceUNRock135791113Radius (Earth = 1)110210103Mass (Earth = 1)FIGURE2Composition and mass are principal elements in determining the radius of a planet.Plotted are the radii of Jupiter (J), Saturn (S), Uranus (U), and Neptune (N) as functions of their masses.Also shown are theoretical curves for various mixtures. The solid lines represent zero-temperaturemodels, and the dashed lines are models that follow adiabatic temperature gradients. (Figure adaptedfrom Stevenson,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,10, 257, 1982. Reproduced with permission from theAnnual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, V olume 10, ©1982 by Annual Reviews Inc.)mass actually results indecreasingradius, an effect that begins to appear in the solid H–Hecurve in Fig. 2. This is due to the growing contribution of degenerate electron pressurein these cold, massive bodies.The Distribution of Mass Inside the PlanetsOther information concerning the distribution of mass in the interior is obtained by observingthe motions of moons, rings, and spacecraft. For a spherically symmetric planet, all of themass acts gravitationally as if it is located at a point in the center, but a rapidly rotating planetproduces a more complex gravitational interaction with passing objects. By comparing theactual motion of a spacecraft with what would be expected if the planet were sphericallysymmetric, it becomes possible to map the mass distribution in the interior in terms ofmathematical corrections to a spherical shape. This is just what was done using the Magellanspacecraft around Venus.One such correction is theoblatenessof the planet, which describes how ﬂattened it is.Such rotational ﬂattening is readily apparent in Fig. 1. For instance, Jupiter’s equatorialradius (Re) is 71,493 km and its polar radius (Rp) is only 66,855 km at an atmosphericThe Realms of the Giant Planets
results in increased interior pressure, which in turn leads to changes in the state of the at-oms and molecules. [Recall the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium, developed for stellar interiors; it applies to spherically symmetric planets as well.] For models of objects just over three times more massive than Jupiter and having similar compositions, increasing


<<<PAGE 863>>>

pressure of 1 bar,3giving an oblateness ofb≡Re−RpRe=0.064874.The amount of oblateness is a function of the speed of rotation and the rigidity of the interior.Note, however, that since the giant planets are ﬂuid throughout much of their interiors, it isnot possible to deﬁne a single, unique rotation period; their upper atmospheres tend to rotatedifferentially,justastheSundoes,whiletheirinteriorsmayrotateatdifferentratesthantheirsurfaces.The oblateness is related to the ﬁrst-order correction term in the gravitational potential(the potential energy per unit mass), deﬁned to be/Phi1≡Um.For a spherically symmetric mass distribution,/Phi1=−GM/r, whereris the distance fromthe center of the planet. However, for a planet that is not exactly spherically symmetric, thegravitational potential can be expanded as an inﬁnite series of the form/Phi1(θ)=−GMr/bracketleftBigg1−/parenleftbiggRer/parenrightbigg2J2P2(cosθ)−/parenleftbiggRer/parenrightbigg4J4P4(cosθ)−···/bracketrightBigg,(1)where each succeeding correction term represents a progressively higher-order componentof the planet’s shape and mass distribution, much like higher-order terms in the familiarTaylor series. Notice that asrincreases, each successive higher-order term becomes lesssigniﬁcant; asr→∞,/Phi1approaches the form of the spherical potential.The functionsP2,P4,...are known asLegendre polynomialsand are encounteredfrequently in many areas of physics. Each polynomial has cosθas its argument, whereθis the angle between the rotation axis and the position vector of a point in space (the originof the coordinate system is centered in the middle of the planet); see Fig. 3. Examplesof some low-order, even-powered Legendre polynomials areP0(cosθ)=1P2(cosθ)=12/parenleftbig3 cos2θ−1/parenrightbigP4(cosθ)=18/parenleftbig35 cos4θ−30 cos2θ+3/parenrightbigP6(cosθ)=116/parenleftbig231 cos6θ−315 cos4θ+105 cos2θ−5/parenrightbig.The Legendre polynomials are multiplied byweighting factors, known asgravitationalmoments(J2,J4,J6,... ), that describe the importance of each polynomial to the overall31 bar=105Nm−2The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 864>>>

/H9258/H9275rReFIGURE 3The angleθis deﬁned from the rotation axis for the Legendre polynomial expansionof the gravitational potential.TABLE 2Gravitational Moments and Moment-of-Inertia Ratios of the Giant Planets.Reis theequatorial radius of the giant planet. (Data from Table 1 of Guillot,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,33, 493, 2005.)MomentsJupiterSaturnJ2(1.4697±0.0001)×10−2(1.6332±0.0010)×10−2J4−(5.84±0.05)×10−4−(9.19±0.40)×10−4J6(0.31±0.20)×10−4(1.04±0.50)×10−4I/MR2e0.2580.220MomentsUranusNeptuneJ2(0.35160±0.00032)×10−2(0.3539±0.0010)×10−2J4−(0.354±0.041)×10−4−(0.28±0.22)×10−4I/MR2e0.2300.241shape. For example,J2is related to the planet’s oblateness and to itsmoment of inertia.4TheJ4andJ6terms are more sensitive to the mass distribution in the outer regions of theplanet, particularly the equatorial bulge, because the terms have stronger dependence onRe.Because density is more dependent on temperature near the surface of the planet than it is inthe deep interior where the gas tends to be degenerate,J4andJ6also measure the planet’sthermal structure. Gravitational moments for the giant planets are given in Table 2.Example 1.1.The ﬁrst three higher-order gravitational moments for Jupiter are givenin Table 2.As a result, the associated expansion terms in Eq. ( 1) have the values shownin Fig. 4. The contribution of oblateness to the gravitational potential near the equatorcontinued4The moment of inertia has already been discussed for the cases of Earth and the MoonandwillbeexploredagainforJupiter.The Realms of the Giant Planets
,


<<<PAGE 865>>>

–5–4–3–2–1012345
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180/H9258 (deg)J2 term (¥10–3)J4 term (¥10–5)J6 term (¥10–7)
FIGURE 4The ﬁrst three higher-order terms in the gravitational potential expansion for Jupiterwhenr=2Re.(θ=90◦) is apparent in the diagram. You should also note that these higher-order correctionterms to a spherically symmetric potential are quite small; the ﬁrst-order correction (J2P2)is only on the order of a few tenths of a percent, the second-order term (J4P4) is two ordersof magnitude smaller than the ﬁrst-order term, and the third-order term (J6P6) is two ordersof magnitude smaller than the second-order term.Related to the gravitational moments is the moment of inertia of the planet.I≡/integraldisplayvola2dm,(2)whereais the distance of the mass elementdmfrom the rotation axis (see Fig. 5). Foran axially symmetric mass distribution, such as a giant planet rotating about a well-deﬁnedaxis, it can be shown thatIcan be expressed in cylindrical coordinates asI=4π/integraldisplayRpz=0/integraldisplayamax(z)a=0ρ(a,z)adadz,(3)wherezis the distance from the center of the planet along the rotation axis to the pointwhereais measured out todm, andRpis the polar radius. If we assume that a cross sectionof the planet along the rotation axis can be approximated by an ellipsoid at the surface, thenamaxis related tozby/parenleftbiggamaxRe/parenrightbigg2+/parenleftbiggzRp/parenrightbigg2=1.The moment of inertia is given byThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 866>>>

RpRefReazdm/H9267core/H9267envFIGURE 5A model of an oblate planet with an elliptical cross section that has a spherical core.ρenvis the density of the envelope andρcoreis the density of the core. The transition between the twodensities occurs at a fractionfof the equatorial radius of the planet.For a two-component model of an oblate planet having an envelope density ofρenvand aspherical core with a density ofρcore, and where the transition between the two densitiesoccurs at a fraction of the surface equatorial radiusf, it can be shown that the moment ofinertia is given byI=8π15R4e/bracketleftbigRpρenv+f5Re(ρcore−ρenv)/bracketrightbig.(4)WritingRpin terms of the oblatenessbof the planet, we haveRp=Re(1−b),Eq. ( 4) becomesI=8π15R5e/bracketleftbig(1−b)ρenv+f5(ρcore−ρenv)/bracketrightbig.(5)Clearly, the moment of inertia depends on the planet’s oblateness and the mass distributionthroughout the planet. Note thatfcannot exceedfmax=Rp/Re=1−b≤1.The Cores of the PlanetsAll of these data suggest that Jupiter and Saturn have dense cores composed of a thick soupof “rock” (Mg, Si, Fe) and ices. However, although the data suggest dense cores, the massesof the cores are relatively poorly constrained. For example, note that Eq. ( 5) is stronglydependent onf≤1, and recall that the higher gravitational moments selectively sample theouter envelope of the planet. Based on the available data and numerical models, it appearsthat Jupiter probably has a rock/ice core of less than about 10 M⊕, while Saturn’s core maybe about 15 M⊕with an uncertainty of perhaps 50%. (It is possible that the smaller core inJupiter could be due to some portion of the core having eroded over the age of the planet.)Despite the core masses of Jupiter and Saturn being much greater than the mass of Earth,they constitute only a small fraction of the total mass of each planet. If we assume coremasses of 10 M⊕and 15 M⊕for Jupiter and Saturn, respectively, their cores represent justThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 867>>>

3% and 16% of the masses of the two gas giants. Hydrogen and helium make up most ofthe rest of the mass in each case.Similar studies of Uranus and Neptune result in core masses comparable to those ofJupiter and Saturn: roughly 13 M⊕or so. However, in the cases of Uranus and Neptune,these cores constitute most of the mass of the planets. In particular, both Uranus and Neptuneprobably have 25% of their mass in the form of rock, 60% to 70% as “ices,” and only 5%to 15% in the form of hydrogen or helium gas. Clearly, Uranus and Neptune are not simplysmallish versions of their larger siblings, and they are appropriately considered as ice giantsrather than gas giants.5Internal Heat and the Cooling Timescalebe seen in Table 3, Jupiter absorbs (and re-emits) 5.014×1017W of solar radiation,while 3.35×1017W of additional power is produced in the interior of the planet. Thissigniﬁcantly alters the energy balance and the thermal equilibrium temperature that wouldresult from solar blackbody radiation alone. In Neptune’s case, more than one-half of theheat being radiated originates from the interior, explaining why it’s effective temperatureis very close to that of Uranus, even though Neptune is much farther from the Sun.One source of internal heat for the giant planets is the gravitational potential energy thatwas released by gases collapsing onto them during formation. This is just a consequenceof the virial theoremand is the same Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism.Neglecting any slight differences due to composition and density, for a given speciﬁc heatcapacity the total thermal energy content of a planet is proportional to its volume (i.e.,∝R3).However, the rate at which heat leaves a planet by blackbody radiation is proportional tosurface area (∝R2). Thus, without an additional source of energy, the timescale for coolingdepends on radius asτcool=total energy contentenergy loss/time∝R3/R2∝R.TABLE 3Energy Budgets and Effective Temperatures of the Giant Planets. (Data from Table 2of Guillot,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,33, 493, 2005.)Power or TemperatureJupiter Saturn Uranus NeptuneAbsorbed power (1016W) 50.14±2.48 11.14±0.50 0.526±0.037 0.204±0.019Total emitted power (1016W) 83.65±0.84 19.77±0.32 0.560±0.011 0.534±0.029Intrinsic power emitted (1016W) 33.5±2.68.63±0.60 0.034±0.038 0.330±0.035Effective temperature (K) 124.4±0.39 5.0±0.45 9.1±0.35 9.3±0.85The termicesin this context is somewhat misleading since the H2O, CH4, NH3, and other constituents are actuallyin a somewhat ﬂuid state under the high pressures found in the interiors of the giant planets.The Realms of the Giant Planets
Another group of observations that provides hints about the formation and structure of the planets and their subsequent evolution is the detection of heat leaking out from the interior. In the terrestrial planets, the heat generated in the interior is due in large part to the slow decay of radioactive isotopes. However, this is not sufﬁcient to account for the large quantities of heat coming from the interiors of the giant worlds. For example, as can


<<<PAGE 868>>>

The characteristic time required for a planet to cool is roughly proportional to the planet’sradius. Extrapolating back in time, the giant planets must have been much more luminouswhen the Solar System was in its infancy; Jupiter may have even glowed visibly.Since Jupiter is larger than Saturn (as well as being closer to the Sun), it should haveremained hotter for a longer period of time and should still be radiating energy into space ata greater rate. In Saturn’s case, however, the energy available from the primordial collapseis not sufﬁcient to account for all of the heat now observed to be coming from the planet.The solution to the puzzle of Saturn’s additional heat source lies in the observation that itshelium is signiﬁcantly depleted in the upper atmosphere. Referring to Table 1, note thathelium only accounts for about 3% of the particles in Saturn’s upper atmosphere, whilethe value is closer to 16% for Jupiter and nearly 20% for the Sun. The slow sinking of theheavier helium atoms relative to hydrogen through the atmosphere causes a change in thegravitational potential energy of the planet and the accompanying generation of heat viathe virial theorem. This effect has been more pronounced in Saturn because the planet issomewhat cooler.Modeling the Interiors of the Giant PlanetsModeling the interiors of the giant planets is done in much the same way it is done forstars; the major difference is the kind of material used in their construction. For example, atthe relatively cool temperatures and high pressures of the giant planet interiors, hydrogentakes on a very strange form by terrestrial standards. As we move deeper into the planet,the familiar form of molecular hydrogen becomes so compressed that the molecular bondsare broken and the orbital electrons become shared among the atoms. This is very similarto the behavior of a metal; the hydrogen inside the planet takes on the characteristics ofa molten metal, much like mercury at room temperature. This exotic equation of stateof hydrogen has been veriﬁed in terrestrial laboratories by creating shock waves in thegas that produce temperatures of several thousand kelvins and pressures of millions ofatmospheres. It appears thatliquid metallic hydrogenactually dominates the interiors ofJupiter and Saturn. For Uranus and Neptune, the pressures probably do not get large enoughto convert hydrogen into its liquid metallic form, but the ices present in their atmospheres(such as methane and ammonia) become ionized by the pressure.The interior structures of the giant planets are depicted in Fig. 6. The regions labeled“inhomogeneous” for the gas giants are where helium becomes insoluble in hydrogen,and helium-rich droplets form. These droplets then sink deeper into the planet, releasinggravitational potential energy. In the case of Saturn the helium may have settled into thecore or formed a shell around the core. Uranus and Neptune have very little hydrogen andhelium and are dominated by ices and rock.The Upper AtmospheresIn their upper atmospheres, the very colorful and dynamic cloud tops of Jupiter, the moremuted hues of Saturn, and the deep blue-greens of Uranus and Neptune owe their beautyto the temperature, composition, rotation, and internal structures of the planets. Observa-tional data, combined with theoretical modeling, suggest that Jupiter’s clouds exist in threelayers. Clouds in the top layer are composed of ammonia, the next layer is probably com-posed of ammonium hydrosulﬁde, and the clouds in the deepest layer are made of water.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 869>>>

AtmosphereMolecular H2
Molecular H2, Helium, IcesIces and rockRock?Ice GiantsGas GiantsInhomogeneous (?)Liquid metallic HIce/rock core (~ 10 M   ?)AtmosphereMolecular H2Inhomogeneous (?)Liquid metallic HIce/rock core (~ 15 M   ?)JupiterSaturn
UranusNeptuneFIGURE 6Computer models of the interiors of the giant planets. The relative sizes of the planetsare depicted correctly. (Adapted from Guillot,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,33, 493, 2005.)The coloration in the clouds of both Jupiter and Saturn is caused by their atmospheres’compositions, although which colors are associated with which molecules remains unclear;suggestions include sulfur, phosphorus, or various organic (carbon-rich) compounds. InJupiter and Saturn, the bluish regions apparently have higher temperatures, indicating thatthey lie deeper in the atmosphere. At progressively higher altitudes are brown, white, andred clouds.Overall, the clouds are located deeper in the atmosphere of Saturn when compared withJupiter, and hence are not as dramatic. In Uranus and Neptune, reﬂective clouds of ammoniaand sulfur are located deep in the atmosphere.As sunlight passes through the atmosphere, theblue wavelengths are scattered most efﬁciently by the molecules. In addition, the presenceof methane in the atmosphere tends to absorb the red light.The Comet P/Shoemaker–Levy 9 Impacts on JupiterDuring July 16–22, 1994, Jupiter took center stage as it got pummeled by the fragments ofComet P/Shoemaker–Levy 9(SL9). The comet was discovered in March 1993, althoughit had apparently been orbiting Jupiter for decades. Extrapolating the comet’s orbit back intime, it appears that SL9 broke apart on July 8, 1992, as it passed within 1.6RJof Jupiter,well within the planet’s Roche limit. [A Hubble Space Telescope view of 21 fragments isThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 870>>>

(a)(b)
(c)(d)
FIGURE 7(a) 21 fragments of SL9 seen on May 17, 1994. The line of cometary nuclei stretchesfor 1.1×106km. [Courtesy of H. A. Weaver, T. E. Smith (Space Telescope Science Institute), andNASA.] (b) Hubble Space Telescope images, taken several minutes apart, showing the plume fromfragment G on July 18, 1994. (c) Close-up of the fragment G impact site. (Courtesy of Dr. HeidiHammel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and NASA HST.) (d) From left to right, the impactsites in the southern hemisphere of fragments C, A, and E. One of Jupiter’s moons (Io) can be seencrossing the planet’s disk. (Courtesy of the Hubble Space Telescope Jupiter Imaging Team.)shown in Fig. 7(a).] Astronomers soon realized that the comet fragments would crashinto Jupiter in July 1994, possibly providing important clues to the nature of comets andthe structure of Jupiter’s atmosphere.Over the week when the collisions occurred, virtually all of the telescopes on Earth(including amateur telescopes) that were in position to view the event, as well as space-basedobservatories such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Galileo, and V oyager 2, were focused onThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 871>>>

Jupiter. Various predictions had indicated that some direct evidence of the impacts might beobservable from Earth, but the spectacular display that ensued far exceeded expectations.Figure 7(b) shows several images of the enormous plume that rose 3500 km above thecloud tops when fragment G (believed to be the largest) entered the atmosphere of theplanet. Even though each of the collisions occurred just beyond our view, on the side ofJupiter away from Earth, the plumes were high enough to make them visible above thelimb. The ﬁreballs reached temperatures of 7500 K, greater than the effective temperatureof the Sun. Data for the G impact indicate that the temperature cooled to 4000 K after ﬁveseconds. Analysis of the data indicated that the largest fragments were no more than 700 macross.Immediately after each of the larger collisions, scars appeared in the atmosphere greaterin diameter than Earth [see Figs. 7(c) and (d)]. The dark nature of the marks was probablydue to organic molecules rich in sulfur and nitrogen that were present in the atmospherebefore the collision. It is also possible that some of the coloration was due to carbon-basedcompounds, like graphite, that contained silicates delivered by the comet fragments. ByDecember 1994, the marks had been torn apart by the motions in Jupiter’s atmosphere,forming a ring around the planet that eventually dissipated completely.Atmospheric DynamicsThe most famous atmospheric feature on Jupiter is itsGreat Red Spot, apparent inFigs. 1(a) and 8(a). This huge anticyclonic storm, which measures roughly one Earthdiameter wide by two Earth diameters long, has been observed for more than three centuries.Smaller but similar features can be seen in the atmospheres of each of the giant worlds.Another characteristic shared by these planets is the banded cloud structure following linesof constant latitude. In the case of Uranus the banded cloud features are very difﬁcult to
(a)(b)
FIGURE 8(a) The Great Red Spot of Jupiter. (b) The Great Dark Spot of Neptune. (Courtesyof NASA/JPL.)Only the Galileo and V oyager 2 spacecraft had direct views of the impacts.6
6The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 872>>>

To equatorFIGURE 9Circulation around Jupiter’s Great Red Spot is counterclockwise. The anticyclonicstorm (which is in the southern hemisphere) is located between two atmospheric bands that are movingin opposite directions. Wind speeds within the Great Red Spot reach 100 m s−1, and eddies at theedge of the system circle it in about 7 days.detect, but they do exist. The circulation within Jupiter’s Great Red Spot is attributable toits location between two rivers of atmosphere moving in opposite directions (see Fig. 9).Despite these apparently long-lived features, the atmospheres are very dynamic, withrapid changes occurring on small scales, including rotation around the more stable cyclonicstructures. It is worth noting, however, that large features are not necessarily permanenteither. For instance, when V oyager 2 visited Neptune in 1989, it discovered theGreat DarkSpotin the southern hemisphere, shown in Figs. 1(d) and 8(b). Later, when the planetwas observed again by the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994, the Great Dark Spot was gone.Then, in 1995, another dark spot appeared in the northern hemisphere.is similarly redirected. However, the atmospheric circulation of Uranus has an interestingaspect not shared with the other giant planets. Unlike any other planet in the Solar Systemexcept Pluto, Uranus is almost lying on its side; its rotation axis is tilted 97.9◦to the ecliptic.This implies that each pole has the Sun overhead for a portion of its 84-year orbit. Duringthose periods one would expect heat to be transported from the subsolar pole to the one thatis in darkness. Yet, when V oyager 2 passed Uranus in 1986, at about the time when one ofthe poles was pointed toward the Sun, the visible ﬂow patterns were still largely parallel tothe planet’s equator, due to the planet’s rapid rotation and the effects of the Coriolis force.How Uranus was able to transport heat away from the subsolar pole without detectablepole-to-pole ﬂow patterns remains an open question.Another noticeable difference between Uranus and the rest of the giant worlds is its lackof prominent vortexes. This may correspond to the lack of any detectable heat ﬂow outwardThe Realms of the Giant Planets
Just as the Coriolis force redirects the large-scale circulation in Earth’s atmosphere from north–south to predominantly east–west ﬂow patterns in each hemisphere, Hadley circulation in the more rapidly rotating giant planets (particularly Jupiter and Saturn)


<<<PAGE 873>>>

from the deep interior. Although it must certainly exist, the rate of heat ﬂow is clearly muchless pronounced than in the other three giants.Magnetic FieldsThe molten iron–nickel core of Earth is the source of its magnetic ﬁeld. In the giant planets,it is liquid metallic hydrogen that appears to ﬁll that role, at least in Jupiter and Saturn. Rapidrotation generates electric currents in the conducting interiors of the planets. Because themagnetic ﬁelds are almost certainly anchored deep in their interiors, measuring the rotationperiods of the ﬁelds provides a method of determining the rotation periods of their interiors.In the 1950s, measurements of the radio-wavelength radiation being emitted from Jupiterrevealed both thermal and nonthermal components. The thermal radiation is just part of theenergy being given off by the planet itself (blackbody radiation). However, the strongtrapped in it. The measured strength of the ﬁeld is some 19,000 times greater than Earth’sﬁeld.Another interesting consequence of the SL9 collisions in Jupiter’s southern hemisphere[which all occurred at nearly the same latitude; see Fig. 7(d)] was the appearance ofan auroral display in the northern hemisphere, not unlike the aurorae seen on Earth.Apparently, charged particles near the collision sites acquired sufﬁcient kineticenergy that they traveled along Jupiter’s magnetic ﬁeld lines, colliding with the atmospherein the north within 45 minutes following the impacts.The physical extent of Jupiter’s magnetic ﬁeld is enormous.The planet’smagnetosphere,deﬁned to be the space enveloped by its magnetic ﬁeld, has a diameter of 3×1010m, 210times the size of the planet and 22 times larger than the Sun. Because of Jupiter’s rapidrotation, the charged particles trapped in its ﬁeld are spread out into acurrent sheetthatis situated alongthe ﬁeld’ sequator (the ﬁeld axis is inclined 9.5◦to the rotation axis ofthe planet). Given the large numbers of particles present in Jupiter’s current sheet, anothersource of charged particles beyond those supplied by the solar wind must exist. The solutionto this mystery came when the V oyager spacecraft ﬁrst observed Jupiter’s moon Io.2THE MOONS OF THE GIANTSMany of the most spectacular and fascinating images returned by the V oyager, Galileo,and Cassini–Huygens missions were of the moons of the giant planets, beginning with theGalilean moons of Jupiter (Fig. 10). The relative sizes of the Galilean moons are depictedin Fig. 11.Io(shown in more detail in Fig. 12) is the closest of the four large Galileanmoons to Jupiter. It is a bizarre-looking yellowish-orange world with as many as nine activevolcanoes observed to be erupting simultaneously.Europa(Fig. 13) is covered with athin layer of water-ice that is criss-crossed by cracks and nearly devoid of any cratering.Ganymede(Fig. 14) has a thick ice surface that shows evidence of signiﬁcant cratering.And ﬁnally,Callisto(Fig. 15) appears to be covered with a layer of dust and has an old andThe Realms of the Giant Planets
nonthermal component was determined to be synchrotron radiation with wavelengths in the decameter (tens of meters) and the decimeter (tenths of meters) ranges. This implies that Jupiter must have a signiﬁcant magnetic ﬁeld with relativistic electrons


<<<PAGE 874>>>

FIGURE 10A “family portrait” of Jupiter and its four largest moons. From nearest Jupiter tofarthest are Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. The portrait is actually a mosaic of a number ofV oyager images. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)
FIGURE 11A mosaic of images obtained by the Galileo spacecraft showing the four Galileanmoons of Jupiter. From left to right, and from nearest to Jupiter to farthest away: Io, Europa, Ganymede,Callisto. Here, the moons are depicted in such a way as to show their relative sizes. (Courtesy ofNASA/JPL.)very thick ice crust that has been subjected to extensive bombardment. The characteristicsof these worlds are consistent with a decreasing average density with increasing distancefrom Jupiter, implying that the relative amount of water-ice crust increases with respect tothe rock core.The Evolution of the Galilean MoonsThe increasing percentage of volatiles (principally water-ice) in these worlds at increasingdistances from Jupiter suggests that their formation was closely linked to the formation andThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 875>>>

(a)(b)
(c)
FIGURE 12(a) The disk of Io shows a large number of volcanic features. (b) A volcano(Prometheus) erupting on the limb of Io. Prometheus was observed to be erupting in every imageobtained by the V oyagers (1979) and Galileo (1995–2003). Other volcanic eruptions are not as long-lived. (c) Mountains on Io seen at sunset. The low scarp in the upper left is approximately 250 m high.It is believed that these mountains are produced by uplifted thrust faults. The black lines along thebottom of the image are due to missing data. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL/University of Arizona/ArizonaState University.)subsequent evolution of the planet itself. Given the regular nature of the Galilean satellites,it has been proposed the they may have formed out of the Jupitersubnebulawhile Jupiterwas accreting its massive atmosphere. Within this context, recalling that Jupiter must havebeen hotter in the past than it is today, Io would have been close enough to have had mostof its volatiles evaporate away. Moving progressively farther out, Europa would have beenable to hold on to some water, Ganymede even more, and Callisto (being the coldest of theGalilean moons at the time of its formation) would have retained the largest percentage ofvolatiles.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 876>>>

(a)(b)
(d)(c)(e)
FIGURE 13(a) The full disk of Europa. (b) Europa has numerous cracks running across thesurface. (c) A close-up of broken ice. (d) Ridged plains. (e) Wedge terrain. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)The Effects of Tidal Forces on IoThe consequences of this evolution can be seen in each of the Galilean moons. Considerthem in sequence beginning with the one closest to Jupiter. Because of its proximity toJupiter, Io experiences the most severe tidal forces. Even though the moon’s rotation periodis the same as its orbital period, small deviations from a perfectly circular orbit mean that itsorbital velocity is not constant. Consequently, the moon tends to wobble, not quite keepingone side “locked in place” toward Jupiter. This effect is due to the curious resonance thatexists among the orbits of Io, Europa, and Ganymede. Their orbital periods form ratiosthat are approximately 1:2:4, meaning that both Europa and Ganymede perturb Io’s orbitat about the same location each time Io orbits the planet. This forces Io’s orbit to remainslightly elliptical.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 877>>>

(a)(b)
FIGURE 14(a) The surface of Ganymede shows signiﬁcant cratering, indicating that it has notbeen refreshed as recently as Europa. (b) A close-up view of ridges and grooves prevalent on thesurface, indicative of past tectonic activity. The diagonal band is 15 km wide. The circular feature inthe lower right portion of the image is probably an impact crater. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)
(a)(b)
FIGURE 15(a) Callisto’s surface exhibits extensive cratering. (b) A close-up of a large impactcrater known as Valhalla. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)Based on gravitational data from Galileo’s close ﬂybys of Io, it appears that Io has an iron-rich core, a molten silicate mantle, and a thin silicate crust (the moon’s average density is3530 kg m−3). This structure suggests that Io was entirely molten at least once, and perhapsnumerous times, allowing the moon to become chemically differentiated. Lava ﬂows andlakes of lava, such as Loki Patera (which is larger than the island of Hawaii) are clearlyevident on the surface of Io. It is important to note, however, that Io’s volcanoes do notoperate in quite the same way that Earth-based volcanoes do. Instead, the eruptions may beThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 878>>>

somewhat more analogous to the geysers seen in such places as Yellowstone National Park.In terrestrial geysers, rapid phase transitions from water to steam force the steam upward athigh velocity through cracks in the surface. On Io, sulfur and sulfur dioxide (SO2) probablyplay the same role. In fact, SO2has been detected over volcanic vents and in Io’s very thinatmosphere. The yellowish-orange surface is due to sulfur raining back down on the moonfrom its continually erupting volcanoes. The constant eruptions are always regenerating themoon’s surface; Io is literally turning itself inside out.Io’s Interaction with Jupiter’s Magnetic FieldAll of the Galilean moons are located deep inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere, but Io interactswith the magnetic ﬁeld most strongly. Since Jupiter rotates in just under 10 hours, whereasIo orbits the planet in 1.77 days, Jupiter’s magnetic ﬁeld sweeps past Io at a speed of about57 km s−1. This motion through the magnetic ﬁeld sets up an electric potential differenceacross the moon, estimated to be 600 kV . The potential difference acts much like a battery,causing a current of nearly 106amps to ﬂow back and forth along magnetic ﬁeld linesbetween Io and Jupiter. This current ﬂow of charged particles in the magnetic ﬁeld alsogenerates Joule heating within the moon, analogous to a resistor in a circuit. RoughlyP=IV∼6×1011W is generated in this way. However, this contribution to the totalinternal heating of the moon is only a small fraction of the total energy liberated from thesurface per second, which is approximately 1014W.That Io must have some interaction with Jupiter’s magnetic ﬁeld has been known forsome time. When Jupiter, Io, and Earth are in certain alignments, bursts of decameter-wavelength radiation are detected. Not all the details of the process are yet understood, butthe bursts appear to be associated with the electrical current ﬂowing between Jupiter andits volcanic moon.Io must also be responsible for the excessive number of charged particles trapped inJupiter’s magnetic ﬁeld, although it is unlikely that they escaped directly from the moon’svolcanoes since the ejection speeds are much less than Io’s escape velocity. Instead, aprocess referred to assputteringhas been proposed; oxygen and sulfur ions from Jupiter’smagnetosphere impacting on the moon’s surface or in its atmosphere may provide sufﬁcientenergy for other sulfur, oxygen, sodium, and potassium atoms to escape. In fact, clouds ofsulfur and sodium (known as theIo torus) have been detected around Jupiter at the locationof Io’s orbit. On the order of 1027to 1029ions leave Io and enter Jupiter’s magnetosphericplasma every second.EuropaEuropa’s surface seems to be continually refreshed. Based on the near absence of cratering,it appears that most of the surface is less than 100 million years old, supporting the idea thata layer of liquid water may exist below the surface. In fact, observations from the Galileomission indicate an iron-rich core, a silicate mantle, a possible subsurface ocean, and a thinice crust; the average density of Europa is 3010 kg m−1, less than the density of Io. Thewater ocean/ice crust is collectively about 150 km thick. The source of the heat required toThis is just Faraday’s law of induction.7
7The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 879>>>

keep the subsurface water at least partially melted is probably the weak tidal interactionswith Jupiter and the other Galilean moons. The cracks running across the moon’s surfaceappear to be stress fractures induced by those tidal forces combined with tectonic activity.In 1994 the Hubble Space Telescope detected a thin molecular oxygen atmosphere aroundEuropa. That observation was conﬁrmed by both Galileo and the ﬂyby of the Cassinispacecraft on its way to a rendezvous with Saturn. Cassini also found the presence ofatomic hydrogen in Europa’s atmosphere. It has been suggested that the atmosphere is dueto sputtering of the surface water-ice resulting from the interaction of Europa with Jupiter’smagnetosphere.Given the presence of subsurface heating, a likely source of liquid water, and the prob-ability of organic materials being either intrinsic to the moon or delivered by comets andmeteorites, it has been widely speculated that Europa may be a site for the evolution of life.Even though no evidence exists for the presence of life today or in the past on Europa, atthe end of its operational lifetime scientists intentionally sent the Galileo spacecraft intothe crushing atmosphere of Jupiter on September 21, 2003, in order to avoid any futureinadvertent collision with Europa and its possible subsurface ocean.GanymedeGanymede’s surface also shows a complex series of ridges and grooves that strongly suggestsome history of tectonic activity on this ice world. This is supported by gravitational datafrom Galileo indicating a likely partially molten iron core, a silicate lower mantle, an icyupper mantle, an ice crust, and an average density of only 1940 kg m−1. It has been proposedthat before the ice crust became too rigid, convection in the interior was responsible forcarrying heat to the surface. This convective motion also caused movement of the surfacecrust, much like the current action of tectonic plates on Earth. As a result, although thesurface is certainly much older and more heavily cratered than Europa’s, the surface hasbeen at least partially refreshed during its history.CallistoCallisto apparently cooled and solidiﬁed quite rapidly after material accreted out of thelocal subnebula around Jupiter. As a result, its surface continued to collect dust as thenebula thinned, blanketing the moon with the dark material. Evidence that Callisto solidiﬁedquickly is also apparent in the structure of its interior. Models suggest that the interior of themoon is relatively simple, with a partially differentiated interior of ice and rock, an ice-richcrust, and the lowest density of the Galilean moons (1830 kg m−3). Having solidiﬁed inthe early stages of the formation of the Solar System, Callisto was also subject to frequentimpacts of the still-abundant objects that traveled among the newly formed planets andmoons. Evidence of the nebular dust accretion and the impacts remains today. The whitish-appearing impact craters are the result of ice being exposed during the collisions.A Uniﬁed Formation of the Galilean MoonsAs we have seen, the four Galilean satellites of Jupiter exhibit a trend of decreasing densitywith distance from their parent planet. Given the evident trends in their properties, includingtheir internal structure (diminishing iron-rich cores and increasing water-ice content withThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 880>>>

distance from Jupiter), it is apparent that they likely formed systematically with Jupiter,perhaps out of a subnebula around the planet. This is also supported by the fact that eachof the Galilean moons orbit prograde and in the equatorial plane of the planet.The Smaller Moons of JupiterOther, smaller moons also orbit in a prograde direction in the equatorial plane of Jupiter.These additionalregular satellitesmay have formed out of the subnebula as well. However,there are a large number of moons around Jupiter that orbit well out of the equatorial planeand, in many cases, in retrograde orbits. It seems that theseirregular satellitesof Jupitermay be captured objects that happened to wander by at some point in time. Still other verysmall satellites may becollisional shardsproduced by meteoritic collisions with largersatellites.Space does not allow us to discuss each of these many moons in detail. Similarly, we areunable to discuss most of the smaller moons orbiting the other giant planets; rather, we willfocus our attention on the larger moons and a few of the more unusual smaller satellites ofSaturn, Uranus, and Neptune.Saturn’s Titan with Its Thick AtmosphereWhen the two V oyager spacecraft reached Saturn in 1980 and 1981, they were directed toexamineTitan, the second-largest moon in the Solar System (Ganymede being the largest).Ever since Gerard P. Kuiper (1905–1973) detected methane gas around Titan in the 1940s,astronomers have wondered about the nature of this distant, atmospheric world. When theimages began arriving, scientists saw a moon with an atmosphere so ﬁlled with suspendedparticles (aerosols) that no pictures of its obscured surface were possible.The joint Cassini–Huygens mission arrived in the Saturnian system in July 2004. Afterarrival, the Huygens probe detached from the Cassini orbiter and descended to the surfaceof Titan on January 14, 2005. During its descent, the Huygens probe was able to measurewind speeds of up to 210 m s−1, sample the composition of the atmosphere, and, afterpassing through the high-altitude smog layer of hydrocarbons, obtain images of the surface(see Fig. 16).The dominant constituent in the atmosphere is nitrogen (N2), which constitutes some-where between 87% and 99% of the gases. Methane (CH4) makes up between 1% and 6%of the atmosphere, and argon (Ar) constitutes between 0% and 6% of the total. Numerousother species are present in smaller amounts, including molecular hydrogen (H2), carbonmonoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), and a host of additionalhydrocarbons, such as acetylene (C2H2), ethylene (C2H4), ethane (C2H6), methylacetylene(C3H4), propane (C3H8), and diacetylene (C4H2). The aerosols in the high-altitude smoglayer are probably just condensed forms of these compounds.At the base of the atmosphere, the pressure is approximately 1.5 atm and the temperatureis 93 K. With those conditions, methane is able to condense as a liquid and then evaporateagain, and thus it plays a role much like that of water on Earth. At the Huygens landingsite, the ground was moist, with liquid methane occurring a few centimeters below thesurface. It is possible that it had rained methane at that location shortly before the arrivalof Huygens. In fact, Huygens sank 10 to 15 cm into the soft ground at the landing site. TheThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 881>>>

(a)
(b)(c)FIGURE 16Counterclockwise from upper left: (a) Titan with its thick atmosphere as seen bythe Cassini orbiter (Courtesy of NASA/JPL). (b) A mosaic image of the surface from an altitude of8 km imaged by the Huygens probe (Courtesy of ESA/NASA/JPL/University of Arizona). (c) Thesurface of Titan with“pebbles”of what is probably water-ice in the foreground. Theﬂat pebble nearthe middle of the image has a width of 15 cm, and the one to its right has a width of 4 cm. Both pebblesare 85 cm from the Huygens probe camera. (Courtesy of ESA/NASA/JPL/University of Arizona.)surface water-ice pebbles also show evidence of having a liquidﬂow across them, much liketerrestrial rock pebbles in a dry creek bed. In addition, images obtained during the descentrevealed topography that looks like drainage canals leading to low, dark,ﬂat regions thatmay be lakes (or dried lake beds).Mimas and the Herschel CraterAnother member of the Saturnian system,Mimas, is a small but fascinating moon (shown inFig. 17). It exhibits a very large impact crater (referred to as Herschel) that is testimonyto a collision almost energetic enough to fracture it. Of course Saturn also has numerousMore than one researcher has noticed that Mimas bears a strong resemblance to the“Death Star”in the GeorgeLucasﬁlmStar Wars, Lucasﬁlm Ltd. Production (1977).88The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 882>>>

FIGURE 17The impact that produced the Herschel crater on Mimas was nearly energetic enoughto completely fracture the moon. Mimas is one of the many small moons orbiting Saturn. (Courtesyof NASA/JPL.)
FIGURE 18Miranda is one of the moons of Uranus. Its dramatic surface features may be theresult of one or more very energetic collisions that fractured the moon. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)other regular and irregular satellites in its system, a few of which will be mentioned in thecontext of its extensive ring system in Section 3.The Chaotic Surface of Miranda, a Moon of UranusWhen V oyager 2 reached Uranus in 1986, it encountered another moon that may havesuffered a very energetic collision.Miranda, which measures only 470 km across, lookslike a moon“put together by a committee”(Fig. 18). One explanation for its amazingtopography is that one or more collisions actually succeeded in breaking the moon apart.When gravity pulled all of the pieces back together, they didn’t quiteﬁt. Portions of the rockcore tried to settle back to the center of the moon while ice tried toﬂoat back to the surface.This proposed rearrangement of the structure of Miranda produced a strange surface withThe Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 883>>>

cliffs as tall as 20 km (twice the height of Mount Everest) and features such as the“chevron”that can be seen in theﬁgure.An alternative explanation for Miranda’s topography proposes that tidal forces exertedby Uranus on the small moon caused parts of the surface to be pulled apart. This allowedwarmer material in the interior (which was heated by tidal effects) to rise to the surface,producing the ridges and troughs that are observed.Interestingly, all of the regular moons of Uranus, and, as we will see in the next section, itsring system as well, orbit near the equatorial plane of the planet rather than its orbital plane.Recall that the rotation axis of Uranus is highly inclined to the ecliptic (97.9◦), making theorientation of the Uranusian system a puzzle for Solar System dynamicists.Neptune’s TritonThe last and one of the most unusual moons visited by V oyager 2 was Neptune’s largestmoon,Triton(Fig. 19). With a surface temperature of 37 K, it is also the coldest worldyet visited. The moon’s southern pole is covered with a pinkish frost that is composedalmost entirely of nitrogen. Along with the nitrogen frost, other surface ices include CH4,CO, and CO2. Also present are very large“frozen lakes”of water-ice that show very littlecratering, indicative of a relatively young age. The water-ice may have erupted from icevolcanos.During the V oyager 2ﬂyby, geyser-like jets were detected forcing plumes of gas 8 km upinto Triton’s tenuous atmosphere, where the plumes were blown down-wind. These plumesmay simply be gas rising from a warm source inside the planet, but how they are initiatedremains unclear.The atmosphere of Triton is composed predominantly of nitrogen, like the atmospheres ofEarth, Titan, and Pluto. However, unlike Earth and Titan, Triton’s atmosphere is extremelythin, with a pressure of only 1.6×10−5atm. Much of the atmosphere may be a consequenceof the jets of nitrogen gas erupting from the interior of the moon.
(a)(b)
FIGURE 19(a) The southern polar ice cap of Triton, Neptune’s largest moon. The dark streaksappear to be a mixture of nitrogen frost and hydrocarbons that was ejected from small volcanos. (b) Awater-ice lake that may have been produced by an ice volcano. Given the lack of signiﬁcant cratering,the surface appears to have been refreshed relatively recently. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 884>>>

◦widely believed that Triton was captured by Neptune. It is also likely that when the relativelymassive Triton was captured, it signiﬁcantly disrupted Neptune’s already-existing systemof much smaller satellites. Perhaps the tidal effects that resulted in the moon’s present-daycircularized and synchronous orbit could have produced sufﬁcient internal heating to causefaulting and its cantaloupe-like terrain.3PLANETARY RING SYSTEMSEach of the giant planets contains a ring system. Although Saturn’s prominent rings wereﬁrst seen several hundred years ago, the rings of the other planets weren’t discovered untilthe 1970s and 1980s. As we will learn, there are certainly some similarities among the ringsystems, but there are signiﬁcant differences as well.The Structure of Saturn’s RingsArguably, the most well-known feature of the Saturnian system is its spectacular set ofrings, seen in Fig. 1(b). Based on observations made from Earth, several fairly distinctrings have long been known to exist, labeled (from the outside in) A, B, and C. Between theprominent A and B rings, theCassini divisionwas thought to be virtually devoid of ringmaterial. Another empty region, called theEncke gap, was observed within the A ring.After the planet was visited by the V oyager spacecraft, other rings were discovered.The two spacecraft also revealed previously unexpected complexity in the system. As canbe seen in Fig. 20(b), instead of large, almost continuous rings, thousands ofringletswere discovered; even the Cassini division has a number of rings lying in it, although thenumber density of the particles is much lower than in the neighboring regions. The F ringproved to be particularly perplexing because it is very narrow and appears to be braided[Fig. 21(a)].ripples in the disk gives the rings the appearance of being about 1 km thick. Because of thethinness of the disk, when it is viewed perpendicular to the plane, the optical depth of thering system ranges from about 0.1 to 2. It is actually possible to see through the rings inmany locations.When Galileo observed Saturn in 1612 (some two years after his initial observations),he was surprised to discover that the protrusions that he had seen earlier had apparentlyvanished! We now know that during his later set of observations, Galileo was viewing therings edge-on, making them undetectable from Earth.The reason the rings are so thin is easily understood by considering what happens toparticles that undergo partially inelastic collisions, as shown in Fig. 22. Imagine twoparticles circling Saturn in the same direction but in orbits that are slightly tilted with respectto each other. If the two particles should collide, thex-components of their velocities wouldThe Realms of the Giant PlanetsTriton’s slowly decaying retrograde orbit. Given its highly unusual orbit, both  retrograde and inclined to Neptune’s equator by 20, its proximity to the Kuiper Belt, and physical properties similar to other Kuiper Belt objects (such as Pluto), it is
The positions of the various rings and the Cassini division are given in  Table  4; also included is the estimate of Saturn’s Roche limit for a satellite of density 1200 kg m−3. The rings extend out as far as 8 RS from Saturn, while the disk of the rings is very thin, perhaps only a few tens of meters thick. The presence of vertical


<<<PAGE 885>>>

(a)(b)
(c)(d)FIGURE 20(a) Jupiter’s very thin ring. (b) A close-up of Saturn’s rings. Even the dark Cassinidivision is not entirely empty. (c) The rings of Uranus. Because the moving spacecraft was focusedon the ring system, the background stars appear as streaks in the image. (d) Neptune was masked tobring out its faint ring system. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.)be largely unaffected, but the collision would decrease theiry-components. The processdiminishes the thickness of the disk until other effects start to become important, such asrandom collisions with incoming particles and perturbations from moons.The Composition of Saturn’s RingsMost of the particles that make up the rings are quite small, with the majority havingdiameters that range from a few centimeters to several meters, although it seems likelythat at least some particles with diameters as small as a few micrometers or as large asone kilometer may exist in the system. Size estimates are derived from several piecesof evidence, including the rate at which particles cool off in Saturn’s shadow and howefﬁciently they reﬂect radar signals of various wavelengths.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 886>>>

(a)(b)1986U8
1986U8
FIGURE21(a)Saturn’sbraidedFring.(b)Twosmall“shepherd”moonsorbitingjustinsideandoutsideoftheϵringofUranus.(CourtesyofNASA/JPL.)TABLE4ThePositionsofSaturn’sRingFeatures.FeaturePosition(RS)DRing1.00–1.21CRing1.21–1.53BRing1.53–1.95CassiniDivision1.95–2.03ARing2.03–2.26RocheLimit2.04FRing2.33GRing2.8ERing3–8
xy
FIGURE 22The collisions between particles help to keep the rings of Saturn very thin.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 887>>>

It has been known for some time that the material in the Saturnian rings is highly reﬂective(the rings have albedos in the range 0.2–0.6).Albedo measurements, combined with infraredspectroscopy, provide information about the composition of ring material. It appears thatthe particles of most of the rings are primarily water-ice, with some dust embedded in themor covering their surfaces. However, the very extended and thin E ring may be composedentirely of dust that is originating from the nearby moon, Enceladus.Jupiter’s Tenuous Ring SystemJupiter’s very tenuous ring system [see Fig. 20(a)] has a characteristic optical depth ofroughly 10−6. Three components have been seen: the innermosttoroidal halo, themainring, and the outermostgossamerring. Taken together they stretch from near Jupiter toabout 3 RJ. It is believed that the ring material is primarily dust that is constantly resuppliedby collisions of micrometeorites with larger objects (tiny moons) in the rings.The Rings of UranusThe rings of Uranus and Neptune [Figs. 20(c) and (d)] wereﬁrst detected indirectlyfrom Earth and later photographed by V oyager 2. On March 10, 1977, astronomers wereobserving theoccultationof a background star (Uranus passing in front of the star). Theywere trying to measure the diameter of Uranus, as well as to gather some informationabout its atmosphere. Knowing the speed of the planet and the amount of time the star washidden, they could determine the planet’s diameter. Quite unexpectedly, the starlight fadedand brightened several times before actually being occulted by the planet. When the starreappeared, the pattern of alternating fading and brightening was repeated, but in reverseorder. The astronomers realized that rings were blocking out the star’s light. The sameprocedure was used for Neptune but led to confusing results. In some cases the starlightwas blocked on only one side of the planet, leading to the suggestion that only incompleterings (or arcs) exist around Neptune.A total of thirteen rings have been detected around Uranus, nine from the ground, twomore by V oyager 2 in 1986, and another two by the Hubble Space Telescope in 2004. Allof the rings are remarkably narrow, ranging in width from 10 km to 100 km (not unlikethe F ring of Saturn), with some of the rings also showing signs of being braided. The twodetected using the HST have diameters that are much greater than the other eleven rings,leading some researchers to refer to them as a second Uranian ring system.The composition of the Uranian rings appears to be very different from that of eitherJupiter or Saturn. Reﬂecting only about 1% of the incident sunlight, the ring material isextremely dark. This is because the rings are composed largely of dust, rather than ice.Curiously, as mentioned in the previous section, the rings and moons of Uranus lie inthe planet’s equatorial plane and not along the ecliptic. Recalling that the rotation axis ofUranus is tilted 97.9◦with respect to the ecliptic, this implies that the orientation of theorbits of the rings and moons changed after one or more catastrophic impacts dramaticallyshifted Uranus’s axis (if indeed impacts were responsible). Apparently Uranus’s rotation-ally produced equatorial bulge gravitationally affected its satellites and ring material, ulti-mately reorienting their orbits until the moons and rings were once again aligned withthe planet’s equator. Similarly, Saturn’s rings are also aligned with its equator, despite theplanet’s equatorial plane being tilted almost 27◦to its orbital plane.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 888>>>

Neptune’s RingsWhen it reached Neptune, V oyager 2 also found rings orbiting that planet. Like the ringsof Uranus, several of the six identiﬁed rings are quite narrow, while the others appear tobe diffuse sheets of dust. Oddly, the outermost ring, known as Adams, hasﬁve discreteregions of concentrated material, like sausages on a string. It was these concentrations thatwere responsible for the arcs that were deduced from occultations.Physical Processes Affecting Ring SystemsThe spectacular observations of the V oyagers, Galileo, and Cassini have shown us that thedynamics of ring systems are quite complex. Not all of the features are as yet understood,but many important components have been identiﬁed:•Collisionshave already been mentioned as the process that maintains the thinness ofthe rings.•Keplerian shear(or diffusion) spreads the rings out in the system’s plane. As morerapidly moving particles in slightly lower orbits overtake more slowly moving parti-cles farther out, collisions between them cause the inner particles to slow somewhat,and they drift closer to the planet.At the same time, the outer particles are accelerated,moving them outward. The process stops when the density of ring particles becomesso low that collisions effectively cease.•Shepherd moonsare small moons that reside in or near the edge of the rings, con-trolling the location of ring boundaries via their gravitational interactions. The nar-rowness of the F ring of Saturn [recall Fig. 21(a)] was understood when the twomoons Pandora and Prometheus were discovered to be orbiting just outside and in-side the ring, respectively. As the more rapidly moving ring particles pass Pandora,the moon’s gravitational pull slows them down, causing the particles to drift inward.When Prometheus overtakes the ring particles, it pulls them forward, speeding themup and causing them to move outward. As a result, the F ring is conﬁned to a narrowregion just 100 km wide. Another shepherd moon (Atlas) deﬁnes the sharp outer edgeof the A ring. Shepherd moons have also been discovered guiding one of the rings ofUranus; see Fig. 21(b).•Orbital resonancesbetween moons and ring particles in speciﬁc orbits can act todeplete or enhance particle concentrations. (It is also necessary that the orbital planeof the moon align with the ring plane.) For instance, there exists a 2:1 orbital res-onance between Mimas and particles at the inner edge of the Cassini division. Inother words, a particle in that location orbits twice for every orbit of Mimas. Sincean inferior conjunction of such a particle with Mimas always occurs at the same po-sition, gravitational perturbations of the particle’s orbit produced by Mimas becomecumulative, implying that the moon tends to force the particle into an elliptical orbit.The Adams ring, along with the Leverrier and Galle rings, were named for the mathematical and observationaldiscoverers of Neptune.9
9The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 889>>>

As the particle begins to cross the more circular orbits of particles at other radii, col-lisions become more likely. The outcome is that the particle has been removed fromits original orbit and relocated in another part of the system.•Spiral density waves,ﬁrst proposed by Peter Goldreich and Scott Tremaine in thelate 1970s, are set up by moons as a consequence of orbital resonance. Gravitationalperturbations can cause particles at different orbital radii to bunch up, effectivelyincreasing their gravitational inﬂuence on other nearby particles in the disk. Thoseneighboring particles in turn are drawn toward the increase in density, extending theenhancement. If the moon responsible for the resonance is beyond the edge of thedisk, the wave of density enhancement spirals outward. Since the density is largerin the wave, the probability of collision increases. Keplerian shear then causes thenumber density of particles near resonance orbits to decrease. This process helpsexplain the width of the Cassini division.10•The Poynting–Robertson effect(a consequence of the headlight effectcancauseringparticlestospiralintowardtheplanet.Whenparticlesintheringsabsorbsunlight,theymustre-radiatethatenergyagainiftheyaretoremainin thermal equilibrium. The original light was emitted from the Sun isotropically, butin the Sun’s rest frame the re-radiated light is concentrated in the direction of motionof the particle. Since the re-radiated light carries away momentum as well as energy,the particle slows down and its orbit decays.•Plasma dragis a consequence of the collisions of ring particles with charged particlestrapped in the planet’s magneticﬁeld. Since the magneticﬁeld is anchored inside theplanet, it must revolve with the rotation period of the planet. If the ring particles areinside the planet’s synchronous orbit (as most rings are), the particles will overtakethe magneticﬁeld plasma, and collisions will slow the particles down. The particleswill then spiral in toward the planet, just as with the Poynting–Robertson effect. Ifthe ring particles are outside the synchronous orbit, they will spiral outward.•Atmospheric dragoccurs as particles approach the outer reaches of the planet’satmosphere. This effect quickly causes the particles to spiral down into the planet.•Radial spokeshave been observed in the rings of Saturn and are attributed to theinteraction of charged dust particles with the planet’s magneticﬁeld. These spokesmove through the ring system with the rotation period of the planet, rather thanwith the orbital period of the rings. It appears that some dust particles acquire a netelectrostatic charge as a result of their frequent collisions with other dust particles.This causes the dust to become trapped in magneticﬁeld lines tens of meters abovethe plane of the rings. Sunlight that is scattered from the suspended particles producesthe observed spokes.10Spiral density waves also play an important role in the structure of spiral galaxies.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 890>>>

•Warpingof the disk is caused by the gravitational inﬂuences of the Sun and theplanet’s moons. If the Sun or the moons are not in exactly the same plane as the ring,particles in the ring are pulled out of the ring plane.Ring FormationThe formation of planetary rings is still not fully understood. A major problem lies in thetimescales involved in maintaining rings against processes that tend to disperse or destroythem. Are rings long-lived or transient phenomena? One idea,ﬁrst suggested by Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) and Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) in the late 1700s, arguesthat rings are nebular in origin; they were formed at the same time that the planets accreted.Since most of Saturn’s rings are composed largely of water-ice, while the rings of Jupiter,Uranus, and Neptune contain primarily nonvolatile substances (silicates and carbon), Saturnmust have cooled more rapidly, before the water could escape. Although this idea couldaccount for the spectacular Saturnian system, while also explaining the composition andgreater sparsity of the rings of the other giant planets, it is difﬁcult to understand how thesystems could be maintained for more than 4.5 billion years.It is also possible that ring systems arise due to tidal forces; if moons were drawn insidethe planet’s Roche limit, or if a comet or meteoroid ventured too close, tidal forces wouldfracture the objects, producing a new ring system. However, tidal disruption should leaveintact rocky fragments as large as tens of kilometers in diameter. Grinding and meteoriticimpacts would eventually break down the remnants, but such processes are extremely slow.On the other hand, loosely packed icy objects, such as comets, may be broken into smallerpieces by tidal disruptions (recall Shoemaker–Levy 9).The discovery of the giant, outermost ring of Uranus by the HST was accompanied bythe discovery of another moon, Mab, in the same orbit as the ring. It seems that when Mabis hit by meteorites, material ejected from the moon replenishes the giant ring, suggestingthat the source for this ring, at least, has been identiﬁed.Clearly, much work remains to be done before we can claim to understand the complex-ities of planetary rings.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBeatty, J. Kelly, Petersen, Carolyn Collins, and Chaikin, Andrew (eds.),The New SolarSystem, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press and Sky Publishing Corporation,Cambridge, MA, 1999.Booth, Nicholas,Exploring the Solar System, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,1996.Goldsmith, Donald, and Owen, Tobias,The Search for Life in the Universe, Third Edition,University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2002.Morrison, David, and Owen, Tobias,The Planetary System, Third Edition,Addison-Wesley,San Francisco, 2003.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 891>>>

Treﬁl, James,Other Worlds: Images of the Cosmos from Earth and Space, National Geo-graphic, Washington, D.C., 1999.TechnicalAsplund, M., Grevesse, N., and Sauval, A. J.,“The Solar Chemical Composition,”CosmicAbundances as Records of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis in Honor of David L.Lambert, Barnes, Thomas G. III, and Bash, Frank N. (eds), Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc Conference Series,336, 25, 2005.Atreya, S. K., Pollack, J. B., and Matthews, M. S. (eds.),Origin and Evolution of Planetaryand Satellite Atmospheres, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 1989.de Pater, Imke, and Lissauer, Jack J.,Planetary Sciences, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Greenberg, Richard, and Brahic,André(eds.),Planetary Rings, University ofArizona Press,Tucson, 1984.Guillot, Tristan,“The Interiors of Giant Planets: Models and Outstanding Questions,”An-nual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences,33, 493, 2005.Houghton, John T.,The Physics of Atmospheres, Third Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2002.Hubbard, W. B., Burrows, A., and Lunine, J. I.,“Theory of Giant Planets,”Annual Reviewof Astronomy and Astrophysics,40, 103, 2002.Kivelson, Margaret G. (ed.),The Solar System: Observations and Interpretations, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1986.Lewis, John S.,Physics and Chemistry of the Solar System, Academic Press, San Diego,1995.Mannings, Vincent, Boss, Alan P., and Russell, Sara S. (eds.),Protostars and Planets, IV,University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2000.Saumon, D., and Guillot, T.,“Shock Compression of Deuterium and the Interiors of Jupiterand Saturn,”The Astrophysical Journal,609, 1170, 2004.Taylor, Stuart Ross,Solar System Evolution, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.The Realms of the Giant Planets


<<<PAGE 892>>>

PROBLEM SET
1Estimate the pressures at the centers of Jupiter and Saturn. Compare your answers to the Sun ’s
central gas pressure.
2Analytic functions can be derived for the pressure and density structure in the interior of Jupiter
if an approximate relationship between pressure and density is assumed. A reasonable choice
for a composition of pure molecular hydrogen is
P (r) =Kρ2(r),
where Kis a constant. This type of analytic model is known as a polytrope.The Realms of the Giant Planets
(a)By substituting the expression for the pressure into the hydrostatic equilibrium equation
can be obtained, namely
(b)Show that the equation is satis ﬁed by
ρ(r) =ρc/parenleftbiggsinkr
kr/parenrightbigg
,
where ρcis the density at the center of the planet and
k≡/parenleftbigg2πG
K/parenrightbigg1/2
.
(c)Taking the average radius of Jupiter to be RJ=6.99×107m and assuming that the density
goes to zero at the surface (i.e., kRJ=π), determine the values of kandK.
(d)Integrate the  equation  below  using the analytical solution for Jupiter ’sdensityasa
ﬁnd an expression for the planet ’s interior mass, Mr, written in
terms of rand ρc.Hint:dP
dr=−GMrρ
r2=−ρg
function of radius to
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 
by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.21d2ρ
dr2+2
rdρ
dr+/parenleftbigg2πG
K/parenrightbigg
ρ=0.
dMr
dr=4πr2ρ,
/integraldisplay
r(sinkr)dr =1
k2sinkr−r
kcoskr.
,.(below) anddifferentiating,showthatasecond-orderdifferentialequationforthedensity


<<<PAGE 893>>>

TABLE 2Gravitational Moments and Moment-of-Inertia Ratios of the Giant Planets.Reis theequatorial radius of the giant planet. (Data from Table 1 of Guillot,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,33, 493, 2005.)MomentsJupiterSaturnJ2(1.4697±0.0001)×10−2(1.6332±0.0010)×10−2J4−(5.84±0.05)×10−4−(9.19±0.40)×10−4J6(0.31±0.20)×10−4(1.04±0.50)×10−4I/MR2e0.2580.220MomentsUranusNeptuneJ2(0.35160±0.00032)×10−2(0.3539±0.0010)×10−2J4−(0.354±0.041)×10−4−(0.28±0.22)×10−4I/MR2e0.2300.241The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem Set(e)Using the boundary condition thatMr=MJat the surface, estimate the planet’s centraldensity. (The value obtained in this problem is lower than the result found from detailednumerical calculations, 1500 kg m−3. One major reason for the difference is that Jupiter’scomposition is not purely molecular hydrogen.)(f)Make separate plots of the density and interior mass as functions of radius.(g)What is the central pressure of your model of Jupiter? (One detailed model gives a valueof 8×1012Nm−2.)3 (a)Assuming spherical symmetry and the density distribution for the polytropic model ofJupiter given in Problem 2b, show that the moment of inertia is given byI=8ρc3π/parenleftbigg1−6π2/parenrightbiggR5J.Hint:Since this analytical model does not assume constant density, you will need tointegrate over concentric rings toﬁnd the moment of inertia about Jupiter’s rotation axis.Recall thatI≡/integraltextvola2dm, wherea=rsinθis the distance from the rotation axis to thering of massdm, anddm=ρ(r)dV=ρ(r)2πar dθ dr.(b)Using the estimated value for the central density of Jupiter obtained in Problem 2e,calculate the planet’s moment-of-inertia ratio.(c)Compare your answer to part (b) with the measured value given in Table 2. What doesthis result say about the true density distribution within the planet relative to the analyticalmodel?
4 (a)Show that Eq. ( 5) follows directly from Eq. ( 3) in cylindrical coordinates for thecaseofatwo-componentmodelplanetwithtwoconstantdensities(seeFig.5).Assumethat the outer component is oblate and the inner component is spherical.I=4π/integraldisplayRpz=0/integraldisplayamax(z)a=0ρ(a,z)adadz,(3)

<<<PAGE 894>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem SetI=8π15R5e/bracketleftbig(1−b)ρenv+f5(ρcore−ρenv)/bracketrightbig.(5)
RpRefReazdm/H9267core/H9267envFIGURE5Amodelofanoblateplanetwithanellipticalcrosssectionthathasasphericalcore.ρenvisthedensityoftheenvelopeandρcoreisthedensityofthecore.Thetransitionbetweenthetwodensitiesoccursatafractionfoftheequatorialradiusoftheplanet.(b)Verify that Eq. ( 5) reduces to the familiar case offor a spherically symmetric planet of constant density.5 (a)Derive an equation for the mass of the core of the two-component planetary model shownin Fig. 5. You should express your answer in terms of the fractional equatorial radius,fRe, and the constant density of the core.Isphere=25MR2
RpRefReazdm/H9267core/H9267envFIGURE5Amodelofanoblateplanetwithanellipticalcrosssectionthathasasphericalcore.ρenvisthedensityoftheenvelopeandρcoreisthedensityofthecore.Thetransitionbetweenthetwodensitiesoccursatafractionfoftheequatorialradiusoftheplanet.I=8π15R5e/bracketleftbig(1−b)ρenv+f5(ρcore−ρenv)/bracketrightbig.(5)


<<<PAGE 895>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem Set(b)Assume that Jupiter has a 10 M⊕core and that the average density of the core is15,000 kg m−3. Determinef, the ratio of the equatorial radius of the planet’s core to theequatorial radius of its surface.(c)What is the average envelope density in this two-component model?(d)Determine the moment-of-inertia ratio (I/MR2e) for this two-component model.(e)Compare your answer in part (d) to the measured value of the moment-of-inertia ratiofor Jupiter given in Table 2. What can you say about the mass distribution of Jupitercompared to the analytical model?TABLE 2Gravitational Moments and Moment-of-Inertia Ratios of the Giant Planets.Reis theequatorial radius of the giant planet. (Data from Table 1 of Guillot,Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.,33, 493, 2005.)MomentsJupiterSaturnJ2(1.4697±0.0001)×10−2(1.6332±0.0010)×10−2J4−(5.84±0.05)×10−4−(9.19±0.40)×10−4J6(0.31±0.20)×10−4(1.04±0.50)×10−4I/MR2e0.2580.220MomentsUranusNeptuneJ2(0.35160±0.00032)×10−2(0.3539±0.0010)×10−2J4−(0.354±0.041)×10−4−(0.28±0.22)×10−4I/MR2e0.2300.2416Estimate the angular diameter of Jupiter’s magnetosphere as viewed from Earth at opposition.Compare your answer with the angular diameter of the full Moon.7Suppose that fragment G of comet Shoemaker–Levy 9 measured 700 m in diameter. If thisfragment had an average density of 200 kg m−3, estimate its kinetic energy just before itentered the planet’s atmosphere. You may assume that it struck the atmosphere with a speedequal to the planet’s escape speed. Express your answer in joules and megatons of TNT(1 MTon=4.2×1015J).8 (a)On thesame scale, plot (1) theﬁrst-order correction term to the gravitational potential ofSaturn as a function ofθ[i.e., theJ2term in Eq. ( 1)], (2) the second-order correctionterm, and (3) the sum of the two terms. (Similar plots for Jupiter are shown in Fig. 4;note that the plots for Jupiter use different scales.) Assume that the observer is a distancer=2Refrom the planet./Phi1(θ)=−GMr/bracketleftBigg1−/parenleftbiggRer/parenrightbigg2J2P2(cosθ)−/parenleftbiggRer/parenrightbigg4J4P4(cosθ)−···/bracketrightBigg,(1)


<<<PAGE 896>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem Set
–5–4–3–2–1012345
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180/H9258 (deg)J2 term (¥10–3)J4 term (¥10–5)J6 term (¥10–7)
FIGURE 4The ﬁrst three higher-order terms in the gravitational potential expansion for Jupiterwhenr=2Re.9 (a)Estimate the amount of energy radiated by Jupiter over the last 4.55 billion years (see.(b)For which angle(s) is the gravitational potential largest? smallest? By what percent dothese values for the gravitational potential deviate from the case of spherical symmetry(the zeroth-order term)?E∼−310GM2R.the equation below(b)Estimate therateof energy output from Jupiter due to gravitational collapse alone, assum-ing that the rate has been constant over its lifetime.(c)Compare your answer for part (b) with the value for theﬂux that was given in the text.What does this say about the rate of energy output in the past? Discuss the implicationsfor the evolution of the Galilean moons.10Estimate the blackbody temperature of Neptune, taking into consideration that one-half of allthe energy radiated by the planet is due to internal energy sources. Compare your answer withthe measured value of 59.3±1.0K .1Assume that all of the ions escaping Io are sulfur ions. Assuming also that this rate has beenconstant over the last 4.55 billion years, estimate the amount of mass lost from the moon sinceits formation. Compare your answer with Io’s present mass (8.932×1022kg).2 (a)Make a rough estimate of the mass contained in Saturn’s rings. Assume that the rings havea constant mass density and that the disk is 30 m thick with an inner radius of 1.5RSandan outer radius of 3 RS(neglect the E ring). Assume also that all of the ring particles arewater-ice spheres of radius 1 cm and that the optical depth of the disk is unity. The densityof the particles is approximately 1000 kg m−3.Hint:Refer to the equation below toestimate thenumber density of water-ice spheres.11ℓ=vtnσvt=1nσ.

<<<PAGE 897>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem Set(b)If all of the material in Saturn’s rings were contained in a sphere having an average densityof 1000 kg m−3, what would the radius of the sphere be? For comparison, the radius andmass of Mimas are 196 km and 4.55×1019kg, respectively, and it has an average densityof 1440 kg m−3.13Carefully sketch the orbits of Mimas and a characteristic Saturnian ring particle that is lockedin a 2:1 orbital resonance with the moon. Show qualitatively that the resonance produces anelliptical orbit.Calculate the position of Saturn’s synchronous orbit. Are any of its rings located outside ofthat radius? If so, which ones?
16A dust grain orbiting the Sun (or in a planetary ring system) absorbs and then re-emits solarradiation. Since the light is radiated from the Sun isotropically and re-emitted by the grainpreferentially in the direction of motion, the particle is decelerated (it loses angular momentum)and spirals in toward the object it is orbiting. This process (known as the Poynting–Robertsoneffect) is just a consequence of the headlight effect(a)If a dust grain orbiting the Sun absorbs 100% of the energy that strikes it and all of theenergy is then re-radiated so that thermal equilibrium is maintained, what is the luminosityof the grain? Assume that the particle’s cross-sectional area isσgand its distance from theSun isr..14
(b)Show that therateat which angular momentum is lost from a grain is given bydLdt=−σg4πr2L⊙mc2L,(6)
(c)Compare your answer in part (b) to the estimated age of the Solar System. Could the Ering be a permanent feature of the Saturnian system without a source to replenish the ring?Note that the small moon Enceladus orbits Saturn in the E ring.wheremandL=mvrare the mass and angular momentum of the grain, respectively, andL⊙is the luminosity of the Sun.Hint:Think of radiated photons as carrying aneffectivemassaway from the grain; the effective mass of a photon is justmγ=Eγ/c2.(a)Beginning with Eq. ( 6), show that the time required for a spherical particle of radiusRand densityρto spiral into Saturn from an initial orbital radiusR0is given bytSaturn=8πρc23L⊙Rr2Sln/parenleftbiggR0RS/parenrightbigg,whereRSis the radius of the planet andrSis its distance from the Sun. Assume that theorbit of the particle is approximately circular at all times and that it is always a constantdistance from the Sun.(b)The E ring is known to contain dust particles having average radii of 1µm. If the densityof the particles is 3000 kg m−3, how long would it take for a typical particle to spiral intothe planet from an initial distance of 5 RS?17The mass and radius of Miranda are 8×1019kg and 236 km, respectively.(a)What is the escape velocity from the surface of Miranda?(b)What would be the speed of a small object freely falling toward Uranus when it crossed theorbit of Miranda? Assume that the object started falling toward Uranus from rest, inﬁnitelyfar from the planet. Neglect any effects due to the orbital motion of the planet around theSun. Miranda’s orbital radius is 1.299×108m.15


<<<PAGE 898>>>

The Realms of the Giant Planets: Problem Set(c)Usingthe belowequation,estimatetheamountofenergyneededtopulverize(d)Suppose that a spherical object with a density of 2000 kg m−3were to collide with Mi-randa, completely destroying it. If the object hit Miranda with the speed found in part (b),what would the object’s radius need to be?Note:For the purposes of this“back-of-the-envelope”calculation, you need not be concerned with the energy that would be expendedin pulverizing the impacting object.Ug∼−16π215Gρ2R5∼−35GM2R.thatmoon. 


<<<PAGE 899>>>



<<<PAGE 900>>>

Minor Bodies of the Solar System1Pluto and Charon2Comets and Kuiper Belt Objects3Asteroids4Meteorites1PLUTO AND CHARONClyde W. Tombaugh (1906–1997) discovered a small 15th-magnitude object orbiting theSun. The new object was classiﬁed as a planet and named Pluto for the Roman god of theunderworld.1It turns out that even though Pluto was discovered near its predicted position,the prediction was invalid because it was founded on statistically insigniﬁcant apparentdeviations in the orbits of the other planets.Pluto is unlike any of the terrestrial or giant planets of the Solar System; in fact, it bearsmuch more resemblance to Neptune’s moon Triton than to any other planets.Its248.5-yearorbitisveryeccentric(e=0.25).Atperihelionitisonly29.7 AU from the Sun (actually closer than Neptune), while it is 49.3 AU away at aphelion.Its orbit is also inclined signiﬁcantly from the ecliptic (17◦).Despite the fact that Pluto is a Neptune-crossing object, it is not in any danger of collid-ing with the giant world. Pluto is protected from that fate by a 3:2 orbital resonance withNeptune. Consequently, Pluto is never near perihelion when it is in conjunction with Nep-tune, and the two planets never get any closer than about 17 AU. Pluto actually approachesUranus more closely, coming within 11 AU.The Discovery of CharonMany of the most basic characteristics of Pluto, such as its mass and radius, were poorlydetermined until its largest moon,Charon, was discovered in 1978.2Figure 1 shows a1The name Pluto was suggested by Venetia Burney, who was then an 11-year-old English schoolgirl.2Prior to the discovery of Charon, Pluto’s radius was uncertain to within a factor of 4, and its mass wasn’t knownto better than a factor of 100.From Chapter 2  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,2The success of the mathematical prediction of Neptune’s position led astronomers to consider the possibility that a ninth planet existed even farther from the Sun. Based on perceived anomalies in the orbits of Uranus and Neptune, the search began in the late nineteenth century. Finally, on February 18, 1930, after a systematic and tedious search,


<<<PAGE 901>>>

FIGURE 1Pluto and its three moons. Charon was discovered in 1978, and the other two moonswere detected by the Hubble Space Telescope’s Advanced Camera for Surveys in 2005. [Courtesyof NASA, ESA, H. Weaver (JHU/APL), A. Stern (SwRI), and the Hubble Space Telescope PlutoCompanion Search Team.]Hubble Space Telescope image of the Pluto system. Pluto and Charon orbit the system’scenter of mass in 6.39 d with a separation of only 1.964×107m (just slightly more than1/20 of the distance between Earth and the Moon). Using Kepler’s third law, the combinedmass of the system is only 0.00247 M⊕. Of course, to determine each mass individuallyrequires knowledge of the ratio of their separations from the system’s center of mass, whichyields a mass ratio ofMCharon/MPluto=0.124. From these data, the mass of Pluto has beenestimated to be 1.3×1022kg, and Charon’s mass is roughly 1.6×1021kg; for comparison,Triton’s mass is 2.14×1022kg.The Densities and Compositions of Pluto and CharonShortly after the discovery of Charon, astronomers realized that a rareeclipse seasonwouldoccur between 1985 and 1990. Since the orbital plane of the Pluto–Charon system is inclined122.5◦to their orbit around the Sun, observers on Earth see the system edge-on only forbrief intervals once every 124 years. Fortuitously, Pluto was also at perihelion in 1989. Thenext eclipse season will not occur until the twenty-second century.The duration of the occultations provided the information necessary to determine theradius of Charon. Pluto’s radius has been determined to be 1137 km, making it only abouttwo-thirds the size of our Moon, but the occultation data indicate that Charon’s radius isabout 600 km. This means that Pluto’s average density is about 2110 kg m−3and Charon’sdensity is roughly 1770 kg m−3. These data seem to indicate that Pluto and Charon areprobably made of frozen ices and rock, with Pluto having a somewhat higher proportionof rock than the majority of the moons of the giant planets. The best map of the surface ofPluto obtained to date is shown in Fig. 2.It is worth noting that Triton’s density is 2050 kg m−3, very similar to that of Pluto.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 902>>>

FIGURE 2The surface of Pluto as seen by the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994. 85% of thesurface is represented; the south polar region was pointed away from Earth when the map wasconstructed. The observed features may be basins and craters, or perhaps frost from various ices.[Courtesy of Alan Stern (Southwest Research Institute), Marc Buie (Lowell Observatory), NASA,and ESA.]The Possible Formation of Charon by a Large ImpactWith a mass that is almost 1/8 that of Pluto, Charon is proportionately the most massivemoon in the Solar System relative to its parent planet.3It appears that Charon must haveformed as a result of a large impact on Pluto, similar to the way scientists believe our Moonformed around Earth.It is also possible that the two moons discovered in2005areadditionalproductsofthatcollision.Theimpactorprobablyhadamassofbetween0.2 and 1 MPluto.Complete Spin–Orbit Couplingworlds have resulted in the ﬁnal state of lowest energy. Because they are fully locked, thetidal forces do not produce the constantly changing bulges seen in other systems, suchas Earth’s tidal bulges produced by the Moon. Therefore, the frictional heat losses andangular momentum transfer in operation elsewhere have now ceased for the Pluto–Charoninteraction.A necessary consequence of the locked, synchronous orbit is that Charon is locateddirectly over Pluto’s equator. If this weren’t the case, the orbital motion would carry Charonalternately north and south of Pluto’s equator, and any deviation from spherical symmetrybetween the two worlds would result in constantly changing tidal forces. Since the orbital3Our Moon, which is the second-largest satellite in the Solar System relative to its parent planet, contains onlyabout 1/81 the mass of Earth.Minor Bodies of the Solar System
Pluto and Charon also have another interesting dynamical characteristic:Both ob-jects have rotation periods that are exactly the same as their orbital period about their mutual center of mass. Since they spin in the same direction as their orbital mo-tion, Pluto and Charon keep the same faces toward each other at all times; they are completely locked in a synchronous orbit. The tidal forces between these two small


<<<PAGE 903>>>

plane of the system is inclined 122.5◦to its orbit around the Sun, this implies that bothA Frozen Surface and a Changing AtmosphereIn 1992 Tobias C. Owen and collaborators used the United Kingdom Infrared Telescopeon Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to carry out a spectroscopic study of Pluto’s surface. Their workrevealed that the surface is covered with frozen nitrogen (N2), which constitutes some 97%of the total area, with carbon monoxide ice (CO) and methane ice (CH4) each accounting for1% to 2%, similar to the surface of Triton. Oddly, Charon’s surface appears to be composedprimarily of water-ice; no molecular nitrogen, carbon monoxide, or methane ices or gaseshave been detected on Charon.When Pluto occulted a faint star in 1988, a very tenuous atmosphere was detected,with a surface pressure of about 10−5atm. The atmosphere is dominated by N2, with CH4and CO probably making up roughly 0.2% of the total by number, consistent with thecomposition of the surface ice and the rate of sublimation of the various species. Curiously,when Pluto occulted another star in 2002, measurements of the pressure and scale heightof the atmosphere had doubled, implying that Pluto’s atmosphere had become signiﬁcantlythicker over the 14-year period.It has been suggested that the atmosphere of this tiny, distant world is not permanent. The1988 observation of its atmosphere was made near perihelion when the planet’s temperaturewas near its maximum value of approximately 40 K. At this temperature, ices on the surfaceare able to undergo partial sublimation. The atmosphere apparently thickened between1988 and 2002 because ices continued to sublimate, releasing additional gases into theatmosphere. However, as the planet moves back toward aphelion, the atmosphere willprobably “freeze out” again.A Rendezvous with PlutoIn January 2006, NASA launched theNew Horizonsﬂyby mission. If all goes accordingto plan, New Horizons will pass near Pluto in 2015, giving us the ﬁrst close-up look atthis tiny, distant planet and its moons. Whether Pluto will still have an atmosphere at thetime of the ﬂyby is one of the many interesting questions waiting to be answered about thisTrans-Neptunian quadruple system.2COMETS AND KUIPER BELT OBJECTSorbital period is 76 years).4Because of their unusual appearance when near perihelion, bright4This famous comet has probably been making its periodic tours of the inner Solar System for 23,000 years, butit was Edmond Halley who ﬁrst realized that these were repeated observations of the same object. The proof ofhis hypothesis was accomplished with the aid of Newton and his newly developed mechanics.Minor Bodies of the Solar SystemPluto and Charon rotate retrograde. Uranus also rotates retrograde and that its ring sys-tem and regular satellites are located directly over its equator; that orientation has also been attributed to tidal forces.
Comets such as Comet Mrkos and Comet Halley [Fig.  3(a)], have been observed frequently throughout history. In fact, the periodic visits of Comet Halley have been  recorded during each passage through the inner Solar System since at least 240 B.c. (its


<<<PAGE 904>>>

(a)(b)Nucleus(104 m)Coma(109 m)To SunComet’s motionHydrogenhalo(1010 m)IontailDusttail
FIGURE 3(a) Comet Halley clearly exhibited both a dust tail (curved) and an ion tail (straight)during its most recent trip through the inner Solar System. This image was obtained by the Michi-gan Schmidt telescope at Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory on April 12, 1986. Visible is adetachment event occurring in the ion tail. (Courtesy of NASA/JPL.) (b) The anatomy of a comet.comets have long been associated with mystery and forces beyond human comprehension.While many people believed that comets foretold coming evils, others considered themmessengers of good news. The artist Giotto di Bondone (1266–1337) depicted the “Star ofBethlehem” as a comet in his workAdoration of the Magi, which adorns the interior of theScrovegni Chapel in Padua, Italy (Fig. 4). The painting dates from 1303, just two yearsafter Comet Halley had last appeared.A Model of a CometIn 1950 Fred L. Whipple (1906–2004) proposed a model of comets that successfully ex-plained most of their physical characteristics, including the development oftailswhen theyenter the inner Solar System; see Fig. 3(b). He suggested that a “dirty snowball,” roughly10 km across, lies at the center of the comet. This dirty snowball constitutes the comet’snucleus. The nucleus is composed of ices and embedded dust grains. As the nucleus movesfrom the cold environment of the outer Solar System into the warmer regions near the Sun,the ices begin to sublimate. The released dust and gas then expand outward to produce a109-m cloud of gas and dust known as thecoma. Subsequently, the material in the comainteracts with the sunlight and solar wind, producing the very long, familiar tails (up to1 AU in length) that are always associated with our images of comets. We now know thata hydrogen gashalo(or envelope) also surrounds the coma and can have a diameter of1010m. When the comet leaves the inner Solar System, the temperature decreases sufﬁ-ciently that the rate of sublimation diminishes signiﬁcantly and the halo, coma, and tailsdisappear. Cometary activity does not stop entirely, however; small outbursts can occurfrom time to time as heat from the Sun travels inward through the nucleus, releasing highlyvolatile gases.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 905>>>

FIGURE 4Adoration of the Magi, by Giotto di Bondone (1266–1337). The painting adorns theinterior of the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua, Italy. Work on the painting began two years after the 1301appearance of Comet Halley.The Dynamics of Comet TailsComet tails are always directed away from the Sun, as depicted in Fig. 5. Two independentmechanisms are responsible for the structure of the tails: radiation pressure on the liberateddust grains, and the interaction of ions with the solar wind and the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld.First consider the effect of radiation pressure on grains. For anidealizedspherical dustgrain of radiusRthat is located a distancerfrom the Sun and that absorbs all of the incidentlight that strikes it, the following equation can be used to calculate the outward forceThe factor of cosθmeans that the grain’s cross-sectional areaσ=πR2shouldbe used in calculating the force. In other words, for the case of complete absorption thesame force would be exerted if the grain were replaced by a circular disk with an identicalradius, oriented perpendicular to the light. Using⟨S⟩=L⊙/4πr2for the magnitude of thetime-averaged Poynting vector, the force on the grain due to radiation pressure isFrad=⟨S⟩σc=L⊙4πr2πR2c.(1)Of course the Sun’s gravity is also acting on the grain. If the density of the grain isρ, itsmass ismgrain=43πR3ρof radiation pressure on the grain:Frad=⟨S⟩Accosθ(absorption),Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 906>>>

Comet’s orbitSun
Dust tailIon tailDust tailIon tailIon tailDust tail
FIGURE 5The curved dust tail and the straight ion tail are always directed away from the Sun.and the magnitude of the gravitational force acting on it is given byFg=GM⊙mgrainr2=4πGM⊙ρR33r2,whereFgis directed inward toward the star. Now, the ratio of the magnitudes of these forcesisFgFrad=16πGM⊙Rρc3L⊙.(2)Because both gravity and light obey an inverse square law, this ratio does not depend onthe distancerfrom the Sun.The magnitudes of the gravitational and radiation pressure forces on a cometary dustgrain will be equal if the radiusRof the grain has the critical valueRcrit=3L⊙16πGM⊙ρc.(3)GrainssmallerthanRcritwill experience a net outward force and will spiral away from theSun. The curvature of the dust tail arises because of the decrease in the orbital speeds of thegrains with increasing distance from the Sun. For a typical density ofρ=3000 kg m−3,the critical radius of the dust grain is found to beRcrit=1.91×10−7m=191 nm.Minor Bodies of the Solar System
Grains larger than Rcrit w i l l  c o n t i n u e  t o  o r b i t  t h e  S u n .  H o w e v e r ,  a  c o m p e t-ing process, the Poynting–Robertson effect, causes larger grains to spiral slow-ly in toward the Sun. The time required for a spherical particle of radius R a n d


<<<PAGE 907>>>

densityρto spiral into the Sun from an initial orbital radiusris given by5tSun=4πρc23L⊙Rr2.(4)BecauseRcritis comparable to the wavelengthsλof light emitted by the star, the actualsituation is more complicated than this simple analysis suggests. The smallest grains (R≪λ) are inefﬁcient absorbers of light and have absorption cross sections that are much smallerthanπR2. Furthermore, the dust grains will scatter some of the incident light rather thanabsorb it. The effect of scattering on the radiation pressure force depends on the compositionand geometry of the dust grains and on the wavelength of the light.The Compositions of CometsIt is the scattering of light that gives dust tails their white or yellowish appearance. On theother hand, the color of an ion tail is blue because CO+ions absorb and reradiate solarphotons at wavelengths near 420 nm. However, CO+is certainly not the only species iden-tiﬁed in comets. To date, a rich variety of atoms, molecules, and ions have been discoveredspectroscopically, including some molecules that are quite complex. During its 1986 peri-helion passage, the inner coma of Comet Halley was found to contain roughly (by number)80% H2O, 10% CO, 3.5% CO2, a few percent(H2CO)n(polymerized formaldehyde), 1%methanol (CH3OH), and traces of other compounds. A partial list of chemical species thathave been found in comets is given in Table 1.Disconnection EventsThe straight ion (or plasma) tail owes its structure to a complex interaction among thecomet, the solar wind, and the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld.6Since the comet is an obstruction inthe path of the solar wind and because the relative speed of the solar wind and the cometcomet encounters a reversal in the solar magnetic ﬁeld (the boundary between magneticﬁeld directions is known as asector boundary). During a disconnection event, the ion tailbreaks away and a new one forms in its place. Disconnection events are quite common andare evident in the image of Halley’s comet in Fig. 3(a), as well as in the time sequenceof Comet Hyakutake in March 1996 (Fig. 6).Robotic Investigations of CometsWhipple’s dirty-snowball hypothesis was dramatically veriﬁed in March 1986, when an in-ternational armada of spacecraft rendezvoused with Comet Halley. The ﬂeet was made up of56The model of a cometarymagnetotailwas ﬁrst proposed by Hannes Alfvén in 1957.The Poynting–Robertson effect is also important in understanding the dynamics of Saturn’s rings.Minor Bodies of the Solar System
exceeds both the local sound speed and the Alfvén speed, a shock front develops in the direction of motion. As matter piles up at this bow shock, ions in the coma get trapped in the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld, loading the ﬁeld down. This causes the magnet-ic ﬁeld to wrap around the nucleus. The cometary ions circle the ﬁeld lines and trail behind the nucleus in the antisolar direction. A disconnection event occurs when the


<<<PAGE 908>>>

TABLE 1A Partial List of Chemical Species Found in Comets. Various isotopomers have alsobeen detected, such as HDO (deuterium replacing one of the hydrogen atoms in H2O).Atoms Molecules IonsH CH H+CC2C+O CN Ca+Na CO CH+Mg CS CN+Al NH CO+Si N2N+2S OH OH+KS2H2O+Ca H2OH2S+Ti HCH CO+2V HCN H3O+Cr HCO H3S+Mn NH2CH3OH+2Fe C3Co OCSNi H2COCu H2CSNH3NH4CH3OHCH3CN(H2CO)ntwo spacecraft from Japan (SuiseiandSakigake), two from the former Soviet Union(Vega 1andVega 2), one from the European Space Agency (Giotto, named for the twelfth-On March 6 and 9, from distances of 8900 km and 8000 km, respectively, Vega 1 andVega 2 were able to obtain low-resolution pictures of the nucleus of the comet. Relayingthe Vega telemetry data to the European Space Agency, the Giotto scientists were then ableto guide their spacecraft to an even closer encounter. As a direct result of extraordinaryThe two Soviet missions traveled to Venus ﬁrst, releasing probes into its atmosphere.ICE was originally named theInternational Sun–Earth Explorer 3when it was launched in 1978. After manyyears on another mission, the spacecraft was reassigned to investigate the two comets.7
78Minor Bodies of the Solar System
century Italian painter), and one from the United States (the International Cometary Explorer, which ﬂew past Comet Giacobini–Zinner six months earlier)8. A number of spacecraft that were already ﬂying other missions temporarily trained their instruments on the comet as well, even though they did not actually go out and meet the famous  visitor.


<<<PAGE 909>>>

FIGURE 6A spectacular example of a disconnection event in the March 25 image of thissequence of images of Comet Hyakutake in 1996. (©Shigemi Numazawa/Atlas Photo Bank/PhotoResearchers, Inc.)international cooperation, Giotto came within 596 km of the nucleus on March 14 (themission goal was 540 km).Because of the high relative velocity of Giotto and Halley (68.4k ms−1), even a collisionwith a small dust grain from the nucleus could cause serious damage to the spacecraft.Therefore, to protect the instruments on board, Giotto was equipped with a 50-kg shieldmade of aluminum and plastic Kevlar. Despite these precautions, just seven seconds beforeits closest approach to the nucleus, a dust particle struck the spacecraft off-axis, causing itto wobble severely. Stability was restored again one-half hour later.Near its closest approach, the Giotto camera recorded the image of the nucleus seen inFig. 7. The size of Whipple’s dirty snowball is approximately 15 km×7.2k m×7.2k m ,and it is shaped roughly like a potato. The surface is extremely dark, with an albedo ofbetween 0.02 and 0.04. Repeated trips near the Sun have apparently left behind a layer ofdust and possibly organic material as the ices evaporated away.Visible in Fig. 7 are dust jets (ejected streams of material) located on the Sunwardside of the nucleus. The positions of the jets probably correspond to thin regions in thedark covering on the surface through which trapped, heated gases in the interior are able toescape.As the nucleus rotates, other surfaces are exposed to the Sun, and new jets develop.10“The Halley Encounters,” by Rüdeger Reinhard, inThe New Solar System, Third Edition, Beatty and Chaikin(eds.), Cambridge University Press and Sky Publishing Corporation, Cambridge, MA, 1990, pp. 207–216, offersa fascinating recounting of the ﬂybys.10The nucleus of Comet Halley appears to have two rotation periods (2.2 days and 7.4 days) corresponding tomotions about different axes of this irregularly shaped object.9
9Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 910>>>

FIGURE 7The nucleus of Comet Halley as seen by the Giotto spacecraft. Evident are jets ofgases on the sunward side of the nucleus. (Image from Reitsema et al.,20th ESLAB Symp.,ESASP-250,Vol. II, 351, 1986.)It has been estimated that during the ﬂybys, jets were present on 15% of the surface, with gasand dust discharge rates of approximately 2×104kg s−1and 5×103kg s−1, respectively.Because of the reaction forces produced by the jets, comets tend to have slightly erraticorbits.By considering these nongravitational perturbations to its orbit, the mass of CometHalley’s nucleus has been estimated at between 5×1013kg and 1014kg. If these crudeestimates turn out to be correct, the average density of the nucleus is less than 1000 kg m−3and may be as low as 100 kg m−3. It is likely that gases and dust escaping from the icybody have left a porous, honeycomb structure inside the nucleus with an average densityclosetothatofnew-fallensnow.(Jupiteralsoappeartohavebeenverylooselypacked,withdensitiesofabout600kgm−3.)The passage of the International Cometary Explorer through the tail of Comet Giacobini–Zinner and the extensive international collaboration to rendezvous with Comet Halley werethe ﬁrst two of several missions to comets that have occurred since the mid-1980s. In 2001the experimental ion-propulsion spacecraftDeep Space 1obtained images of the 10-km-long nucleus of Comet Borrelly from a vantage point of 2200 km. In addition, on January 2,2004,Stardustpassed within 250 km of Comet Wild 2, obtaining high-resolution images ofthe surface. Stardust also captured dust from the comet and, on January 15, 2006, returnedthe dust to Earth for analysis.A very dramatic encounter occurred on July 4, 2005, whenDeep Impactsent a 370-kgimpactor into Comet Tempel 1, a 7.6 km by 4.9 km object, at a speed of 10.2k ms−1. Imagesof Comet Tempel 1 obtained by Deep Impact are shown in Fig. 8. The impactor createdTheShoemaker–Levy9fragmentsthathitMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 911>>>

(a)(b)
(c)FIGURE 8(a) Comet Tempel 1 seen from Deep Impact ﬁve minutes before the impactor struckthe comet. The nucleus measures 5 km by 11 km. (b) 67 seconds after impact. (c) The surface ofTempel 1, 20 seconds before impact. The image was obtained by the impactor’s targeting sensor.Features as small as 4 m can be identiﬁed. (NASA/JPL-Caltech/UMD.)a crater in the comet’s nucleus that allowed scientists to study the interior. Analysis of thedata identiﬁed a variety of compounds, including water, carbon dioxide, hydrogen cyanide,methyl cyanide, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and other organic molecules,as well as minerals such as olivine, calcite, iron sulﬁte, and aluminum oxide. The 107kgof material excavated from the near surface of the comet has the consistency of a very ﬁnesand, or perhaps even the consistency of talcum powder. It also seems that the comet’sdensity is roughly that of powder snow, loosely held together by its weak gravity. With amass of 7.2×1013kg, Tempel 1 has a density of only 600 kg m−3. The low density suggeststhat Tempel 1 may be a very porous rubble pile.In the future, ESA’sRosettaspacecraft, which was launched in 2004, is scheduled torendezvous with Comet Churyumov–Gerasimenko in 2014 and then spend almost two yearsMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 912>>>

carefully studying the comet from a low orbit around the nucleus. The mission will also landa probe on the surface of the comet. During its extended tour, Rosetta will ﬂy alongside thecomet as it moves into the inner Solar System, is heated by the Sun, and begins releasingtrapped volatiles from its interior. Among other goals, this exhaustive study may help us todetermine whether or not the “seeding” of Earth with cometary organic material may havehelped life develop on our planet.Sun-Grazing CometsWhile many comets that venture into the inner Solar System suffer relatively small amountsof sublimation near perihelion compared with their masses, other comets may experiencemore severe consequences. For instance, when Comet West moved through the inner SolarSystem in 1976, its nucleus broke into four separate pieces. Comet Kohoutek also split apartin 1974. Perhaps more impressive are theSun-grazing comets. While it has been intenselystudying the Sun, the LASCO instrument onboard the SOHO spacecraft has discoveredmore than 1000 comets that make close approaches to the Sun. In some instances thecomets’ orbits cause them to plunge into the Sun, as occurred with Comet SOHO-6, shownin Fig. 9.The Oort CloudHalley is one example of a class of comets known asshort-period cometswith orbitalperiods of less than 200 years. Short-period comets are found near the ecliptic and return tothe inner Solar System repeatedly. Thelong-period cometshave orbital periods of greaterthan 200 years, and some may take from 100,000 to 1 million years or more to return.In 1950, based on a very careful statistical study of their apparently random orbits, JanOort (1900–1992) concluded that long-period comets originate in a distant distribution ofcometary nuclei now known as theOort cloud. Although the Oort cloud has never been
FIGURE 9An image of Comet SOHO-6 plunging into the Sun (lower left-hand side). The diskof the Sun is covered so that the Sun’s corona and coronal mass ejections can be studied. The imagewas obtained by the LASCO instrument onboard SOHO on December 23, 1996. [SOHO (ESA &NASA).]Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 913>>>

1012–1013members with a total mass on the order of 100 M⊕. For comparison, the neareststars are approximately 275,000 AU away. The inner Oort cloud (3000 AU to 20,000 AU)may be slightly concentrated along the ecliptic, while the outer Oort cloud (20,000 AU to100,000 AU) has a nearly spherical distribution of cometary nuclei.The comets in the Oort cloud probably did not form at their present locations. Instead,they may be ancient planetesimals that coalesced near the ecliptic in the vicinity of Uranusand Neptune. After repeated gravitational interactions with the ice giants, the nuclei werecatapulted out to their current distances. Because these nuclei were so far from the Sun,passing stars and gas clouds ultimately randomized their orbits, resulting in the nearlyspherical distribution that exists in the outer cloud today. With the inner cloud being deeperin the Sun’s gravitational well, these cometary nuclei did not become quite as randomlydistributed. Therefore, comets in the inner Oort cloud were able to retain some history oftheir original locations when the Solar System was young. It is probably the gravitationalperturbations of other stars and gas clouds that cause some of the cometary nuclei to starttheir long falls into the inner Solar System.The Kuiper BeltSince the orbits of short-period comets lie preferentially near the ecliptic, it seems unlikelythat these objects originated in the Oort cloud. Kenneth E. Edgeworth (1880–1972) in 1949and Kuiper in 1951 independently proposed that a second collection of cometary nucleimight be located close to the plane of the ecliptic.In August 1992, 1992 QB1, a 23rd-magnitude object, was discovered by Jane Luu andDavid Jewitt 44 AU from the Sun and having an orbital period of 289 years. Seven monthslater a second 23rd-magnitude object (1993 FW) was discovered at nearly the same distancefrom the Sun.Assuming these objects have albedos characteristic of typical cometary nuclei(3% to 4%), then they must have diameters of approximately 200 km in order to appear asbright as they do. That would make them about one-tenth the size of Pluto. By early 2006,telescopic surveys employing sensitive CCD cameras had resulted in the discovery of morethan 900 similar objects beyond Neptune’s orbit.Now known as theKuiper belt,11this disk of cometary nuclei extends from 30 to 50 AUfrom the Sun; the semimajor axis of Neptune’s orbit is 30 AU. Some members appear tohave particularly eccentric orbits that may reach out to 1000 AU at aphelion, however.Noting their location beyond the outermost ice giant, theseKuiper Belt Objects(KBOs)are sometimes alternatively referred to asTrans-Neptunian Objects(TNOs).A Kuiper Belt Object Larger Than PlutoAs more and more KBOs have been discovered, a number of them have been found tohave diameters somewhat smaller than, but comparable to, that of Pluto (see Table 2).However, in 2005, astronomers Mike Brown (Caltech), Chad Trujillo (Gemini Observatory),and David Rabinowitz (Yale University) announced the discovery of the ﬁrst object in the11In recognition of the independent suggestion of Edgeworth, this collection of objects is sometimes referred toas theEdgeworth–Kuiper belt.Minor Bodies of the Solar Systemobserved, its existence seems certain. The reservoir of nuclei appears to be  located between 3000AUand 100,000AU from the Sun and probably contains


<<<PAGE 914>>>

TABLE 2A List of the Largest Known Kuiper Belt Objects, as of May 2006. Many of thelisted diameters are quite uncertain.Name Diameter (km) Period (yr)a(AU)ei(deg)2003 UB313 2400559 67.89 0.4378 43.99Pluto2274248 39.48 0.2488 17.16Sedna∗1600 12,300 531.7 0.857 11.93Orcus1500247 39.39 0.220 20.6Charon1270248 39.48 0.2488 17.162005 FY9 1250309 45.71 0.155 29.02003 EL61 1200285 43.34 0.189 28.2Quaoar1200287 43.55 0.035 8.0Ixion1070249 39.62 0.241 19.6Varuna900282 42.95 0.052 17.22002 AW197 890326 47.37 0.131 24.4∗Sedna has an orbit that is much larger than the classical Kuiper belt.Kuiper belt known to be larger than Pluto. 2003 UB313 was discovered on January 5, 2005,from data that were collected in a sky survey in 2003. With an orbital period ofP=559 yr,a semimajor axis ofa=68 AU, an orbital eccentricity ofe=0.44, and an inclination withrespect to the ecliptic ofi=44◦, the orbital characteristics of 2003 UB313 are why it tookso long to ﬁnd this large object in the Kuiper belt. Since most surveys looking for KBOshave been focused near the plane of the ecliptic, it was surprising to ﬁnd 2003 UB313 withsuch a large inclination. HST observations indicate that the diameter of 2003 UB313 is2400 km, making it about 6% larger than Pluto. The spectrum of 2003 UB313, shown inFig. 10, is also strikingly similar to Pluto’s, suggesting a surface composition dominatedby frozen methane. A moon has been detected orbiting 2003 UB313 as well.The discovery of 2003 UB313 has rekindled the debate over what ofﬁcially constitutesa planet. Should 2003 UB313 be designated as a planet since it is larger than Pluto? ShouldPluto be removed from the planet classiﬁcation? Interestingly, prior to the discovery of largeKBOs, no formal scientiﬁc deﬁnition of a planet had ever been established; it had more orless been assumed that we will recognize a planet when we see one! At the time of writing,this is an issue that the International Astronomical Union is struggling to resolve. Giventhat society has long come to see Pluto as a planet, the decision may very well be beyondthe formal deﬁnitions of scientists. Whatever the resolution of these questions, it is clearthat in light of the apparent size and composition of 2003 UB313 and many of the otherKBOs, Pluto and Charon are certainly Kuiper belt objects; they just happen to be amongthe largest known members. After all, Pluto and Charon have more in common with verylarge cometary nuclei than with a “typical” planet–moon system. Neptune’s unusual moon,Triton, is probably a captured KBO as well.Classes of Kuiper Belt ObjectsAs the number of known KBOs has continued to grow, it has become evident that theyfall into three different groups based on their orbital characteristics.Classical KBOsareMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 915>>>

2003 UB313Pluto0.51.01.52.0Wavelength (/H9262m)0.80.60.40.20.0Reflectance
FIGURE 10The reﬂection spectrum of 2003 UB313 (individual points) compared to the spec-trum of Pluto (gray line). Absorption features of methane dominate the spectrum. The large pointsare data fromBVRIJHKphotometry. [Courtesy of Mike Brown (Caltech), Chad Trujillo (GeminiObservatory), and David Rabinowitz (Yale University).]those that orbit between 30 and 50 AU from the Sun, most have semimajor axes between 42and 48 AU. The orbital inclinations of classical KBOs tend to be less than 30◦. It has beensuggested that the cutoff of classical KBOs at 50AU may be due to a passing star early in theformation of the Solar System.Scattered KBOshave much higher orbital eccentricitiesthan the classical KBOs and were probably pumped up to those orbits by gravitationalinteractions with the ice giants, most notably Neptune. 2003 UB313 is one example ofa scattered KBO. The perihelion distances of scattered KBOs are characteristically about35AU, and they tend to have greater orbital inclinations than the classical KBOs. In addition,it is likely that the scattered KBOs are at least one source of the short-period comets. Finally,a class ofresonant KBOsexists that have orbital resonances with Neptune. As we noted inSection 1, Pluto is locked in a 3:2 orbital resonance with Neptune that protects it fromever colliding with the ice giant. As a result, Pluto (and Charon) are resonant KBOs. In fact,KBOs that have 3:2 orbital resonances with Neptune are referred to asPlutinos. Orbitalresonances of 4:3, 5:3, and 2:1 have been observed for KBOs as well.CentaursOther fairly large icy bodies have been discovered orbiting the Sun as well. In 1977, anobject known as 2060 Chiron was detected in an orbit that carries it from inside Saturn’sorbit out to the orbit of Uranus. Chiron’s diameter has been estimated to be between 200 kmand 370 km. A slightly smaller object, nicknamed “Son of Chiron” but ofﬁcially called5145 Pholus, has also been seen orbiting among the outer planets, between 8.7 and 32 AU.Originally classiﬁed as an asteroid, Chiron brightened unexpectedly in 1988 and developeda measurable coma. Such behavior deﬁnes this object as a comet rather than a rocky asteroid.Chiron and 5145 Pholus are two examples of a class of objects known asCentaursthatMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 916>>>

Plot prepared by the Minor Planet Center (2005 Sept 8).PlutoNeptuneUranusSunSaturnJupiter
FIGURE 11The positions of known classical and resonant Kuiper belt objects (circles), Centaursand scattered KBOs (triangles), comets (squares), and Trojan asteroids from the orbit of Jupiteroutward on September 8, 2005. The position of each object has been projected onto the plane ofthe ecliptic. Open symbols are objects observed at only one opposition; ﬁlled symbols are objectsthat have been observed at multiple oppositions. For the comets, ﬁlled squares represent numberedperiodic comets; other comets are indicated by open squares. The classical Kuiper belt is clearlyevident beyond the orbit of Neptune. In this orientation, the planets and most of the other objects orbitcounterclockwise, and the vernal equinox is to the right. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of GarethWilliams, Minor Planet Center.)appear to be KBOs which were scattered into the region of the planetary orbits. Centaursmay eventually become short-period comets.Figure 11 shows the locations of KBOs, Centaurs, comets, and Jupiter’s Trojan as-teroids (see Section 3) on September 8, 2005, projected onto the plane of the ecliptic.Because of the projection effect and the very large sizes of the symbols relative to the actualsizes of the objects, the outer Solar System appears to be more crowded than it really is.The Implications for Water in the Inner Solar Systemcondensed out of the warm inner solar nebula with large abundances of volatiles such asItseemsunlikelythattheterrestrialplanetscouldhaveMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 917>>>

water. It has been suggested that much of the water that is found in the oceans of Earth,that is trapped in the permafrost and ice caps of Mars, and that probably existed on Venusin the past could have been delivered to those worlds by impacting comets after the planetsformed. However, “the devil is in the details.” After careful examination of the compositionof several comets that have been explored by spacecraft, it has been noted that the deuterium-to-hydrogen (D/H) ratio in the comets exceeds that in Earth’s oceans by at least a factorof two. In fact, the D/H ratio is more characteristic of the interstellar medium than of theterrestrial oceans. From the small sample of comets that have been closely investigated todate, it appears that another source for the water in Earth’s oceans must be determined. Onthe other hand, it may be that the sample is biased, consisting only of objects that probablyderived from the Oort cloud, rather than the Kuiper belt. Of course, it is also possible thatthe delivery of water to Earth was a prolonged process, involving a variety of mechanisms,including comets, asteroids with relatively high water content (Section 3), water-richmeteorites (Section 4), and planetesimals.3ASTEROIDSit may be that the total number is in excess of 107. However, despite their large numbers,the combined mass of all the asteroids may be as low as 5×10−4M⊕. A close-up view ofasteroid 243 Ida and its moon, Dactyl, is shown in Fig. 12. (The number designates theorder in which the asteroid was discovered. Ceres is designated 1 Ceres.)
FIGURE 12243 Ida and its moon, Dactyl, as seen by the Galileo spacecraft on August 28,1993, during its journey to Jupiter. 243 Ida is 55 km long, and Dactyl (100 km from Ida at the time ofthe ﬂyby) is somewhat egg-shaped, measuring 1.6 km by 1.2 km. Surface features as small as 30 mare visible on Ida. Galileo was about 10,500 km from Ida when this image was taken. (Courtesy ofNASA/JPL.)Minor Bodies of the Solar System
Asteroids (sometimes referred to as minor planets) usually occupy orbits that are closer to the Sun than most comets. The vast majority of asteroids can be found in a belt situated between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Since the discov-ery of Ceres in 1801, several hundred thousand asteroids have been cataloged, and


<<<PAGE 918>>>

1.02.03.04.05.06.00102030405060
Semimajor axis (AU)Number of asteroidsEarthMarsCeres
Jupiter1:12:13:14:1
3:25:27:29:2
4:35:37:3
TrojanThuleHildaCybeleThemisEosPhocaeaFloraHungariaAmorApollo
Koronis
FIGURE 13The distribution of 1796 asteroids in the asteroid belt. Asteroid group names andorbital resonances with Jupiter are also shown. Kirkwood gaps are evident at numerous resonancelocations, and enhancements in the number of asteroids are apparent at other resonance locations.(Data from Williams,Asteroids II, Binzel, Gehrels, and Matthews (eds.), University of Arizona Press,Tucson, 1989.)The Kirkwood Gaps in the Asteroid BeltThe distribution of asteroids in the belt is not completely uniform or even smoothly vary-ing with distance from the Sun. Instead, for various values of the orbital semimajor axis,asteroids are either conspicuously absent or overabundant (see Fig. 13). These positionscorrespond to orbital resonances with Jupiter, analogous to the resonances in Saturn’s ringsthat are produced by its moons, most notably Mimas. Regions where asteroids are under-abundant are known as theKirkwood gaps, the most prominent being at 3.3 AU (a 2:1resonance of orbital periods) and at 2.5 AU (a 3:1 resonance). In reality, physical gaps in thebelt, equivalent to gaps in Saturn’s rings such as the Cassini division, do not actually exist.Instead, the varying eccentricities and orbital inclinations of the asteroids tend to smearout the gaps somewhat, populating them with objects that are transients at those radii. Thelocations of the asteroids (and of some comets) on September 8, 2005, projected onto theplane of the ecliptic, are shown in Fig. 14.The Trojan AsteroidsIn some cases, resonances with Jupiter correspond to local increases in the number ofasteroids. A particularly interesting resonance group is theTrojan asteroids(1:1), whichoccupy the same orbit as Jupiter but either lead or trail the planet by 60◦, as illustrated inFig. 15 and evident in Figs. 11 and 14. In addition, at least one asteroid is orbitingthe Sun at the trailing 60◦position in Mars’s orbit, and two are in the lead 60◦positionMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 919>>>

Plot prepared by the Minor Planet Center (2005 Sept 8).FIGURE 14The distribution of minor bodies in the inner Solar System on September 8, 2005,projected onto the ecliptic. Approximately 237,000 objects are shown in this plot. The outer orbit isthat of Jupiter, and the asteroid belt is clearly visible. The belt is not actually saturated with asteroids;rather, the symbols representing them are vastly larger than the objects themselves. The locationof each planet is marked by a⊕sign; Jupiter is seen in the lower left of the diagram. Jupiter’sTrojan asteroids are evident in the large “clouds” that lead and trail Jupiter by 60◦. The orbits ofthe terrestrial planets are visible among the clutter of the Amors, Apollos, and Atens. Comets areindicated by squares, as in Fig. 11. In this orientation the planets and most of the other objectsorbit counterclockwise, and the vernal equinox is to the right. (Courtesy of Gareth Williams, MinorPlanet Center.)of Neptune’s orbit. These asteroids are found in regions of unusual gravitational stability(gravitational “wells”) that are established by the combined inﬂuence of the Sun and Jupiter.The positions are theL4andL5Lagrangian points, which are locations of equilibrium thatexist in a three-body system when one of the bodies (in this case an asteroid) is much smallerthantheothertwo.Lagrangianpointsplayanimportantroleintheevolutionofsomebinarystarsystems.The Amors, Apollos, and AtensOther special groups of asteroids are those that have orbits among the terrestrial planets.TheAmorsare located between the orbits of Mars and Earth, theApolloscross Earth’s orbitas they approach perihelion, and theAtenshave semimajor axes that are less than 1 AU,Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 920>>>

60º60ºJupiterL4L5SunLeadingtrojansTrailingtrojans
FIGURE 15Trojan asteroids are located in Jupiter’s orbit, either leading or trailing the planetby 60◦. The occupied positions are two of the ﬁve Lagrangian points in the Sun–Jupiter system.although they can cross Earth’s orbit near aphelion. It appears that many of these objectswere probably main-belt asteroids at one time, but perturbations with Jupiter reorientedtheir orbits. Some of the Earth-crossing objects could also be extinct cometary nuclei thathave lost most of their volatiles after repeated trips near the Sun. Since the Apollo and Atenasteroids intersect Earth’s orbit, there is always the possibility that a collision could occur.Hirayama FamiliesIn 1918, the Japanese astronomer Kiyotsugu Hirayama (1874–1943) pointed out associ-ations of asteroids that occupy nearly identical orbits. Today, more than 100Hirayamafamilies(also known asasteroid families) have been identiﬁed. It is believed that eachfamily was once a single larger asteroid that suffered a catastrophic collision. With collisionspeeds that can reach 5 km s−1, the available energy is more than enough to crush rock andcause pieces of the original asteroid to escape. If the collisional energy is not sufﬁcient,only a portion of the surface may escape, or, after fracture, the self-gravity of the debriscould cause the asteroid to reform again as a rubble pile. The InfraredAstronomical Satelliteobserved dust bands that seem to be associated with some of the major Hirayama families.Rendezvousing with AsteroidsThe ﬁrst asteroids to be visited by a spacecraft were 951 Gaspra and 243 Ida in 1991 and1993, respectively (Ida and its moon, Dactyl, are shown in Fig. 12). The ﬂybys occurredas the Galileo spacecraft passed through the asteroid belt while on its trip to Jupiter. Justas astronomers had expected, the irregularly shaped asteroids show evidence of havingsustained numerous meteoritic impacts throughout their existence. In fact, the number ofimpacts suggests that Gaspra (a member of the Flora family) was probably broken off froma larger asteroid 200 million years ago. On the other hand, age estimates for Ida (a memberof the Koronis family) vary. Given the small size of Dactyl, it is unlikely that the mooncould have existed for more than 100 million years without getting destroyed by a majorcollision. However, based on the high crater density on Ida’s surface, it appears that Idamay be as old as 1 billion years. Assuming that the two objects were created together fromMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 921>>>

the breakup of a larger body, the resolution to the puzzle may rest with an increased rateof cratering from debris created when the larger object was destroyed. Even though thenumber density of asteroids in the belt is very low, the expected frequency of collisions issuch that very few would have been lucky enough to avoid a major impact sometime duringthe Solar System’s history.With the discovery of Dactyl orbiting Ida, it is possible to estimate the mass of Idafrom Kepler’s third law. Unfortunately, because of the high relative speed of the ﬂyby(12.4k m s−1) and the spacecraft’s trajectory relative to the orbit of Dactyl (the angle betweenthe trajectory and the orbit was about 8◦), only an approximate range of orbits were derivedfrom the data. The results suggest that the mass of Ida is approximately 3 to 4×1016kg,giving an average density of between 2200 and 2900 kg m−3.TheNear Earth Asteroid Rendezvous mission(NEAR–Shoemaker)12was launchedin 1996. On its way to its ultimate destination of asteroid 433 Eros, NEAR–Shoemakeralso made a 10-km s−1ﬂyby of 253 Mathilde. Based on the gravitational perturbations ofMathilde on the spacecraft, it was determined that the average density of the asteroid isonly 1300 kg m−3, indicating that this asteroid is likely a very heavily fractured rubble pilethat has been broken apart by multiple collisions and only loosely reassembled by its owngravity.When NEAR–Shoemaker arrived at 433 Eros on February 14, 2000, it entered into orbitaround the asteroid and began a year-long intensive study of the object (see Fig. 16).
FIGURE 16A composite image of the two hemispheres of 433 Eros as observed from orbitaround the asteroid. Eros is heavily covered with regolith and shows signiﬁcant evidence of cratering.Eros is one of the largest near-Earth asteroids, measuring 33 km long by 8 km wide by 8 km thick.(Courtesy of NASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.)12The mission was renamed in ﬂight in honor of the late Eugene M. Shoemaker, planetary scientist and co-discoverer of the Shoemaker–Levy 9 comet. Shoemaker had always said that he wanted to hit 433 Eros with arock hammer to see what was inside.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 922>>>

FIGURE 17The surface of Eros from an altitude of 250 m. The image is 12 m across. The imagewas taken during the February 12, 2001, descent of the NEAR–Shoemaker spacecraft. (Courtesy ofNASA/Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.)During the orbital mission, the spacecraft studied Eros’s gravitational ﬁeld and obtainedinformation about its surface composition. Although not designed as a lander, after one yearin orbit, NEAR–Shoemaker survived an intentional landing on the surface of the asteroid ata speed of about 1.6ms−1, and was able to transmit information back to Earth for anotherweek. During the descent phase of the mission, NEAR–Shoemaker returned many close-upimages, including the one shown in Fig. 17.Measurements obtained during the mission indicate that the density of Eros is 2670kg m−3and that it has probably been fractured, but not to the point of being a rubble pile likeMathilde. The interior of Eros appears to have a porosity of 25% or so. From measurementsof radioactivity and from gamma-ray spectroscopy measurements (see Fig. 18), it appearsthat Eros contains K, Th, U, Fe, O, Si, and Mg, as expected for this primitive object.Classes of AsteroidsIt was in the 1930s that astronomers ﬁrst realized that asteroids vary in color. By observingthe spectrum of reﬂected sunlight, it is possible to identify absorption bands that provideimportant information about the surface compositions of these objects. Information canalso be obtained by studying their albedos. The composition of asteroids is now knownto vary signiﬁcantly, but a general trend exists with increasing distance from the Sun (seeFig. 19). Some of the major classes of asteroids are•S-typeasteroids reside in the inner part of the belt (2–3.5 AU) and make up roughlyone-sixth of all the known asteroids. Their surfaces are dominated by a mixture ofiron- or magnesium-rich silicates, together with pure metallic iron–nickel. They tendto have a low abundance of volatiles, appear somewhat reddish, and have moderatealbedos (0.1–0.2). Gaspra, Ida, and Eros are S-type asteroids.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 923>>>

IronIronIronPotassiumSiliconSiliconOxygenOxygenNEAR Surface GRS Spectra
02000 4000 6000 8000 10,000Energy (keV)103104105106Relative intensity
FIGURE 18The gamma-ray spectrum of 433 Eros obtained by the NEAR–Shoemaker space-craft after it landed on the surface of the asteroid. Two different gamma-ray detectors obtained thetwo spectra shown. (Adopted from a ﬁgure courtesy of NASA/Johns Hopkins University AppliedPhysics Laboratory.)
SSSCCCCCPPPPDDDDDDD
PPPPPDSSSSCCCBias-corrected
2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 5.0Semimajor axis (AU)00.20.40.60.8FractionSC
FIGURE 19The distribution of major asteroid types with distance from the Sun. [Figure adaptedfrom Gradie, Chapman, and Tedesco,Asteroids II, Binzel, Gehrels, and Matthews (eds.), Universityof Arizona Press, Tucson, 1989.]Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 924>>>

•M-typeasteroids are very metal-rich with absorption spectra dominated by iron andnickel. They appear slightly reddish, and they have moderate albedos (0.10–0.18).M-types are preferentially located in the inner portion of the belt, among the S-types(2–3.5 AU).•C-typeasteroids constitute perhaps three-fourths of all the minor planets. Theseobjects are located predominantly near 3 AU but can be found throughout the mainbelt (2–4 AU). They are very dark, with albedos in the range 0.03–0.07, and theyappear to be rich in carbonaceous material. Two-thirds of the C-types also containsigniﬁcant quantities of volatiles, particularly water. Mathilde is a C-type asteroid.•P-typeasteroids are located near the outer edge of the main belt and beyond (3–5AU),peaking in population near 4 AU. They have a slightly reddish appearance and lowalbedos (0.02–0.06). Their surfaces may contain a signiﬁcant abundance of ancientorganic compounds, which are also present in comets.•D-typeasteroids are much like P-types, except that they have a redder appearanceand are located farther from the Sun. The Trojan asteroids are dominated by D-types.Some of Jupiter’s smaller moons also exhibit spectra similar to D-type asteroids.It seems likely that the differences in asteroid types with distance from the Sun arelargely a result of the process of condensation out of the solar nebula.ClosertotheSun,neartheinneredgeoftheasteroidbeltwherethetemperaturewashigher,morerefractorycompounds(likesilicon)condensedout while volatiles such as water and organic compounds could not. Farther from the Sun,temperatures had decreased sufﬁciently to allow more volatile compounds to condense andbecome part of the asteroids in that region. Many of the C-type asteroids in the middle ofthe belt appear to behydrated(meaning that water is present in these objects), whereas themore distant P- and D-types may contain water-ice, like most of the moons of the outerSolar System. Interestingly, 1 Ceres, at a distance from the Sun of 2.77 AU, and the largestasteroid in the belt, appears to be nearly spherical and may have a water-ice mantle.Evidently the majority of the minor planets in the inner part of the belt have beensubjected to signiﬁcant gravitational separation during their lifetimes, including most or allof the S-type asteroids. The unusual and very metal-rich M-types have also been profoundlyaltered by evolution since formation. It is generally believed that M’s represent the cores ofmuch larger parent asteroids that became chemically differentiated and were later shatteredby cataclysmic collisions, exposing the core.At least one asteroid, 4 Vesta, appears to have a surface that is covered with basalt (rockformed from lava ﬂows). Vesta has a radius of 250 km and is the third-largest asteroidknown, behind 1 Ceres and 2 Pallas. It seems that magma developed in the interior andeventually found its way through cracks to the surface, where it solidiﬁed. Vesta also hasan impact crater large enough to have exposed the subsurface mantle.Internal HeatingAs Vesta and the S- and M-type asteroids suggest, the interiors of at least some asteroidsmust have become molten for a period of time during their lives, raising the question of theMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 925>>>

source of the heat. Being small objects, the asteroids readily radiate their interior heat intospace, so they should have cooled off rather quickly after formation, too quickly to allow forτ∝2613Al, with a half-life of 716,000 years:2613Al→2612Mg+e++νe.(5)One difﬁculty with this suggestion is that in order to be effective in melting the interiorof an asteroid, the aluminum must be incorporated relatively rapidly into a forming asteroidafter the aluminum is produced (in just a small number of half-lives). This places a severeconstraint on the formation timescale for the Solar System.A second problem with the radioactive isotope solution lies in the apparent trend fromchemically differentiated, volatile-poor asteroids in the inner belt to hydrated asteroidsaround 3.2 AU and icy bodies near Jupiter. This distribution seems to imply that2613Al waspreferentially included in asteroids in the inner belt if it is the source of heat that led tochemical differentiation.4METEORITESIn the early morning hours of February 8, 1969, residents in the region around ChihuahuaCity, Mexico, saw a bright blue-white light that streaked across the sky. As they watched,the light broke into two parts, each in turn exploding into a spectacular display of glowingfragments. Sonic booms were also heard accompanying the light show. It was reported thatsome observers even believed that the world was coming to an end. Rocks rained downon the countryside over an area that measured 50 km by 10 km (known as astrewnﬁeld).The next day the ﬁrst meteorite was discovered in the small village of Pueblito de Allende.All of the more than two tons of specimens collected from this meteor shower are nowcollectively referred to as theAllende meteorite. Many of the Allende stones were takento the NASA Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, Texas, for study.13One sample ofthe Allende meteorite is shown in Fig. 20.14The observed streaks of light were produced by the frictional heating of the meteoritesurfaces by Earth’s atmosphere, causing the meteorites to glow. Although the outsides of thesamples were covered byfusion crustsproduced by the frictional heating, the interiors ofthe samples were unaffected. When a meteorite passes through the atmosphere, its damagedsurface ﬂakes off almost as quickly as it forms.13The Lunar Receiving Laboratory was preparing to analyze the Moon rocks that were to be collected later thatyear by theApolloastronauts.14After attending a lecture about a meteoritic fall given by two Yale professors in Connecticut in 1807, PresidentThomas Jefferson (1743–1826) reportedly commented, “I could more easily believe that two Yankee professorscould lie than that stones could fall from Heaven.” Jefferson was, himself, a well-respected amateur scientist.Minor Bodies of the Solar Systemsigniﬁcant gravitational separation (recall that cool  R). Furthermore, the very long-half-life radioactive isotopes that are, in large part, responsible for maintaining the hot inte-rior of Earth could not generate heat rapidly enough to melt the interior of an asteroid. It has been suggested that a relatively short, intense burst of heat could be produced if a shorter-half-life isotope were available in sufﬁcient abundance. A likely candidate is


<<<PAGE 926>>>

(a)(b)
FIGURE 20(a) A sample of the Allende meteorite. The surface has a fusion crust. (b) A close-up of a portion of the interior of the sample showing CAIs and chondrules embedded in a matrix.(Courtesy of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.)The Age and Composition of the Allende MeteoriteA very precise chronometer for determining ages of events in the formation of the SolarSystem is available by comparing the relative abundances of two stable isotopes of leadthat can be identiﬁed in meteorites,20782Pb and20682Pb. These isotopes are ultimately producedby independent sequences of decays that begin with23592U (half-life of 0.704 Gyr) and23892U(half-life of 4.47 Gyr), respectively. By using thisPb–Pb system, scientists have deducedan age for the Allende meteorite of 4.566±0.002 Gyr, which is very close to the solarmodel age of the Sun (4.57 Gyr)It seems that the Allende meteoriteisanearlyprimordialremnantoftheearlysolarnebula(asareothermeteorites).A chemical analysis of the samples revealed that the meteorite’s composition is closeto solar (similar to the Sun’s photosphere), with some exceptions; the most volatile ele-ments (H, He, C, N, O, Ne, and Ar) are underabundant, and lithium (Li) was found to beoverabundant. The relative underabundance of volatiles can be understood by assumingthat the Allende meteorite condensed out of the inner portion of the solar nebula wherethe temperature was too high for those elements to be included in solar concentrations.1Allende’s lithium content is probably overabundant relative to the Sun because the Sun hasactually destroyed much of its own complement of that element during the star’s lifetime.CAIs and ChondrulesContained in the Allende samples are two types of nodules embedded in amatrixofdark silicate material. Thecalcium- and aluminum-rich inclusions(CAIs, also knownasrefractory inclusions) are small pockets of material ranging in size from microscopicto 10 cm in diameter that are relatively overabundant in calcium, aluminum, and titaniumwhen compared with the remainder of the meteorite. This is signiﬁcant because they are the15Of course, light gases such as hydrogen and helium easily escape low-mass objects such as meteorites.5Minor Bodies of the Solar System
.


<<<PAGE 927>>>

most refractory (least volatile) of the primary elements in meteoritic material. It seems thatthe CAIs have undergone repeated episodes of evaporation and condensation.Chondrulesare spherical objects (1–5 mm across) made predominantly of SiO2, MgO, and FeO, whichseem to have cooled very rapidly from a molten state. Apparently no more than one meltingand cooling event occurred for a given chondrule, and some chondrules may have beenonly partially molten.A particularly intriguing discovery in the Allende CAIs is the overabundance of2612Mg.Because this particular nuclide is produced by the radioactive decay of2613Al (recall Eq. 5),which is known to be produced by supernovae, the meteorite may have formed out ofmaterial signiﬁcantly enriched with supernova ejecta. Moreover, because the half-life of2613Al is relatively short by astronomical timescales, the meteorite must have formed within afew million years or so following the production of the2613Al. This suggests that a supernovashock wave may have triggered the collapse of the solar nebula. Because the material fromthe supernova should not be expected to mix thoroughly with the original nebula, regionsof enhanced abundance would probably exist out of which objects such as the Allendemeteorite could form. An alternative mechanism for the production of the required2613Alhas also been proposed: Intense ﬂares during pre-main-sequence T-Tauri and FU Orionisphases appear capable of synthesizing2613Al. This mechanism seems to eliminate the needfor a possibly ad hoc supernova trigger.Carbonaceous and Ordinary ChondritesThe Allende meteorite is one example of a class of primitive specimens known ascar-bonaceous chondrites, so named because they are rich in organic compounds and containchondrules. They may also include appreciable amounts of water in their silicate matrix.The matrix even records the existence of a fairly strong primordial magnetic ﬁeld (aboutequal in strength to the value of Earth’s present-day ﬁeld).Ordinary chondritescontainfewer volatile materials than the carbonaceous chondrites, implying that they formed in asomewhat warmer environment. Both general types of chondrites arechemically undiffer-entiated stony meteorites.Chemically Differentiated MeteoritesSeveral forms ofchemically differentiated meteoriteshave also been discovered. Igneousstones, known asachondrites, do not contain any inclusions or chondrules; instead, theywere formed entirely out of molten rock.Ironmeteorites do not contain any stony (silicate)material, but they may be composed of up to 20% nickel. About three-quarters of all ironmeteorites have long iron–nickel crystalline structures, up to several centimeters long andknown asWidmanstätten patterns, that could have developed only if the crystal cooledvery slowly over millions of years.16Stony–ironmeteorites contain stony inclusions in amatrix of iron–nickel.Stones(chondrites and achondrites) make up about 96% of all themeteorites that hit Earth, irons account for about 3% of the total, and stony–irons make upthe remainder (1%).16The patterns were named for CountAlois von Widmanstätten, director of the Imperial Porcelain Works in Vienna,who discovered them in 1808.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 928>>>

Sources of MeteoritesThe vast majority of all meteorites probably originate from asteroids, either chipped off theirparents or liberated from the deep interior during a catastrophic collision. For a sufﬁcientlylarge asteroid, signiﬁcant gravitational separation may have occurred, as suggested by theM-type minor planets. The exposed metallic cores are the source of the irons, and thecore–rock interface is the source of the stony–irons. Other asteroids underwent very littlechemical alteration during their lives and may account for the chondrites.The reﬂection spectra of asteroids can be compared with meteorite samples to test whetherthe asteroids could be the source of objects striking Earth. Figure 21 shows the strongcorrelations between the spectra of some asteroids and meteorites. Note, for instance, thatthe asteroid 176 Iduna has a spectrum very similar to that of the carbonaceous chondrite,Mighel, while the basaltic surface of 4Vesta agrees well with that of the achondrite meteorite,Kapoeta.An unusual achondrite was discovered on the ice cap of Antarctica in 1982.17It hasthe chemical makeup of rocks collected from the lunar highlands by theApolloastronauts.Clearly this achondrite was ejected from the Moon instead of from an asteroid. Becausethe escape velocity of the Moon is much larger than the escape velocities of asteroids, thediscovery was certainly unexpected. Even more surprising, a small handful of meteoriteshave been discovered whose ages date back only 1.3 Gyr. Because these stones are muchyounger than the surface of the Moon, they must have originated on a body that has been
0.60.81.01.20.4
0.60.81.01.20.4Amount of light reflected(relative to reflectance at 0.56 /H9262m)
0.51.00.51.0Wavelength (/H9262m)4 Vestavs.Kapoeta (Ca-rich achondrite)230 Amantisvs.Veramin (stony iron)176 Idunavs.Mighel (carbonaceous chondrite)887 Alindavs.Bremervorde (ordinary chondrite)
FIGURE 21Comparisons between the infrared spectra of asteroids and meteorites. The reﬂec-tion data for the asteroids are depicted by open circles with attached error bars. The laboratory spectraof the meteorites are given as solid curves. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of C. R. Chapman, inTheNew Solar System, Third Edition, Beatty and Chaikin (eds.), Cambridge University Press and SkyPublishing, Cambridge, MA, 1990.)17Antarctica is an excellent site for ﬁnding meteorites. Any rock lying on the surface of a glacier is almost certainlyextraterrestrial in origin.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 929>>>

TABLE 3The Dates and Parent Bodies of Principal Meteor Showers.Shower Approximate Date Parent BodyQuadrantid January 3 (unknown)Lyrid April 21Comet 1861 IEta Aquarid May 4Comet HalleyDelta Aquarid July 30(unknown)Perseid August 11 Comet Swift–TuttleDraconid October 9 Comet Giacobini–ZinnerOrionid October 20 Comet HalleyTaurid October 31 Comet EnckeAndromedid November 14 Comet BielaLeonid November 16 Comet 1866 IGeminid December 13 Asteroid 3200 Phaetongeologically active more recently. The only real candidate is Mars, with an escape velocityof 5 km s−1. At least one of the meteorites has inclusions of shock-melted glass that containnoble gases and nitrogen in the same proportions as the Martian atmosphere. However,also recall that Mars has produced at least one very old meteorite, ALH84001.A number ofmeteor showersoccur near the same dates every year, during which timemeteors seem to emanate from a ﬁxed position on the celestial sphere, known as aradiant.The source of the meteorites is debris left in the orbits of comets or asteroids that happento intersect Earth’s orbit. As Earth passes through the body’s orbit, material rains down asif that material were coming from a position in the sky that Earth happens to be movingtoward at the time; hence the radiant. Most parent bodies of meteor showers are comets,although at least one object, 3200 Phaeton, is classiﬁed as an asteroid. Meteor showersare named for the constellation in which their radiants lie. A list of the principal meteorshowers, their approximate dates of maximum, and the parent object (if known) is given inTable 3.A History of Collisions with EarthBy now it should be apparent that objects throughout the Solar System have been subjectedto numerous and sometimes violent collisions; Earth is no exception. Even as recently as50,000 years ago, an iron meteorite, estimated to be 50 m in diameter, hit the ground inArizona, producing a crater 1.2 km wide and 200 m deep (Fig. 22). There is also strongevidence to support the hypothesis that a stony asteroid exploded in the atmosphere aboveSiberia in 1908 (an episode known as the Tunguska event). The detonation leveled treesin a radial pattern for 15 km in every direction. It is even reported that the blast waveknocked a man off his porch 60 km from the epicenter and that the explosion was audible atdistances of up to 1000 km. Estimates place the energy released during the Tunguska eventat 5×1017J, equivalent to a nuclear explosion of 12 MTons.Could other, even more energetic collisions have produced catastrophic consequencesfor life on Earth at the time? In about 1950, Ralph Baldwin suggested that meteoritic impactsMinor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 930>>>

FIGURE 22The 50,000-year-old Meteor Crater (also known as Barringer’s Crater) in Arizonais 1.2 km in diameter and 200 m deep. It was produced by an iron meteorite estimated to be 50 m indiameter. (Courtesy of D. J. Roddy and K. Zeller, USGS.)could have been responsible for the mass extinctions of many species seen in the paleon-tological record. Support for this hypothesis came in 1979 when geologist Walter Alvarezand his father, Luis Alvarez (1911–1988), a Nobel Prize winner in physics, announced thediscovery of high abundances of iridium in a dark-colored clay that was located in the geo-logic strata at the Cretaceous–Tertiary boundary (commonly called the K–T boundary). TheK–T boundary corresponds in time to the extinction, 65 million years ago, of 70% of thespecies then in existence, including the last of the dinosaurs. Since their original discoveryin the Appenine Mountains of Italy, the anomalously high iridium concentrations have beenseen throughout the world at the K–T boundary.The signiﬁcance of iridium is that it is rare in rock found near Earth’s surface. This isbecause iridium is readily soluble in molten iron (it is asiderophile) and as such participatedin the chemical differentiation of heavy elements sinking toward the core of Earth. However,iridium is fairly common in iron-rich meteorites. The amount of iridium present in the K–Tclay strata, where it is thousands of times more abundant than is typical of ordinary rock, isconsistent with an impact by a stony asteroid that measured 6 to 10 km across (or perhapsthe object was a slightly larger comet). An impactor of this size should have produced acrater some 100 to 200 km in diameter.Shocked mineral grains have also been found worldwide at the K–T boundary but aremost abundant in North America, suggesting that the impact (or impacts) could have oc-curred there. Attention has focused on an ancient impact site along the northern coast ofthe Yucatan peninsula, near the town of Chicxulub. A nearly semicircular structure at least180 km across is located there and, based on radioactive dating, appears to be of the correctage. Based on the size of the crater, the energy of the impact is estimated to have been4×1022J, the equivalent of 1013tons of TNT.An impact of that magnitude at the Chicxulubsite could also account for evidence of an enormous tidal wave (atsunami) that apparentlytraveled as far north as central Texas.How could such an ocean impact have led to mass extinctions? If a meteorite of thesize suggested hit in the ocean, it would vaporize a large amount of water. Some of thisFor comparison, the vertical rise of a typical mountain in the Rockies is about 1.5 km above the valley ﬂoor,and ocean depths are approximately 6 km.Some scientists have suggested that the diameter of the crater may be more like 300 km.18
19
1819Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 931>>>

water would wash out airborne dust while the rest of the moisture would increase thegreenhouse effect. As the temperature rose, even more water would evaporate into theatmosphere. Global atmospheric and ocean surface temperatures could rise by as much as10 K through this enhanced greenhouse effect.Alternatively, if a major impact were to occur on land, a tremendous amount of dustwould be injected into the atmosphere. As a consequence, the albedo would increase andmore solar radiation would be reﬂected back into space, cooling the surface.20In either case, as the meteorite passed through the atmosphere, the enormous amount ofkinetic energy available in the impactor would have produced searing heat and generateddevastating ﬁres. It would also have reacted with appreciable amounts of nitrogen, producingnitrogen oxides and nitric acid. The ensuing acid rain would have damaged delicate land-based and aquatic ecosystems, killing vegetation and destroying much of the remainingfood source. Carbon soot is found in the K–T clay layer, and there is also geologic evidencesuggesting that ﬂowering plants were destroyed in some regions for periods of at leastseveral thousand years. Regardless of whether the impact occurred on land or in an ocean,the global environment would have been dramatically affected.Even if asteroids or comets did not kill the dinosaurs and other creatures, there is clearevidence that major impacts have occurred in the past. By some estimates, the probabilityof the occurrence, during our lifetimes, of a cataclysmic impact that would be capable ofdestroying civilizations is perhaps as high as one in a few thousand. In light of this rathersurprising statistic, some scientists have suggested that we should build a global asteroid–comet defense system. Although no deﬁnite plans have yet been formulated, conferenceshave been held to discuss the possibility.The Basic Building Blocks of LifeIronically, even though impactors have been proposed as the mass murderers of some lifeforms on Earth, a number of carbonaceous chondrites have been found to contain many ofthe basic building blocks of life. Seventy-four amino acids have been found in one meteoritealone (the Murchison meteorite, which fell in Australia in 1972). Of those, seventeen areimportant in terrestrial biology. In addition to the amino acids, all four of the bases that cross-link the double helix of the DNA molecule (guanine, adenine, cytosine, and thymine), andthe ﬁfth base that is important in cross-linking in RNA (uracil), have been discovered in theMurchison meteorite. Other molecules important to life on Earth (such as fatty acids) havealso been found in carbonaceous chondrites. Of course, it is a long way from producingrelatively simple amino acids and cross-linking bases to the generation of the extremelycomplex DNA and RNA molecules, but these discoveries indicate that the fundamentalchemistry necessary to start the process can occur in an extraterrestrial environment.
20It has been suggested that such a situation could also arise following a large-scale nuclear war. This scenariohas been referred to as “nuclear winter.”Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 932>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBeatty, J. Kelly, Petersen, Carolyn Collins, and Chaikin, Andrew (eds.),The New SolarSystem, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press and Sky Publishing Corporation,Cambridge, MA, 1999.Canavan, Gregory H., and Solem, Johndale, “Interception of Near-Earth Objects,”Mercury,May/June 1992.Goldsmith, Donald, and Owen, Tobias,The Search for Life in the Universe, Third Edition,University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2002.Morrison, David, “The Spaceguard Survey: Protecting the Earth from Cosmic Impacts,”Mercury, May/June 1992.Morrison, David, and Owen, Tobias,The Planetary System, Third Edition,Addison-Wesley,San Francisco, 2003.Sagan, Carl, and Druyan, Ann,Comet, Pocket Books, New York, 1985.Smith, Fran, “A Collision over Collisions: A Tale of Astronomy and Politics,”Mercury,May/June 1992.TechnicalBottke, William F., Cellino, Alberto, Paolicchi, Paolo, and Binzel, Richard P. (eds.),Aster-oids III, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2002.Brown, M. E., Trujillo, C. A., and Rabinowitz, D. L., “Discovery of a Planet-Sized Objectin the Scattered Kuiper Belt,”The Astrophysical Journal,635, L97, 2005.de Pater, Imke, and Lissauer, Jack J.,Planetary Sciences, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Festou, Michel C., Keller, H. Uwe, and Weaver, Harold A. (eds.),Comets II, University ofArizona Press, Tucson, 2005.Gilmour, Jamie, “The Solar System’s First Clocks,”Science,297, 1658, 2002.Luu, Jane X., and Jewitt, David C., “Kuiper Belt Objects: Relics from the Accretion Diskof the Sun,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,40, 63, 2002.Mendis, D. A., “A Postencounter View of Comets,”Annual Review of Astronomy andAstrophysics,26, 11, 1988.Minor Planet Center,http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/cfa/ps/mpc.html.Praderie F., Grewing, M., and Pottasch, S. R. (eds.), “Halley’s Comet,”Astronomy andAstrophysics,187, 1987.Ryan, “Asteroid Fragmentation and Evolution of Asteroids,”Annual Review of Earth andPlanetary Sciences,28, 367, 2000.Stern, S. A., “The Pluto–Charon System,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,30, 185, 1992.Taylor, Stuart Ross,Solar System Evolution, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Minor Bodies of the Solar System


<<<PAGE 933>>>



<<<PAGE 934>>>

1 (a)Assume that a spherical dust grain located 1 AU from the Sun has a radius of 100 nm anda density of 3000 kg m−3. In the absence of gravity, estimate the acceleration of that graindue to radiation pressure. Assume that the solar radiation is completely absorbed.(b)What is the gravitational acceleration on the grain?2(a)Beginning, with the equation  below show that the time required for a spherical particleofradiusRand densityρto spiral into the Sun from an initial orbital radiusofr≫R⊙is given by Eq. (4). Assume that the orbit of the dust grain is approximatelycircularatalltimes.(b)Find the radius of the largest spherical particle that could have spiraled into the Sun fromthe orbit of Mars during the Solar System’s 4.57-billion-year history. Take the density ofthe dust grain to be 3000 kg m−3.3Estimate the amount of mass lost by Comet Halley during its most recent trip through the innerSolar System. Take into consideration the fact that the comet exhibits signiﬁcant activity onlyduring a short period of time near perihelion (an interval of approximately one year). Compareyour answer with the total amount of mass present in the nucleus. Assuming that the mass lossrates are the same for each trip, how many more trips might the comet be able to make beforeit becomes extinct?4In the text it was mentioned thatnongravitational perturbationswere used to estimate themass of Comet Halley. How might this be done?5Comet 1943 I, which last passed through perihelion on February 27, 1991, has an orbitalperiod of 512 years and an orbital eccentricity of 0.999914. This is one member of the classof Sun-grazing comets.(a)What is the comet’s semimajor axis?(b)Determine its perihelion and aphelion distances from the Sun.(c)What is the most likely source of this object, the Oort cloud or the Kuiper belt?6Using Kepler’s laws, verify that the 2:1 and 3:1 orbital resonances of Jupiter correspond to thetwo prominent Kirkwood gaps indicated in Fig. 13.Minor Bodies of the Solar System
dLdt=−σg4πr2L⊙mc2L,tSun=4πρc23L⊙Rr2.PROBLEM SET
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.22(4)
,The Poynting–Robertson effect, together with radiation pressure, is important in clearing the Solar System of dust left behind by comets and colliding asteroids (the dust that is responsible for the zodiacal light).


<<<PAGE 935>>>

(a)If there are 300,000 large asteroids between 2AU and 3AU from the Sun, and each asteroidis assumed to be spherical with a radius of 100 km, determine the total volume occupiedby the asteroids considered here.(b)Model the region in which these asteroids orbit as an annulus with an inner radius of 2 AU,an outer radius of 3 AU, and a thickness of 2 R⊙. Determine the volume of the region.(c)What is the ratio of the volume occupied by asteroids to the volume of the region in whichthey orbit?(d)Comment on the validity of a spaceship needing to maneuver quickly through a densepopulation of asteroids as frequently depicted in popular science ﬁction movies.7Vesta orbits the Sun at a distance 2.362 AU and has an albedo of 0.38 (unusually reﬂective foran asteroid).(a)Estimate Vesta’s blackbody temperature, assuming that the temperature is uniform acrossthe asteroid’s surface.(b)If Vesta’s radius is 250 km, how much energy does it radiate from its surface every second?8Figure 14makesitappearthattheasteroidbeltissaturatedwithobjects.Inthisproblemwe will consider the fraction of the volume actually occupied by asteroids.1.02.03.04.05.06.00102030405060
Semimajor axis (AU)Number of asteroidsEarthMarsCeres
Jupiter1:12:13:14:1
3:25:27:29:2
4:35:37:3
TrojanThuleHildaCybeleThemisEosPhocaeaFloraHungariaAmorApollo
Koronis
FIGURE 13The distribution of 1796 asteroids in the asteroid belt. Asteroid group names andorbital resonances with Jupiter are also shown. Kirkwood gaps are evident at numerous resonancelocations, and enhancements in the number of asteroids are apparent at other resonance locations.(Data from Williams,Asteroids II, Binzel, Gehrels, and Matthews (eds.), University of Arizona Press,Tucson, 1989.)Minor Bodies of the Solar System: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 936>>>

9In this problem you will estimate the amount of energy released per second by the radioactivedecay of2613Al inside Vesta during its lifetime.(a)Vesta has a radius of 250 km and a density of 2900 kg m−3.Assumingsphericalsymmetry,estimate the asteroid’s mass.(b)Assume for the moment that the asteroid is composed entirely of silicon atoms. Estimatethe total number of atoms inside Vesta. The mass of one silicon atom is approximately28 u.(c)The mass of2613Al is 25.986892 u and the mass of2612Mg is 25.982594 u. How much energyis released in the decay of one aluminum atom? Express your answer in joules.(d)The ratio of2613Al to all aluminum atoms formed in a supernova is about 5×10−5, andaluminum constitutes approximately 8680 ppm (parts per million) of the atoms in achondritic meteorite. Assuming that these values apply to Vesta, estimate the numberof2613Al atoms originally present in the asteroid.
Plot prepared by the Minor Planet Center (2005 Sept 8).FIGURE 14The distribution of minor bodies in the inner Solar System on September 8, 2005,projected onto the ecliptic. Approximately 237,000 objects are shown in this plot. The outer orbit isthat of Jupiter, and the asteroid belt is clearly visible. The belt is not actually saturated with asteroids;rather, the symbols representing them are vastly larger than the objects themselves. The locationof each planet is marked by a⊕sign; Jupiter is seen in the lower left of the diagram. Jupiter’sTrojan asteroids are evident in the large “clouds” that lead and trail Jupiter by 60◦. The orbits ofthe terrestrial planets are visible among the clutter of the Amors, Apollos, and Atens. Comets areindicated by squaresInthisorientationtheplanetsandmostoftheotherobjectsorbitcounterclockwise, and the vernal equinox is to the right. (Courtesy of Gareth Williams, MinorPlanet Center.)Minor Bodies of the Solar System: Problem Set
.


<<<PAGE 937>>>

10With the aid of a diagram, explain why it is best to observe a meteor shower between 2a.m.and dawn instead of in the early evening.Hint:Consider the velocities of the infalling meteorsand the orbital and rotational motions of Earth.11Suppose that the Tunguska event was caused by an asteroid colliding with Earth. Assume thatthe density of the object was 2000 kg m−3and that it exploded above the surface of the planettraveling at a rate equal to Earth’s escape velocity. If all of the energy of the explosion wasderived from the asteroid’s kinetic energy, estimate the mass and radius of the impacting body(assume spherical symmetry).(e)Find an expression for the amount of energy released per second in the decay of2613Alwithin Vesta as a function of time, and plot your results over the ﬁrst 5×107years onsemilog graph paper. You may ﬁnd the below equation useful.(f)How much time was required after the formation of Vesta before energy production dueto the radioactive decay of2613Al dropped to 1×1013W, comparable to the current rate ofenergy output from the asteroid? See Problem 7.dNdt=−λN,Minor Bodies of the Solar System: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 938>>>

Formation of Planetary Systems
From Chapter 2  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,3

<<<PAGE 939>>>

Formation of Planetary Systems1Characteristics of Extrasolar Planetary Systems2Planetary System Formation and Evolution1CHARACTERISTICS OF EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY SYSTEMS
Detections through the Reﬂex Radial Velocity Techniquehemosteffectivemethodofdiscoveringextrasolarplanetstodatehasbeenthroughthemeasurementofthereﬂexradialvelocityoftheparentstar.With the exception of the pulsar, PSR 1257+12, 51 Pegasi was the ﬁrst star (other thanour Sun) found to have a planet in orbit around it. Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of theGeneva Observatory made the announcement in October 1995 of a planet with a period ofP=4.23077 d in a nearly circular orbit (e<0.01) around 51 Peg (a more recent radialvelocity curve of 51 Peg obtained by Geoffrey Marcy and his collaborators is shown inFig. 1). Since the system is not eclipsing, and the planet is too faint to be visuallyidentiﬁed, the inclination of the orbit of the planet (i) is unknown. As a result, only thequantitymsinican be determined for the planet from radial velocity measurementsGiventhattheparentstarisaneartwinofourSun,withaspectralclassiﬁcation of G2V–G3V , implying a stellar mass of approximately 1 M⊙, the lower masslimit of the orbiting planet is obtained from the maximum radial velocity wobble of the star.Example 1.1.To determine the minimum mass of the planet orbiting 51 Peg, we mustﬁrstdetermineitsorbitalvelocity.FromKepler’sthirdlawandassumingthatthemass of the star ism51=1M⊙and that the planet’s mass,m, is insigniﬁcant (m≪m51),we ﬁnda=/bracketleftbiggGP2(m51+m)4π2/bracketrightbigg1/3=7.65×109m=0.051 AU.T
.Several methods have been used to detect extrasolar planets (sometimes referred to as exoplanets). With the rapid increase in the number of known planets beyond our own Solar System, important new information is being gathered concerning how planetary systems form and evolve. In addition to these systems being interesting to study in their own right, this increase in knowledge about extrasolar planets helps to inform us about our own Solar System.
,


<<<PAGE 940>>>

Since the orbit of the planet is nearly circular, the orbital speed of the planet isv=2πa/P=131 km s−1.oting from Fig. 1 that the amplitude of the star’s observedradial velocity isvr,max=v51sini=56.04 m s−1, we ﬁnd thatmsini=m51v51siniv=8.48×1026kg=0.45 MJ,where MJis the mass of Jupiter. Since sini≤1, the mass of the planet, 51 Peg b, must begreater than 0.45 MJ.51 Peg b is one example of a “hot Jupiter,” one of a number of extrasolar planets thathave been discovered having Jupiter-class masses but orbiting very close to their parentstar.Multi-Planet SystemsA number of extrasolar planetary systems have been found through the radial velocitytechnique to have multiple planets in orbit about the central stars. An example of one suchsystem isυAndromedae; see Fig. 2. After the orbital perturbations due to the 4.6-d orbitof one planet were removed from the radial velocity curve of the star, evidence remainedof additional perturbations. TheυAnd system contains at least three planets with orbitalperiods of 4.6 d, 241 d, and 1284 d, withmsini’s of 0.69 MJ,1.89 MJ, and 3.75 MJ,respectively. The mass of the F8V parent star is estimated to be 1.3M⊙As of May 2006, 193 extrasolar planets have been detected in 165 planetary systems.While most of the planetary systems have had just one planet detected in them so far, 20systems are known to be multi-planet systems.
–50050Velocity (m s–1)P = 4.230 dayK = 56.04 m s–1e = 0.01RMS = 5.21 m s–1x2 = 1.01
–0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2PhaseFIGURE 1The radial velocity measurements of 51 Pegasi, revealing the presence of a planetorbiting only 0.051 AU from the star. The sinusoidal shape of the velocity curve is evidence of a verylow orbital eccentricity(Figure adapted from Marcy, et al.,Ap.J.,481, 926, 1997.)N
.Formation of Planetary Systems
.


<<<PAGE 941>>>

1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006Time (yr)0–200–100100200
4.6-day planetremovedLick ObsVelocity residuals  (m s–1)
FIGURE 2The residuals in the radial velocity measurements ofυAndromedae after the grav-itational perturbations of the 4.6-day planet have been removed. The data reveal the presence of atleast three planets orbitingυAnd. (Adapted from a ﬁgure provided by Debra A. Fischer, privatecommunication.)The Mass Distribution of Extrasolar PlanetsInitially, the radial velocity technique was able to discover only very massive (Jupiter-class)planets in close-in orbits around their parent stars. One of the reasons for this selection effectis that these objects exert the greatest gravitational inﬂuence on their parent star and generatethe largest reﬂex radial velocities. The other reason is that a star must be observed over a timeinterval greater than the orbital period of the planet before the existence of the planet canbe conﬁrmed. As the amount of time increases for the systems being surveyed, the longertime-line data have allowed researchers to ﬁnd lower-mass planets and planets orbitingfarther from the star. The lowest-mass planet discovered to date is in a multiple systemorbiting Gliese 876 and has anmsini=0.023 MJ, which is just 7.3M⊕. The largest orbitdetected thus far using the reﬂex motion technique is in the multiple system 55 Cancri, witha semimajor axis of 5.257 AU and an orbital period of 4517 d=12.37 yr.Over time, this selection effect is systematically diminishing.As is evident from statisticalstudies of the systems investigated so far, nature seems able to produce planets with a rangeof masses, with the lowest-mass planets being the most common. When binned by massinterval (see Fig. 3), the number of planets in each mass bin varies asdNdM∝M−1.(1)The Distribution of Orbital EccentricitiesIt is also interesting to note the relationship between orbital eccentricity (e) and semimajoraxis for extrasolar planets (Fig. 4). Those planets that are orbiting close to their parent starFormation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 942>>>

02468 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0m sin i (MJ)05101520253035Number of planets
FIGURE 3The number of planets in mass bins of interval 0.5MJ. The solid line is given byEq. ( 1). (Data fromThe Extrasolar Planets Encyclopedia,http://exoplanet.eu, maintainedby Jean Schneider.)
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Orbital eccentricity0.11Semimajor axis (AU)HD 80606b
FIGURE 4The orbital eccentricities of the known extrasolar planets as a function of semi-major axis. Only 3 planets (<2%) are known to have eccentricities greater than 0.75, and lessthan 15% have eccentricities greater than 0.5. (Data fromThe Extrasolar Planets Encyclopedia,http://exoplanet.eu, maintained by Jean Schneider.)Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 943>>>

tend to have circularized orbits (or at least orbits with smaller eccentricities). Planets orbitingfarther from their parent star may have high orbital eccentricities, with the maximum valuedetermined to date being a planet orbiting HD 80606 withe=0.927 and a semimajor axisof 0.439 AU. However, from the data obtained thus far, only 15% of planets are knownto have eccentricities of greater than 0.5, and less than 2% have eccentricities in excess of0.75.With the small number of high-eccentricity planets, it is important to ask whether or notthere is something unique about the systems in which they are found. HD 80606 turns out tobe one member of a wide stellar binary system, the other member being HD 80607. Thesetwo G5V stars are nearly identical and slightly smaller than the Sun. The two stars are alsoseparated by a projected distance of 2000 AU. It has been suggested that the gravitationalperturbations exerted on the planet, HD 80606b, by HD 80607 may have pumped its orbitup to its current very high eccentricity. In support of this suggestion, another planet with ahigh eccentricity (e=0.67), 16 Cyg Bb, is also a member of a binary star system. However,the timescale for the gravitational perturbations provided by HD 80607 that would causethe orbital eccentricity of HD 80606b to signiﬁcantly increase is estimated to be 1 Gyr. Thislong period of time comes from the necessary resonant alignment of the second star withthe planet. The 1-Gyr timescale must be compared against the 1-Myr timescale providedby the general relativistic effect of the advance of the periastron of HD 80606b’s orbit dueto its parent starItisarguedthatthegeneralrelativisticeffectswouldcompletelyoverwhelmthe perturbations from HD 80607 unless there were a third body in the HD 80606 systemwith an orbital period of roughly 100 yr that could also gravitationally inﬂuence HD 80606b.So far, a third object has not been discovered.Two conclusions may be drawn from these data: (1) Planets with orbital periods ofless than 5 days tend to have the smallest eccentricities (e<0.17, with 80% of thosehavinge<0.1), probably due to strong tidal interactions with the parent star, and (2)planets sufﬁciently far from the parent star may have fairly large orbital eccentricities, buttypically less than about 0.5. It seems that our own Solar System is somewhat unique,at least compared to the systems studied to date, in that our planets tend to have orbitaleccentricities that are very small (excluding the Kuiper belt objects).The Trend toward High MetallicityAn additional important trend has also been emerging from the extrasolar planetary systemdata obtained to date. It appears that there is a strong tendency for planetary systems to pref-erentially form around metal-rich (Population I) stars. One way to quantify themetallicityis by comparing the ratios of iron to hydrogen in stars relative to our Sun, deﬁning themetallicity to be[Fe/H]≡log10/bracketleftbigg(NFe/NH)star(NFe/NH)⊙/bracketrightbigg,(2)whereNFeandNHrepresent thenumberof iron and hydrogen atoms, respectively. Starswith[Fe/H]<0 are metal-poor relative to the Sun, and stars with[Fe/H]>0 are relatively.Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 944>>>

–0.50–0.250.000.250.50[Fe/H]051015202530Percentage of stars with planetsFIGURE 5The percentage of stars found to have planetary systems, relative to the number ofstars investigated in each metallicity bin. The solid curve is given by Eq. ( 3). (Figure adapted fromFischer and Valenti,Ap. J.,622, 1102, 2005.)metal-rich. For comparison, extremely metal-poor (Population II) stars in the Milky WayGalaxy have been measured with values of[Fe/H]as low as−5.4, while the highest valuesfor metal-rich stars are about 0.6.As can be seen in Fig. 5, most stars with planetary systems detected so far tend tobe metal-rich compared to the Sun. Those stars that do have a metallicity lower than thesolar value are only moderately lower. The data in Fig. 5 are plotted as the percentage ofstars in a given metallicity bin that were well studied and found to have planetary systems.According to the sample of 1040 F, G, and K stars used in the study, the data seem to bewell-ﬁt by the relationshipP=0.03×102.0[Fe/H],(3)wherePis the probability of a star having a detectable planetary system.Measuring Radii and Densities Using Transitsthe small number of systems where this has been possible, it appears that the Jupiter-classplanets have densities that are similar to those of the gas giants in our Solar System (seeFig. 6). However, some of the so-called “hot Jupiters” that orbit close to the parent starappear to be somewhat inﬂated (e.g., HD 209458b and OGLE-TR-10b). The simple answerto explain the effect, namely the higher surface temperature due to the planet’s proximityto the parent star, doesn’t seem to explain all of the close-in systems, so apparently anothersource (or sources) of heat is required to puff up the planets. Some of the suggestionsfor solving the puzzle include tidal dissipation due to ongoing circularization of the orbit(perhaps involving another undetected object trying to simultaneously pump up the orbitalFormation of Planetary Systems
The transit of a planet across the disk of the parent star provides further information about the planet. From the timing of the eclipse, and using atmospheric models of the star that include limb darkening, it is possible to determine the planet’s radius. Of course, once the radius is determined, the planet’s average density may also be computed. From


<<<PAGE 945>>>

111b10b209458b189733b132b56b300 kg m–3600 kg m–31000 kg m–31500 kg m–3TrES-1JupiterSaturn
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0Mass (MJup)0.60.81.01.21.4Radius (RJup)113b
149026bFIGURE 6The relationship between radius and mass for transiting extrasolar planets. Thedashed lines correspond to speciﬁc average mass densities. (Adapted from a ﬁgure provided by DebraA. Fischer, private communication.)eccentricity), a misalignment between the planet’s orbital plane and the equator of thestar, and dissipation of atmospheric currents in the planet as its gas migrates from the hot,substellar point to the cooler region on the back of the planet (Hadley circulation).At least one planet appears to have a massive rocky core. The G0IV star HD 149026 has atransiting “hot Saturn,” with anmsini=0.36 MJ. From the transits, the orbital inclinationhas been determined to be 85.3◦±1.0◦, allowing a determination of the mass of the planet(not just a lower limit) of 0.36 MJ=1.2MS, where MSdesignates the mass of Saturn.The timing of the transits also yields a radius of 0.725±0.05 RJfor the planet, implyingan average density of 1253 kg m−3, which is 94% the density of Jupiter but 1.8 times thedensity of Saturn. The star itself has a mass and radius of 1.3±0.1M⊙and 1.45 R⊙,respectively. In addition, the star’s metallicity is[Fe/H]=0.36, making it a signiﬁcantlymetal-rich star. Based on computer models of the planet’s interior, it appears that the planetpossesses a 67 M⊕core composed of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, assumingthat the core density is 10,500 kg m−3, which is believed to be similar to Saturn’s core. Ifthe core density is only 5500 kg m−3, then the calculated core mass would be even larger(78 M⊕).The Detection of an Extrasolar Planet AtmosphereTransits of extrasolar planets across the disks of their parent stars also provide for thepossibility of detecting extrasolar planetary atmospheres. The ﬁrst planet for which thisFormation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 946>>>

was accomplished was HD 209458b. David Charbonneau and his collaborators were ableto detect the spectroscopic signature of sodium at its resonance doublet wavelength of589.3 nm by noting differences in the spectrum of the star as the planet passed in front ofit. The starlight passing through the planet’s atmosphere produced an enhanced absorptionfeature at that wavelength. The effect was very subtle, with deepening of the absorptionfeature by only an additional factor of 2.32±10−4relative to adjacent wavelength bandsduring the transit. It has been proposed that the spectral signatures of water, methane, andcarbon monoxide may be able to be detected in this way as well.Distinguishing Extrasolar Planets from Brown DwarfsWith the detection of a few extrasolar planets having masses more than a factor of ten largerthan the mass of Jupiter, the question is again raised concerning the deﬁnition of a planet.At the low-mass end, large Kuiper belt objects such as Pluto have been classiﬁed as planets.At the upper end, what distinguishes a planet from a brown dwarf?planets. One proposed deﬁnition of planet is that it is an object that forms through a processbeginning with the bottom-up accretion of planetesimals, whereas a brown dwarf formsdirectly from gravitational collapse. The challenge with such a deﬁnition is determiningafter the fact how a particular object may have formed.A second criterion that has been proposed is based on whether or not the object thatforms is massive enough ever to have had nuclear fusion occur in its core. Computermodels of very low-mass objects indicate that if the mass of the object is greater than13 MJ, deuterium can burn while the object is forming. The rate of energy productionas being those objects having masses between these two limits (13 MJ<Mbd<75 MJ);in other words, brown dwarfs are “stars” that burn some deuterium but never reach astable nuclear-burning phase during contraction. Given the difﬁculty with the formation-mechanism criterion, the nuclear-reaction/mass-based criterion is generally favored.An Image of an Extrasolar PlanetIn 2004 the ﬁrst image of an extrasolar planet was obtained by Gael Chauvin and collabo-rators, using the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope with an infrareddetector; see Fig. 7. The parent star is a 25 MJbrown dwarf of spectral type M8.5, knownas 2MASSWJ1207334−393254, or 2M1207 for short! The system was also resolved laterby the Hubble Space Telescope’s NICMOS instrument. The planet resides 55 AU from thebrown dwarf and has an estimated mass of 5±2MJ. From the infrared observations, thespectral type of the planet is between L5 and L9.5.Formation of Planetary Systems
Two different criteria have been proposed to answer this question. One suggestion is tied to the formation process of planets and stars. Stars form from the gravitational collapse of a gas cloud. As we will explore further in the next section, planets are gen-erally believed to form from a bottom-up accretion process, although there has been speculation that gravitational collapse in the star’s accretion disk may also produce
would not be sufﬁcient to stabilize the object during gravitational collapse, but deu-terium burning can be sufﬁcient to affect the luminosity of the object during col-lapse. At the ther end, stars with mass of at least 0.072 M⊙ (75 MJ) for solar compo-sition undergo nuclear fusion at a sufﬁcient rate to stabilize them at the low-mass end of the main sequence. Thus, it is proposed that brown dwarfs should be considered


<<<PAGE 947>>>

FIGURE 7The ﬁrst image obtained of an extrasolar planet. The planet is orbiting the browndwarf 2MASSWJ1207334−393254. (Image courtesy of the European Southern Observatory.)Future Space-Based Planet SearchesGiven the dramatic success since the mid 1990s in detecting planetary companions of main-sequence stars, a number of projects are planned to further the search using space-basedobservatories:•COROT(COnvection, ROtation, and planetary Transits) is a joint mission of France,ESA, Germany, Spain, Belgium, and Brazil that is designed to study stellar seismol-ogy and search for planetary transits. COROT is scheduled for launch in 2006.• NASA’sKeplermission is slated for launch in 2008 and will search for transits ofEarth-sized planets across their parent stars’ disks. Speciﬁcally, the Kepler missionhopes to identify Earth-like planets in the habitable zone around solar-type stars outto a distance of about 1 kpc.• TheSIM PlanetQuestmission, scheduled for launch in 2011, is designed to obtainhigh-precisionastrometricdataOneofSIM’sprimarymissionsistosearchfornearbyextrasolarEarth-sizedplanets.• The data obtained from Kepler and SIM will provide input data for another NASAmission, known as theTerrestrial Planet Finder(TPF). TPF, as it is currently en-visioned, will be made of two complementary component missions: avisible-lightcoronagraph, scheduled for launch around 2014, and aninfrared nulling interferom-eterthat will be composed of ﬁve individual spacecraft ﬂying in precise formation (tobe launched before 2020). Together, the two components of the TPF should be ableto identify Earth-like planets and measure their atmospheric chemistries. One goalof TPF is to try to detect the signatures of life in the atmospheres of other Earth-likeplanets..Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 948>>>

• Sometime in 2015 or later, ESA plans to launchDarwin, a free-ﬂying array of sixinfrared telescopes that will also act as an infrared nulling interferometer.With the great focus on planetary searches currently under way from the ground and fromspace, and with additional space-based missions planned for the future, the tremendousadvances in this ﬁeld of modern astrophysics can be expected to continue.2PLANETARY SYSTEM FORMATION AND EVOLUTIONThe question of how Earth and the Solar System formed has intrigued humans in all culturesfor thousands of years. In 1778 Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707–1788)proposed that a giant comet collided with the Sun, causing the ejection of a disk of materialthat ultimately condensed to form the planets. Competing tidal theories argued that a closeencounter with a passing star ripped material from the Sun. Unfortunately, each of thesetheories suffers from a number of difﬁculties, including inadequate energy, compositiondifferences between the planets and the Sun, and the sheer improbability of such an event.Another class of theories suggested that the Sun accreted planetary material from interstellarspace, taking care of the difﬁculty of composition differences between the Sun and theplanets, but not those among the planets themselves. Yet another class of theories, the basisof today’s models, argue for the simultaneous formation of the Sun and the planets outof the same nebula. Among the early proponents of these so-called nebular theories wereRené Descartes (1596–1650), Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), and Pierre-Simon, Marquis deLaplace (1749–1827).Although a signiﬁcant number of problems remain to be solved, there is now some senseof convergence on the basic components of planetary system formation. Throughout Part III(as well as in the rest of the book to this point), we have presented clues related to criticalfeatures of a comprehensive model, some obvious and others more subtle. Before discussingour present understanding of the formation of planetary systems, we will review some ofthese clues and the questions they raise.Accretion Disks and Debris Disksand pre-main-sequence evolution of stars. It is clear from both observational and theoreticalstudies that stars form from the gravitational collapse of clouds of gas and dust. If a collapsingcloud contains any angular momentum at all (which it surely will), the collapse leads to theformation of an accretion disk around the growing protostarAs a direct observational consequence of the conservation of angular momentum, nu-There is also substantial evidence ofdebris disksaround older stars, such asβPictorisTheimplicationisthatmaterialisleftoverinthediskafterthestarhasﬁnishedforming. Debris disks may be the extrasolar analogs to the asteroid belt and the Kuiper belt.There is a wide range of observational data related to the formation..Formation of Planetary Systems
merous examples of accretion disk formation have been discovered and studied in detail, including the many proplyds observed in the Orion Nebula and elsewhere and the jets and Herbig–Haro objects associated with young protostars. In addition, there is growing evi-dence that clumps of material exist in these disks.


<<<PAGE 949>>>

Angular Momentum Distribution in the Solar SystemHowever, one problem that has frustrated most attempts to put together an adequate pictureof how our own Solar System developed concerns the present-daydistributionof its angularthe angular momentum of the entire Solar System, and most of the remainder is associatedwith Jupiter.1To complicate matters further, the Sun’s spin axis is tilted 7◦with respect tothe average angular momentum vector of the planets, making it hard to envision how sucha distribution of angular momentum could develop.An additional interesting component of the angular momentum question concerns theamount of angular momentum possessed by other stars. It turns out that, on average, main-sequence stars that are more massive rotate much more rapidly and contain more angularmomentum per unit mass than do less massive ones. Moreover, as can be seen in Fig. 8,a very discernible break occurs in the amount of angular momentum per unit mass as afunction of mass near spectral class A5. If the total angular momentum of the Solar Systemwere included, rather than just the angular momentum of the Sun, the trend along the upper
11121314Log10 (L/M) (m2 s–1)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4Log10 (M/M  )SunG0F5F0A5A0B8B5B3B0O8SolarSystem
FIGURE 8The average amount of angular momentum per unit mass as a function of mass forstars on the main sequence. The Sun’s value and the total for the entire Solar System are indicated bytriangles. Best-ﬁt straight lines have been indicated for stars A5 and earlier, as well as for stars A5and later (not including the Sun).0.073M⊙R2⊙.1The Sun does not rotate as a rigid body, and because it is centrally condensed, its moment of inertia is closer toFormation of Planetary Systemsmomentum. A simple calculation of the angular momentum in the Sun and Jupiter  reveal that the orbital angular momentum of that planet exceeds the rotational angular momentum of the Sun by roughly a factor of twenty. A more detailed analysis shows that even though the Sun contains 99.9% of the mass, it contains only about 1% of


<<<PAGE 950>>>

endofthemainsequencewouldextendtoincludeourSolarSystemaswell(theSun is a G2 star).A portion of the angular momentum problem may be solved by the transport of angu-lar momentum outward via plasma drag in a corotating magnetic ﬁeld. Charged particlestrapped in the protosun’s ﬁeld would have been dragged along as the ﬁeld swept throughspace. In response, the protosun’s rotation speed slowed because of the torque exerted onit by the magnetic ﬁeld lines. In addition, much of the rotational angular momentum ofthe newly formed Sun was probably also carried away by the particles in the solar windComposition Trends throughout the Solar SystemWe have already seen that lower-mass stars with metallicities similar to or greater thanthe solar value seem able to form planetary systems routinely. Therefore, the process ofplanetary system formation must be robust. The process must also be capable of producingsystems with planets that are far from the parent star and systems where the planets are veryclose in.A crucial piece of any successful theory must be the ability to explain the clear composi-tion trends that exist among the planets in our Solar SystemThe inner terrestrial planets are small, generally volatile-poor, and dominated by rockymaterial, while the gas and ice giants contain an abundance of volatile material. Moreover,even though the ice giants Uranus and Neptune contain substantial volatiles, the gas gi-ants Jupiter and Saturn contain the overwhelming majority of volatile material in the SolarSystem.The moons of the giant planets also exhibit composition trends. In going from Jupiter outto Neptune, the progression is from rocky moons to increasingly icy bodies, ﬁrst containingwater-ice and then methane- and nitrogen-ice. The pattern even includes such objects as theasteroids, the Centaurs, the Kuiper belt objects, and other cometary nuclei. It is particularlyimportant to note that a composition trend also exists across the asteroid belt itself. Even onthe smaller scale of Jupiter’s system of satellites, the Galilean moons change from volcanicIo to the thick-ice surface of Callisto.The Temperature Gradient in the Solar NebulaApparently, either a composition gradient or a temperature gradient (or both) must haveexisted in the early solar nebula while these objects were forming. For instance, the ob-servations just described could be accounted for if the temperature of the nebular disk hadawell-determinedtemperaturegradient[T∝r−3/4.
.
starsystemhas.An analogous sort]Formation of Planetary Systems
In support of these mechanisms is Fig.  8. The change in slope of the angular-momentum-per-unit-mass curve corresponds well with the onset of surface convection in low-mass stars, which in turn is linked to the development of coronae and mass loss. Other mecha-nisms for angular momentum transport will be discussed later.
decreased sufﬁciently across the asteroid belt. In that case, water would not have condensed in the region of the terrestrial planets but could have condensed in the form of ice in the vicinity of the giant planets. Another temperature gradient associ-ated with the formation of Jupiter could help to explain the formation of the Gali-lean moons from the Jupiter subnebula. An accretion disk that forms in a binary


<<<PAGE 951>>>

MercuryVenusEarthMarsCeresJupiterSaturnUranusNeptuneMethane-iceWater-icePluto2003 UB3130.1110100Distance from the Sun (AU)101001000Temperature (K)
FIGURE 9An equilibrium model of the temperature structure of the early solar nebula. Water-icewas able to condense out of the nebula in those regions beyond approximately 5 AU, and methane-icecould condense out of the nebula beyond 30 AU. The positions of the planets and Ceres representtheir present-day locations.of temperature structure should have existed in the solar nebula as well. The temperaturestructure for an equilibrium solar nebula model is shown in Fig. 9. Even though speciﬁcfeatures of the distribution may change with more sophisticated modeling (by includingtime dependence, turbulence, and magnetic ﬁelds), it seems apparent that the condensationtemperature of water-ice must be reached at some point near the current position of Jupiter,perhaps in the outer portions of the main asteroid belt (roughly 5 AU). The position in thesolar nebula where water-ice could form has been variously referred to as the “snow line,”the “ice line,” or, more dramatically, the ”blizzard line.”We have also learned that the environments around newly forming stars can be verydynamic places, with mass accretion and mass loss happening at virtually the same timein T-Tauri systems. During FU Orionis events, the environment around the star can be-come particularly active, with signiﬁcant outbursts of energy occurring because of greatlyincreased mass accretion rates. It also seems certain that these environments will have com-plex magnetic ﬁelds that would lead to frequent and intense ﬂares, analogous to the solarﬂares on our Sun that are produced by magnetic ﬁeld reconnection eventsConsequences of Heavy BombardmentOf course, it is readily apparent that our Solar System is riddled with evidence of colli-sions in the past, leaving cratered surfaces on objects of all sizes, from planets and moons.Formation of Planetary Systems
At least within our own Solar System, the formation of the Sun was accompanied by the formation of a wide range of objects, including small rocky planets, gas giants, ice giants, moons, rings, asteroids, comets, Kuiper belt objects, meteoroids, and dust.


<<<PAGE 952>>>

to asteroids and comets. As a consequence, any formation theory must also be able to ac-count for the obvious, heavy bombardment endured by bodies in the early Solar System.composition of the Moon strongly suggest that both of these worlds were directly inﬂuencedby cataclysmic collisions involving very large planetesimals (the Moon’s formation is tiedto just such a collision with Earth). Heavy surface cratering shows that collisions continuedeven after their surfaces formed, with a brief episode of late heavy bombardment about700 Myr after the formation of the Moon. Features such as the enormous Herschel crateron Mimas and the bizarre surface of Miranda testify to the fact that the other bodies in theSolar System underwent the same intense barrage from planetesimals.Another consequence of the heavy bombardment by planetesimals is the variety ofpresent-day orientations for the spin axes of the planets. The extreme examples of theretrograde rotations of Uranus and Pluto have already been discussed, but the other planetsmust have had their rotation axes shifted as well. Assuming that the planets did form out ofa ﬂattened nebular disk, the inherent angular momentum of the system would have resultedin rotation axes being initially aligned nearly perpendicular to the plane of the disk. Becausethis is not the case today, some event (or events) must have occurred to alter the directionsof the planets’ rotational angular momentum vectors. With the exception of Venus’s andMars’s complex tidal interactions with the Sun and the other planets, the only likely mech-anism suggested to date that can naturally account for the range of orientations observedrequires collisions of planets or protoplanets with large planetesimals.The Distribution of Mass within Planetary SystemsOther features of the present-day Solar System that should be explained in a model of SolarSystem formation include the relatively small mass of Mars compared with its neighbors,the very small amount of mass present in the asteroid belt, and the existence of the Oortcloud and the Kuiper belt.Furthermore, if we are to seek a general, unifying model of planetary system formationthat includes our own Solar System as one example, it is necessary to understand thedistributions of planets in other systems. Particularly perplexing when ﬁrst discovered wasthe existence of “hot Jupiters” such as 51 Peg b. How could a gas giant form and surviveso close to its parent star? In our own Solar System, none of the giant planets resides closerto the Sun than 5.2 AU.Formation TimescalesOne aspect of all formation theories that cannot be neglected are constraints imposed bytimescales:•Once thecollapseofamolecularcloudisinitiated,ontheorderof105yearsisrequiredfortheformationof a protosun and nebular disk.•ThehighmassdensityofMercuryandtheextremelyvolatile-poorFormation of Planetary Systems
The onset of violent T-Tauri and FU Orionis activity and extensive mass loss follows the initial collapse in some 105 to 107 years. This means that any


<<<PAGE 953>>>

nebular gas and dust that has not been accreted into a planetesimal or a protoplanet willbe swept away within about 10 Myr, terminating further formation of large planets.• The presence of2613Al in carbonaceous chondrites indicates that these meteorites musthave been formed within a few million years after the creation of the aluminum,whether it was through a supernova detonation or through ﬂares during FU Orionisactivity. Otherwise, all of the radioactive nuclides that were created would havedecayed into2612Mg. This observation puts severe constraints on condensation rates inthe early solar nebula.• The oldest meteorites, including Allende, date back to near 4.566 Gyr, while the ageof the Sun itself is 4.57 Gyr. Clearly these oldest meteorites must have formed rapidlywithin the solar nebula.• The ages of rocks returned from the Moon show that the surface of that body musthave solidiﬁed some 100 Myr after the collapse of the solar nebula. Similar constraintsexist on the formation of the surface of Mars judging on the basis of the age of theMartian meteorite, ALH84001.• The lunar surface underwent a spike of late heavy bombardment about 700 Myr afterthe Moon formed.• As we will learn later, as planets grow in accretion nebulae, they tend to migrateinward due to tidal interactions with the nebula and viscosity effects. It is estimatedthat a planetesimal could drift all the way into its parent star from a distance of 5 AUwithin roughly 1 to 10 Myr.• Arather loose constraint on any model requires that all of the planets, moons, asteroids,Kuiper belt objects, and comets must be fully formed today, 4.57 Gyr years afterthe process started. Although this may seem trivial, not all models of Solar Systemformation have been successful in creating planets this rapidly!The Gravitational Instability Formation MechanismTwo general, competing mechanisms have been proposed for the formation of planets withinthe accretion disks of proto- and pre-main-sequence stars. One mechanism is based on theidea that planets (or perhaps brown dwarfs) could form in accretion disks in a manneranalogous to star formation. In regions where there may be a greater density of material inthe disk, self-collapse could result. As the mass accumulates in that region, its gravitationalinﬂuence on the surrounding disk increases, causing additional material to accrete onto thenewly forming planet. This mechanism could even result in a local subnebula accretiondisk forming around the protoplanet that could lead to the creation of moons and/or ringsystems.While this “top-down”gravitational instabilitymechanism has several attractive fea-tures, including simplicity and being strongly analogous to the formation of protostars, itsgeneral applicability suffers from numerous difﬁculties. By observations of other accretiondisks, along with T-Tauri accretion and mass-loss rates, and combined with detailed numer-ical simulations, it appears that the solar nebula’s lifetime would not have been sufﬁcientto allow objects like Uranus and Neptune to grow quickly enough to attain the masses weFormation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 954>>>

observe before the nebula was depleted. This mechanism also does not explain the largenumber of other, smaller objects that are present in our Solar System and are likely to existin other planetary systems as well (recall theβPic debris disk). In addition, the gravita-tional instability mechanism doesn’t appear to readily account for the mass distribution ofextrasolar planets, the correlation between planetary system formation and metallicity, orthe wide range in the densities and core sizes of planets, both within our Solar System andamong the extrasolar planets.The Accretion Formation MechanismAn alternative model, and the one general favored by most astronomers, is that planetsgrow from the “bottom up” through a process ofaccretionof smaller building blocks.Based on all of the observational and theoretical information presently available, it appearsthat a reasonable description of the formation of planetary systems can now be given. Whatfollows is a possible scenario for the formation of our own Solar System, although referencesto general aspects of planetary system formation will also be made. It is important to note,however, that because of the complexity of the problem, revisions in the model (both minorand major) are likely to occur in the future.The Formation of the Solar System: An Exampleon the upper end of the main sequence, while less massive pieces either were still in theprocess of collapsing or had not yet started to collapse. Within a period of a few millionyears or less, the most massive stars would have lived out their entire lives and died inspectacular supernovae explosions.As the expanding nebulae from one or more of the supernovae traveled out through spaceat a velocity of roughly 0.1c, the gases cooled and became less dense. It may have beenduring this time that the most refractory elements began to condense out of the supernovaremnants, including calcium, aluminum, and titanium, the ingredients of the CAIs thatwould eventually be discovered in carbonaceous chondrites that would fall to Earth billionsof years later. When a supernova remnant encountered one of the cooler, denser componentsof the cloud that had not yet collapsed, the remnant began to break up into “ﬁngers” of gasand dust that penetrated the nebula unevenly. The small cloud fragment would have also beencompressed by the shock wave of the high-speed supernova remnant when the expandingnebula collided with the cooler gas. It is possible that this compression may have evenhelped trigger the collapse of the small cloud. In any case, the material in the solar nebulawas now enriched with elements synthesized in the exploded star.Assuming that the solar nebula possessed some initial angular momentum, conserva-tion of angular momentum demands that the cloud “spun up” as it collapsed, producinga protosun surrounded by a disk of gas and dust. In fact, the disk itself probably formedmore rapidly than the star did, causing much of the mass of the growing protosun to befunneled through the disk ﬁrst. Although this important point is not entirely resolved, it hasFormation of Planetary Systems
Within an interstellar gas and dust cloud (perhaps a giant molecular cloud), the Jeans condition was satisﬁed locally, and a portion of the cloud began to col-lapse and fragment. The most massive segments evolved rapidly into stars


<<<PAGE 955>>>

been estimated that the solar nebular disk may have contained a few hundredths of a solarmass of material, with the remaining 1 M⊙of the nebula ending up in the protosun. At thevery least, a minimum amount of mass must have ended up in the nebular disk to form theplanets and other objects that exist today. Such a disk is referred to as theMinimum MassSolar NebulaThe Hill RadiusWithin the nebular disk, small grains with icy mantles were able to collide and stick togetherrandomly. When objects of appreciable size were able to develop in the disk, they began togravitationally inﬂuence other material in their areas.To quantify the inﬂuence that these growing planetesimals had, we can deﬁne theHillradius,RH, to be that distance from the planetesimal where the orbital period of a testparticle around the planetesimal is equal to the orbital period of the planetesimal aroundthe Sun.Assuming a circular orbit, the orbital period of a test particle (mt) around an object ofmassM(M≫mt) at a distanceRis given by Kepler’s third law asP≃2π/radicalbiggR3GM.At a distanceafrom the Sun, the orbital period of the growing planetesimal around theSun equals the orbital period of a massless test particle around the planetesimal at the Hillradius when/radicalBigga3M⊙=/radicalBiggR3HM.Thus, the Hill radius is given byRH=/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbigg1/3a.(4)Rewriting in terms of the density of the Sun and the density of the planetesimal (assumedto be spherical), the Hill radius becomesRH=R/α(5)whereRis the radius of planetesimal andα≡/parenleftbiggρ⊙ρ/parenrightbigg1/3R⊙a.The physical signiﬁcance of the Hill radius is that if a particle comes within about oneHill radius of a planetesimal with a relative velocity that is sufﬁciently low, the particle canbecome gravitationally bound to the planetesimal. In this way, the planetesimal acquires themass of the particle and continues to grow. Of course, as the planetesimal’s radius grows,so does its Hill radius..Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 956>>>

Example 2.1.For a planetesimal of densityρ=800 kg m−3and radius 10 km, located5 AU from the Sun (ρ⊙=1410 kg m−3), the planetesimal’s Hill radius would beRH=R/α=R/parenleftbiggρρ⊙/parenrightbigg1/3/parenleftbiggaR⊙/parenrightbigg=8.9×106m=1.4R⊕.This planetesimal is similar to present-day cometary nuclei.The Formation of the Gas and Ice GiantsAs the low-energy collisions continued, progressively larger planetesimals were able toform. In the innermost regions of the disk the accreting particles were composed of CAIs,silicates (some in the form of chondrules), iron, and nickel; relatively volatile materialswere unable to condense out of the nebula because of the high temperatures in that region.At distances greater than 5 AU from the growing protosun, just inside the present-day orbitof Jupiter, the nebula became sufﬁciently cool that water-ice could form as well. The resultwas that water-ice could also be included in the growing planetesimals beyond that distance.Even farther out (perhaps near 30 AU, the present-day orbit of Neptune), methane-ice alsoparticipated in the development of planetesimals. The location of the “snow line” wherewater-ice could form is shown in Fig. 10 (recall also Fig. 9).The object that grew most rapidly was Jupiter. Thanks to the presence of water-ice alongwith rocky materials, and with a nebula that was sufﬁciently dense in its region, Jupiter’score reached a mass of between 10 and 15 M⊕. At that point the planet’s gravitationalinﬂuence became great enough that it started to collect the gases in its vicinity (principallyhydrogen and helium). In effect, this created a localized subnebula, complete with its ownaccretion disk. The outcome was the formation of the massive planet we see today, togetherwith the Galilean satellites. Heat generated in the gravitational collapse of Jupiter, combinedwith tidal effects, led to the eventual evolution of its moons. Astronomers believe that theentire process of forming Jupiter required on the order of 106years, halting when the gaswas depleted.As we will see shortly, the formation of the massive Jupiter had a signiﬁcant impacton the other three planetesimals that had also grown to signiﬁcant size beyond the snow
ProtosunMercuryVenusEarthMarsJupiterCeresSnow lineSaturnSnow lineAccretion disk
FIGURE 10A schematic drawing of the solar nebular disk, indicating the position of the water-ice “snow line” 5 AU from the protosun. Methane-ice began forming at roughly 30 AU from theprotosun as well. The protosun, the protoplanets, and Ceres are located at their relative present-daydistances, but their relative sizes are not correct.Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 957>>>

line. Although Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune all developed cores of 10 to 15 M⊕, they weresomewhat farther out in the nebula where the density was lower. As a result, they wereunable to acquire the amount of gas that Jupiter captured in the same period of time.The Formation of the Terrestrial Planets and the AsteroidsIn the inner portion of the solar nebula the temperatures were too warm to allow the volatilesto condense out and participate in the formation of planetesimals. But as the nebula cooled,the most refractory elements were able to condense out to form the CAIs. Next to condensewere the silicates and other equally refractory materials.The slow relative velocities of silicate grains in nearly identical orbits resulted in low-energy collisions that promoted grain growth. Eventually, a hierarchy of planetesimal sizesdeveloped. Computer simulations suggest that in the region of the terrestrial planets, alongwith a large number of smaller objects, there may have been as many as 100 planetesimalsroughly the size of the Moon, 10 with masses comparable to Mercury’s, and several as largeas Mars. However, during the accretion process, most of these large planetesimals becameincorporated into Venus and Earth. When the forming planets became massive enough,internal heat that was generated by decaying radioactive isotopes, together with energyreleased during collisions, started the process of gravitational separation. The results werethe chemically differentiated worlds we see today.With the formation of the massive Jupiter just beyond 5 AU from the Sun, gravitationalperturbations began to inﬂuence the orbits of planetesimals in the region. In particular, mostof the objects in the present-day asteroid belt had their orbits “pumped up” into progressivelymore and more eccentric orbits until some of them were absorbed by Jupiter or the otherdeveloping planets or were sent crashing into the Sun, while most were ejected from theSolar System entirely. This process stole material from the “feeding zones” near Mars and inthe asteroid belt, resulting in a smallish fourth planet and very little mass in the belt. Perhapsonly 3% of the original mass near Mars’s orbit remained and only 0.02% of the mass inthe region of the belt. Continued perturbations from Jupiter meant that the remaining beltof planetesimals had rather high relative velocities and were never able to consolidate intoa single object. In fact, the high relative velocities imply that collisions cause fracturing,rather than growth.As planetesimals continued to move throughout the forming Solar System, other colli-sions occurred. Some of the largest planetesimals in the inner Solar System collided withMercury, removing its low-density mantle, and some struck Earth, forming the Earth–Moonsystem. Still other planetesimals of signiﬁcant mass crashed into Mars and the outer planets,changing the orientations of their axes. Apparently, some of the planetesimals were alsocaptured as moons or were torn apart by the giant planets when they wandered inside theplanets’ Roche limits.Long before the terrestrial planets ﬁnished “feeding” on planetesimals in their regions ofthe disk, however, the evolving Sun reached the stage of thermonuclear ignition in its core,initiating the T-Tauri phase. At this point the infall of material from the disk was reversedby the strong stellar wind that ensued, and any gases and dust that had not yet collected intoplanetesimals were driven out of the inner Solar System.It is only in the innermost part of the Solar System that the nebula was warm enough to form CAIs in the ﬁrstplace.2
2Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 958>>>

The Process of MigrationThe accretion scenario described above is not without its own challenges. For instance,a long-standing problem has to do with the formation of the ice giants. At their currentpositions in the Solar System, it appears that the solar nebula would not have been denseenough to allow them to reach their present-day masses before the remaining gas was sweptaway by the T-Tauri wind. In addition, how is the episode of late heavy bombardment to beexplained as a spike in collision rates roughly 3.8 Gyr ago? The apparent solution to bothof these problems seems to lie in understanding a perplexing problem with many extrasolarplanets.With the discovery of “hot Jupiters” in extrasolar planetary systems, scientists realizedthat planets must be able to migrate inward while they are forming, and Jupiter is no different.Computer simulations of Solar System evolution suggest that Jupiter formed about 0.5 AUfarther out in the nebula than its current position.One mechanism by which inward migration of Jupiter (and extrasolar planets) couldoccur involves gravitational torques between the planet and the disk. In this mechanism,initial deviations from axial symmetry produce density waves in the disk.The gravitational interaction between a growing planet and density waves results in thesimultaneous transfer of angular momentum outward and mass inward.This so-calledType Imigrationmechanism can be shown to be proportional to mass, implying that as the planetaccretes more material, it moves more rapidly toward its parent star. It may be that this canactually cause some planets to collide with the star on a timescale of one to ten millionyears.However, it initially appeared that the timescale for Type I migration was too shortcompared with the runaway accretion of gases onto the growing Jupiter; in other words,Jupiter would crash into the Sun before it could fully form. It also appeared that Jupitercouldn’t grow rapidly enough to reach its present size before the nebula was dissipated bythe T-Tauri wind.The solution to these problems may rest with the migration process itself. As the growingplanet moves through the solar nebula, it continually encounters fresh material to “feed on.”If the planet remained in a ﬁxed orbit, it would quickly consume all of the available gaswithin several Hill radii and would grow only slowly after that. Migration allows it to movethrough the disk without creating a signiﬁcant gap in the nebula.It has also been shown that viscosity within the disk can cause objects to migrate inward.ThisType II migrationmechanism causes slowly orbiting particles farther out to speed upbecause of collisions with higher-velocity particles occupying slightly smaller orbits. Theloss of kinetic energy by the inner particles causes them to spiral inward. Type II migrationcan become the more signiﬁcant, if slower, migration process when a gap is opened up inthe disk.Peter Goldreich and Scott Tremaine suggested in 1980 that this mechanism would be important in the dynamicalevolution of accretion disks. Their paper was published some ﬁfteen years before the ﬁrst conﬁrmed detection ofan extrasolar planet.3
3Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 959>>>

Outward migration is also possible. In this case, the scattering of planetesimals inwardresults in migration outward. Whether inward or outward migration occurs depends on thedensity of the nebula and the abundance of planetesimals.Applying the mechanisms of migration to the evolution of our own Solar System, itappears that Jupiter not only inﬂuenced objects interior to its present-day orbit but also wasinﬂuential in causing Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune to migrate outward. It seems that Uranusand Neptune initially formed their cores in a region of the nebula with a greater density, justas Jupiter and Saturn did. However, because of outward migration, they were able to puton only a small amount of extra gas and remain today as ice giants, rather than gas giants.Resonance Effects in the Early Solar SystemAssuming that Jupiter originally formed at about 5.7 AU from the Sun as some simulationssuggest, and that Saturn formed perhaps 1 AU closer to the Sun than its current position, thetwo gas giants would have moved through a critical resonance as Jupiter migrated inwardand Saturn migrated outward. When the orbital periods of the two planets reached a 2:1resonance (i.e., the orbital period of Saturn was exactly twice the orbital period of Jupiter),their gravitational inﬂuences on other objects in the Solar System would have periodicallycombined at the same points in their orbits, causing signiﬁcant perturbations to orbits ofobjects in the asteroid belt and in the Kuiper belt. Computer simulations suggest that thisresonance effect may have occurred about 700 Myr after the formation of the inner planetsand our Moon. It seems plausible that the passage of Jupiter and Saturn through this 2:1resonance may have caused the episode of late heavy bombardment that is now recordedon the surface of the Moon.As a consequence of Neptune’s outward migration, Neptune swept up some of the re-maining planetesimals, trapping them in 3-to-2 orbital resonances with the planet as itmoved outward. It may be that Pluto and the other Plutinos were caught up in this outwardmigration. The orbits of the scattered Kuiper belt objects were also likely to have beenperturbed by the migration of Neptune. The classical KBOs were probably far enough fromNeptune not to be as drastically affected by its migration. In fact, the Kuiper belt may bethe Solar System’s analog to debris disks seen around other stars.Similarly, the Oort cloud cometary nuclei are likely to be planetesimals that were scat-tered more severely by Uranus and Neptune. Once sufﬁciently far from the Sun, scatteredcometary nuclei had their orbits randomized by passing stars and interstellar clouds.The Formation of CAIs and ChondrulesA particularly challenging problem with the model of Solar System formation describedabove is the presence of chondrules mixed in with CAIs in a matrix of hydrated and carbon-bearing minerals in chondritic meteorites. Both the chondrules and the CAIs have certainlybeen exposed to intense heat, but the matrix has clearly never been heated to temperaturesgreater than a few hundred kevins. Because silicates require lower temperatures to condenseout of the solar nebula, the chondrules probably formed after the CAIs. Silicate dust grainslikely formed out of the nebula, coalescing into small clumps through repeated collisions.Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 960>>>

CoronalwindCoronalwindSoftX-raysSoftX-raysFunnel flowCAI precursorsReconnectionringX-windChondrulesAccretion diskX-regionDipolefieldStarFIGURE 11A schematic diagram of the X-wind model. (Figure adapted from Shu et al.,Ap. J.,548, 1029, 2001.)However, they could not have formed initially as molten droplets but, instead, were meltedafter formation.Currently, the most plausible scenario suggests that powerful ﬂares during FU Orionisevents may be responsible for the melting or partial melting of chondrules and CAIs. As theinner edge of the accretion disk moves in and out on timescales of 30 years or so (perhapsassociated with magnetic ﬁeld activity), the silicate grains are exposed to ﬂash heating byﬂares resulting from reconnection events. In the rareﬁed environment at the interior edgeof the nebula, the droplets are able to cool rather quickly, perhaps between 100 and 2000 Kper hour. Frank Shu and his colleagues have suggested that the metamorphosed chondrulesmay be launched back into the planet-forming region of the nebula by an X-wind, similarto the wind responsible for the ejection of Herbig–Haro objects in jets (see Fig. 11). Inthe planet-forming region of the nebula, the chondrules and CAIs are incorporated into thematrix. This model of chondrule formation implies that the solar nebula was a very dynamicsystem indeed.Although much work remains to be done in fully developing our understanding of SolarSystem formation and the formation extrasolar planetary systems, tremendous progress hasbeen made in this very complex area of research.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBasri, Gibor, “A Decade of Brown Dwarfs,”Sky and Telescope,109, 34, May, 2005.Naeye, Robert, “Planetary Harmony,”Sky and Telescope,109, 45, January, 2005.Marcy, Geoffrey, et al., “California and Carnegie Planet Search,”http://exoplanets.org.Schneider, Jean, “The Extrasolar Planets Encyclopedia,”http://exoplanet.eu.Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 961>>>

TechnicalAlibert, Y ., Mordasini, C., Benz, W., and Winisdoerffer, C., “Models of Giant Planet For-mation with Migration and Disc Evolution,”Astronomy and Astrophysics,434, 343,2005.Beaulieu, J. P., Lecavelier des Etangs,A., and Terquem, C. (eds.),Extrasolar Planets: Todayand Tomorrow, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Proceedings,321, SanFrancisco, 2004.Bodenheimer, Peter, and Lin, D. N. C., “Implications of Extrasolar Planets for Understand-ing Planet Formation,”Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences,30, 113, 2002.Butler, R. Paul, et al., “Evidence for Multiple Companions toυAndromedae,”The Astro-physical Journal,526, 916, 1999.Canup, R. M., and Righter, K. (eds.),Origin of the Earth and Moon, University of ArizonaPress, Tucson, 2000.Charbonneau, David, et al., “Detection of an Extrasolar Planet Atmosphere,”The Astro-physical Journal,568, 277, 2002.de Pater, Imke, and Lissauer, Jack J.,Planetary Sciences, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Fischer, DebraA., andValenti, Jeff, “The Planet–Metallicity Correlation,”TheAstrophysicalJournal,622, 1102, 2005.Goldreich, Peter, and Tremaine, Scott, “Disk-Satellite Interactions,”The AstrophysicalJournal,241, 425, 1980.Goldreich, Peter, Lithwick, Yoram, and Sari, Re’em, “Planet Formation by Coagulation: AFocus on Uranus and Neptune,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,42, 549,2004.Gomes, R., Levison, H. F., Tsiganis, K., and Morbidelli, A., “Origin of the CataclysmicLate Heavy Bombardment of the Terrestrial Planets,”Nature,435, 466, 2005.Lecar, Myron, Franklin, Fred A., Holman, Matthew J., and Murray, Norman W., “Chaos inthe Solar System,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,39, 581, 2001.Mannings, Vincent, Boss, Alan P., and Russell, Sara S. (eds.),Protostars and Planets, IV,University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2000.Marcy, Geoffrey, et al., “Observed Properties of Exoplanets: Masses, Orbits, and Metallic-ities,”Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement,158, 1, 2005.Mayor, M., and Queloz, D., “A Jupiter-Mass Companion to a Solar-Type Star,”Nature,378, 355, 1995.Shu, Frank H., Shang, Hsien, Gounelle, Matthieu, Glassgold, Alfred E., and Lee, Typhoon,“The Origin of Chondrules and Refractory Inclusions in Chondritic Meteorites,”TheAstrophysical Journal,548, 1029, 2001.Taylor, Stuart Ross,Solar System Evolution, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2001.Formation of Planetary Systems


<<<PAGE 962>>>

1 (a) If the actual separation between HD 80606 and HD 80607 is 2000 AU, determine the orbital
period of the binary star system. Hint: You may want to refer to the data in Appendix G to
estimate the masses of the two stars.
(b)How many orbits will the planet HD 80806b make around its parent star in the time that
the two stars complete one orbit about their common center of mass? The semimajor axis
of the planet’s orbit is 0.44 AU.
(c)What is the ratio of the force of gravity exerted on HD 80606b by its parent star to that
exerted by HD 80607 when it is aligned between the two stars?
2Compare Pluto with asteroids and cometary nuclei. Comment on the signiﬁcance of any differ-
ences in view of the evolutionary model discussed in the chapter.
3 (a) If all of the angular momentum that is tied up in the rest of the Solar System could be
returned to the Sun, what would its rotation period be (assume rigid-body rotation)? Refer
to the data in Fig. 8. The moment-of-inertia ratio of the Sun is 0.073.
(b)What would the equatorial velocity of the photosphere be?
(c)How short could the rotation period be before material would be thrown off from the Sun’s
equator?
4The Minimum Mass Solar Nebula is the smallest nebula that could be formed and still have
sufﬁcient mass to create all of the objects in the Solar System. Make a rough estimate of the
mass of the Minimum Mass Solar Nebula.
5Estimate the present-day Hill radius of Jupiter. Express your answer in terms of the radius of
Jupiter, as well as in astronomical units.Formation of Planetary Systems
11121314Log10 (L/M) (m2 s–1)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Log10 (M/M  )SunG0F5F0A5A0B8B5B3B0O8
Solar
System
FIGURE 8 The average amount of angular momentum per unit mass as a function of mass for
stars on the main sequence. The Sun’s value and the total for the entire Solar System are indicated by
triangles. Best-ﬁt straight lines have been indicated for stars A5 and earlier, as well as for stars A5
and later (not including the Sun).PROBLEM SET
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 
by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.23 ,


<<<PAGE 963>>>

6HD 63454 is a K4V star known to have an extrasolar planet orbiting it in a circular orbit with anorbital period of 2.81782 d, producing a maximum radial reﬂex velocity of 64.3ms−1relativetothecenterofmassofthestar.ThedistancetoHD63454is35.80pc.ConsultingAppendix:(a)the semimajor axis of the planet’s orbit.(b)the minimum mass of the planet.(c)the maximum astrometric wobble of the star due to the planet’s pull, expressed in arcseconds.714 Her is a K0V star located 18.1 pc from Earth. The extrasolar planet orbiting the star hasan orbital period of 1796.4 d with an orbital eccentricity of 0.338. Consulting Appendix:(a)the semimajor axis of the planet’s orbit.(b)the maximum separation of the planet from the center of mass of its parent star.(c)the velocity of the planet in its orbit at closest approach to the star.8Explain why the high metallicities of systems with known extrasolar planets support the hy-pothesis that planets form from the “bottom up” by mass accretion of planetesimals.9Assume that Jupiter and Saturn formed 5.7 AU and 8.6 AU from the Sun, respectively. Showthat if the planets simultaneously migrated to their present orbital distances, they passed througha 2:1 orbital period resonance.Formation of Planetary Systems: Problem SetStellar Data determineStellar Data determine


<<<PAGE 964>>>

From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.The Nature of Galaxies
25,

<<<PAGE 965>>>

The Nature of Galaxies1The Hubble Sequence2Spiral and Irregular Galaxies3Spiral Structure4Elliptical Galaxies1THE HUBBLE SEQUENCE
if the Milky Way is limited in extent, perhaps the diffuse and very faint “elliptical nebulae”seen in the night sky might actually be extremely distant disk-like systems, similar to ourown but well beyond its boundary.1He called these objectsisland universes.Cataloging the Island UniversesThe true nature of the island universes became a matter of much investigation, and extensivecatalogs of these objects were collected. One such catalog we owe to Charles Messier (1730–1817), who, while hunting for comets, recorded 103 fuzzy objects that could otherwise beconfused with the intended targets of his search.2Although many of the members of theMessier catalogare truly gaseous nebulae contained within the Milky Way (such as theCrab supernova remnant and the Orion Nebula, M1 and M42, respectively), and others arestellar clusters (for instance, the Pleiades open cluster is M45 and the great globular clusterin Hercules is M13), the nature of other nebulae, such as M31 in Andromedawas unknown.Another catalog of nebulae was produced by William Herschel and subsequently ex-panded by his son, Sir John Herschel (1792–1871), to include the southern hemisphere.1Although today we generally use the wordnebulato refer to gas and dust clouds, it was originally used to describeany fuzzy patch of light in the sky that could not be resolved into a clear ensemble of stars.2Later, other astronomers added seven additional members to the original list, bringing the total number of Messierobjects to 110.It was in the middle of the eighteenth century that Kant and Wright ﬁrst suggested that the Milky Way represents a ﬁnite-sized disk-like system of stars. In the two cen-turies of scientiﬁc investigation since their proposal, we have indeed come to learn that a major component of our Galaxy is well represented by a disk of stars that also contains a signiﬁcant amount of gas and dust. As an extension of their philo-sophical argument about the nature of the Galaxy, Kant went on to suggest that


<<<PAGE 966>>>

Later, J. L. E. Dreyer (1852–1926) published theNew General Catalog(NGC), whichwas based on the work of the Herschels and contained almost 8000 objects. Like Messier’scatalog, the NGC includes many entries that are either gaseous nebulae or stellar clusterslocated within the Milky Way. However, the true nature of other objects in the catalogremained in question.3It was in 1845 that William Parsons, the third Earl of Rosse (1800–1867), built what wasthen the largest telescope in the world. Located in Ireland and nicknamed the “Leviathan,”the 72-in (1.8-m) instrument was able to resolve, for the ﬁrst time, the spiral structure insome nebulae. Their pinwheel appearance strongly suggested that thesespiral nebulaemaybe rotating. This suspicion was eventually veriﬁed by Vesto M. Slipher (1875–1969) in1912 when he detected Doppler-shifted spectral lines in a number of these objects.The Great Shapley–Curtis DebateThe argument over the nature of the nebulae centered on their distances from us and therelative size of the Galaxy. Many astronomers believed that the spiral nebulae resided withinthe conﬁnes of the Milky Way, and others favored the view that they were really Kant’sisland universes. On April 26, 1920, at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington,D.C., Harlow Shapley of the Mount Wilson Observatory and Heber D. Curtis (1872–1932)of the Lick Observatory met to argue the merits of each point of view. In what has becomeknown as theGreat Debatein astronomy, Shapley supported the idea that the nebulae aremembers of our Galaxy. Curtis, on the other hand, was a proponent of the extragalacticinterpretation of the data, believing that the nebulae were physically much like the MilkyWay, but separated from it.One of Shapley’s strongest points was based on the apparent magnitudes of novae ob-served in M31. He argued that if the disk of Andromeda were as large as the Milky Way(approximately 100 kpc in diameter by his own recent estimates), then its angular size inthe sky (∼3◦×1◦) would imply a distance to the nebula that was so large as to make theluminosities of the novae in M31 much greater than those found in the Milky Way.His second major point was based on data of Adrian van Maanen (1884–1946), a well-respected observer, whose proper-motion measurements of M101 seemed to suggest anangular rotation rate of 0.02′′yr−1. If M101 had a diameter similar to Shapley’s estimatefor the Milky Way, then points near its outer edge would have rotational speeds far in excessof those observed within the Milky Way.In defense of the extragalactic hypothesis, Curtis argued that the novae observed in spi-ral nebulae must be at least 150 kpc away from us in order to have intrinsic brightnessescomparable to those in the Milky Way. At this distance, M31 would be similar in size toKapteyn’s much smaller estimate of the diameter of the Galaxy, rather than to Shapley’s
3It is worth pointing out that most of the members in the Messier catalog are contained within the NGC; forinstance, M31 is also designated as NGC 224.The Nature of Galaxies
estimate. He also argued that the large radial velocities measured for many spi-ral nebulae seemed to indicate that they could not remain gravitationally bound within a Kapteyn-model Milky Way. Furthermore, assuming that the transverse  velocities of the nebulae are similar in value to their radial velocities, then if the neb-ulae were close enough to be located within the Milky Way it should be possible to


<<<PAGE 967>>>

measure their proper motions across the sky; however, no such motions had been detected.Finally, for those spiral nebulae that are oriented edge-on, dark absorption regions can beseen. Curtis suggested that if the Milky Way had a similar dark layer, the zone of avoidancewould be easily explained.In the end, neither set of arguments proved to be deﬁnitive and the Great Debate servedmore to highlight the issues than to solve the dilemma. Although, as we now know, errorsexisted on both sides of the controversy, Shapley’s arguments were perhaps the more ﬂawed.Part of the problem rested in his overestimate of the size of the Milky Way’s disk. The otherdifﬁculty was in his reliance on van Maanen’s data, which van Maanen himself later showedto be incorrect. In fact, proper-motion studies were unable to measure any rotation of M101.The debate was ﬁnally settled in 1923 when Edwin Hubble (1889–1953) detectedCepheid variable stars in M31 using the 100-inch telescope at Mount Wilson. By measur-ing their apparent magnitudes and determining their absolute magnitudes via the period–The process of scientiﬁc exploration that led to the realization that our Solar System isnot located near the center of the Milky Way, and that the Galaxy is only one of a countlessnumber of galaxies in the universe, represented an advance in our understanding of the uni-verse comparable to that of the Copernican Revolution. Although many people contributedThe Classiﬁcation of GalaxiesNow that the extragalactic nature of the galaxies had been established, work began ondetermining their physical properties. As a ﬁrst step in understanding any new collectionof objects, it is necessary to classify them according to their intrinsic characteristics, akinto the zoological classiﬁcation of various species of animals. Once again Hubble playeda key role. In his 1926 paper “Extra-Galactic Nebulae,” and later in his bookThe Realmof the Nebulae, Hubble proposed that galaxies be grouped into three primary categoriesbased on their overall appearance. This morphological classiﬁcation scheme, known as theHubble sequence, divides galaxies intoellipticals(E’s),spirals, andirregulars(Irr’s).The spirals are further subdivided into two parallel sequences, thenormalspirals(S’s), andthebarred spirals(SB’s). A transitional class of galaxies between ellipticals and spirals,known aslenticulars, can be either normal (S0’s) or barred (SB0’s). Hubble then arrangedhis morphological sequence in the form of atuning-fork diagram, shown in Fig. 1,which explicitly shows the two types of spirals. A galaxy’sHubble typeis its designationalong the Hubble sequence.A more modern classiﬁcation designates true irregulars as Ir, as shown in Fig4
4.1  The Nature of Galaxies
luminosity relation, he was able to use the distance modulus m − M to calculate the distance to Andromeda. Hubble’s original value of 285 kpc is approximately 2.7 times smaller than the modern estimate of 770 kpc, but it was still good enough to show deﬁni-tively that the spiral nebulae are indeed island universes.distance to Andromeda. Hubble’s original value of 285 kpc is approximately 2.7 times smaller than the modern estimate of 770 kpc, but it was still good enough to show deﬁni-tively that the spiral nebulae are indeed island universes.


<<<PAGE 968>>>

E0 E3 E7 SB0S0SaSBaSb
SBbSc
SBcIrFIGURE 1Hubble’s tuning-fork diagram of galaxy types.Hubble originally thought (incorrectly) that the tuning-fork diagram could be interpretedas an evolutionary sequence for galaxies. As a result, he referred to galaxies toward the leftof the diagram asearly typesand to those toward the right aslate types, terminology that isstill in widespread use today.Within the category of ellipticals, Hubble made divisions based on the observedellip-ticityof the galaxy, deﬁned byϵ≡1−β/α,(1)whereαandβare theapparentmajor and minor axes of the ellipse, respectively, projectedonto the plane of the sky. The Hubble type is then quoted in terms of 10ϵ. Ellipticals rangefrom a spherical distribution of stars, E0, to a highly ﬂattened distribution, E7. Galaxieswith ellipticities greater thanϵ=0.7 have never been observed, implying that no E galaxieswith intrinsic ellipticities greater than 0.7 appear to exist.It is important to realize that a difﬁculty immediately arises with this scheme: Theapparent ellipticity may not correspond well to an actual ellipticity since the orientationof the spheroid to our line of sight plays a crucial role in our observations. This effectcan be seen in Figs. 2 and 3, when observers viewoblateandprolategalaxies,respectively. Note that, in general,a≥b≥crepresents the lengths of the three axes of atriaxialspheroidal system. For a spherea=b=c, for a perfectly oblate spheroida=b,and for a perfectly prolate spheroidb=c. In general, however, there is no requirement thatany of the axes of a spheroidal system have equal lengths.The physical properties of elliptical galaxies cover an enormous range. Their absoluteBmagnitudes may be as dim as−8 or brighter than−23, their masses (including both luminousand dark matter) vary from as little as 107M⊙to more than 1013M⊙, and their diameters canbe as small as a few tenths of a kiloparsec or as large as hundreds of kiloparsecs. The giantelliptical galaxies are among the largest objects in the universe, while the smallest dwarfsare comparable in size to a typical globular cluster. The lenticular galaxies have massesand luminosities comparable to the larger ellipticals. Although the giant ellipticals and theThe termspheroidis commonly used to meanaxisymmetric ellipsoid.5
5The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 969>>>

cabObserver BObserver A/H9252/H9251/H9252/H9251As seen by AAs seen by B(reduced in size)FIGURE 2An oblate spheroidal galaxy has axis lengthsa=bandc<a.I fc/a=0.6, theapparent shape resembles an E4 galaxy (β/α=0.6) when seen by observer A. The same galaxyappears as an E0 when seen by observer B (β/α=1).
a
cbObserver AObserver B/H9252/H9251/H9252/H9251As seen by AAs seen by BFIGURE 3A prolate spheroidal galaxy has axis lengthsb=canda>b.I fb/a=0.6, theapparent shape resembles an E0 galaxy when seen by observer A. The same galaxy appears as an E4when seen by observer B.lenticulars are the easiest to observe, the dwarfs are by far the most numerous. Typicalexamples of elliptical galaxies are shown in Fig. 4, along with an S0 and an SB0. Thephysical characteristics of these galaxies will be discussed in more detail in Section 4.Hubble subdivided the spiral sequences into Sa, Sab, Sb, Sbc, Sc, and SBa, SBab,SBb, SBbc, SBc. The galaxies with the most prominent bulges (the largest bulge-to-diskluminosity ratios,Lbulge/Ldisk∼0.3), the most tightly wound spiral arms (with pitch anglesof approximately 6◦), and the smoothest distribution of stars in the arms are classiﬁed as Sa’s(or SBa’s), while Sc’s (or SBc’s) have smaller bulge-to-disk ratios (Lbulge/Ldisk∼0.05),more loosely wound spiral arms (∼18◦), and spiral arms that resolve into clumps of starsand H II regions. Examples of normal and barred spiral galaxies are shown in Figs. 5and 6, respectively. M31 and NGC 891 are Sb’s, whereasthe Milky Way is probably anSBbcSa–Sc (SBa–SBc) galaxies tend to have much smaller variations in their physical pa-rameters than do ellipticals. On average, spirals also tend to be among the largest galaxiesin the universe, with absoluteBmagnitudes from−16 to less than−23, masses (includingboth luminous and dark matter) between 109M⊙and 1012M⊙, and disk diameters of 5 to100 kpc.Thepitch angleis deﬁned as the angle between the tangent to the spiral arm and the tangent to a perfect circle,measured at the point where the arm and the circle intersect.6.
6The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 970>>>

(a)(b)(c)
(d)(e)(f)FIGURE 4Typical early-type galaxies. (a) IC 4296 (E0), (b) NGC 4365 (E3), (c) NGC 4564(E6), (d) NGC 4623 (E7), (e) NGC 4251 (S0), (f) NGC 4340 (RSB0). (Images from Sandage andBedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C., 1994.)Hubble split the remaining category of irregulars into Irr I if there was at least some hintof an organized structure, such as spiral arms, and Irr II for the most extremely disorganizedstructures. Both the Large Magellanic Cloud and the Small Magellanic Cloud are examplesof Irr I galaxies, while M82 (NGC 3034) is an example of an Irr II; see Fig. 7.Irregular galaxies have a wide range of characteristics, although they tend not to beparticularly large. Typically their absoluteBmagnitudes vary from−13 to−20, they havemasses of between 108M⊙and 1010M⊙, and their diameters range from 1 to 10 kpc. Mostirregulars also tend to have noticeable bars that are often off-center.Since the publication of Hubble’s tuning-fork diagram, astronomers have made numerousmodiﬁcations to his original classiﬁcation scheme. For instance, Gerard de Vaucouleurssuggested the elimination of the irregular classiﬁcations, Irr I and Irr II, in favor of theaddition of other morphological classes later than Sc (or SBc). Those galaxies that werebinned into Irr I have been designated Sd (SBd), Sm (SBm), or Im (where m stands forMagellanic type); for instance, the LMC is classiﬁed as an SBm, and the SMC is an Im. Thetruly irregular galaxies are simply designated Ir, such as M82 (which is why Ir is used asthe designation in Fig. 1). Sandage and Brucato further suggested that the Ir class shouldmore appropriately be termedamorphousto indicate the lack of any organized structure.As we shall see, spirals of Hubble-type Sd and later tend to be signiﬁcantly smaller thanearlier-type spirals; consequently, they are sometimes referred to asdwarf spirals.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 971>>>

(a)(b)
(c)(d)FIGURE 5Typical normal spirals. (a) NGC 7096 (Sa(r)I), (b) M81/NGC 3031 (Sb(r)I–II),(c) M101/NGC 5457/Pinwheel (Sc(s)I), (d) M104/NGC 4594/Sombrero (Sa/Sb) seen nearly edge on.(Images from Sandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washing-ton, Washington, D.C., 1994.)In order to make ﬁner distinctions between normal and barred spirals, de Vaucouleurshad also suggested referring to normal spirals as SA rather than simply S. Intermediatetypes with weak bars are then characterized as SAB, and strongly barred galaxies are SB.As a further reﬁnement to the system, the lenticular galaxies are also sometimes sub-divided according to the amount of dust absorption in their disks. S01galaxies have nodiscernable dust their disks, while S03galaxies have signiﬁcant amounts of dust, and sim-ilarly for SB01through SB03.Thus, the modern sequence from early ellipticals through normal late-type galaxies is(see also Fig. 1)E0, E1,..., E7, S01, S02, S03, Sa, Sab, Sb, Sbc, Sc, Scd, Sd, Sm, Im, Ir.A similar sequence exists for barred spirals.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 972>>>

(a)
(b)(c)FIGURE 6Typical barred spirals. (a) NGC 175 (SBab(s) I–II), (b) NGC 1300 (SBb(s) I),(c) NGC 2525 (SBc(s)II). (Images from Sandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, CarnegieInstitution of Washington, Washington, D.C., 1994.)Sidney van den Bergh introduced theluminosityclassfor spirals. The class ranges fromI through V , with I representing those spirals with well-deﬁned arms; galaxies with the leastdistinct arms are classiﬁed as V . M31 is classiﬁed as SbI–II (intermediate between I andII), the Milky Way Galaxy is an SBbcI–II, M101 is an ScI, the LMC is an SBmIII, andthe SMC is an ImIV–V . Except for the largest elliptical galaxies (to be discussed further inSection 4), the Milky Way and M31 are among some of the largest and brightest galaxiesin the universe. It is important to note, however, that despite its name, luminosity class doesnot necessarily correlate well with absolute magnitude.Besides their striking arms, spirals also show an amazing array of more complex andsubtle features. While some galaxies have spiral arms that can be followed nearly all theway into the center, others have arms that appear to terminate at the location of an innerring. Special designations further help to classify these systems. M101 [Fig. 5(c)] is agalaxy of the former type and is labeled as an Sc(s)I, where (s) designates that the spiralcan be traced to the center of the galaxy. On the other hand, NGC 7096 [Fig. 5(a)] andM81 [Fig. 5(b)] are galaxies of the later type and are classiﬁed as Sa(r)I and Sb(r)I–II,The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 973>>>

(a)
(b)(c)FIGURE 7Examples of irregular galaxies. (a) The Large Magellanic Cloud (Irr I/SBmIII),(b) the Small Magellanic Cloud (Irr I/ImIV–V), (c) M82/NGC 3034 (Irr II/Ir/Amorphous). (Imagesfrom Sandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Wash-ington, D.C., 1994.)respectively, where (r) indicates an inner ring. Galaxies may also have outer rings that canbe identiﬁed. One such example is NGC 4340 [Fig. 4(f)], which is designated as anRSB0, where the R preﬁx stands for outer ring. In some cases, galaxies may have both aninner ring and an outer ring.Given the enormous range in galaxy morphological types, it is not surprising that anyclassiﬁcation scheme will necessarily be complex. Fortunately, the Hubble sequence, withits various permutations and enhancements, has greatly facilitated the process of trying tounderstand the nature of galaxies.2SPIRAL AND IRREGULAR GALAXIESHubble’s classiﬁcation scheme for late-type galaxies has proved to be very successful inorganizing our study of these objects. Not only do bulge-to-disk ratios, the tightness of thespiral arms, and the ability to resolve the arms into stars and H II regions all correlate wellwith Hubble type, but so do a host of other physical parameters.Tables 1 and 2 summarize the characteristics of late-type galaxies, the details ofwhich will be discussed later. Although the spread in parameters can be quite large, trendsin Hubble type are clearly evident. For instance, if we compare an Sa galaxy with an ScThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 974>>>

TABLE 1Characteristics of Early Spiral Galaxies.SaSbScMB−17 to−23−17 to−23−16 to−22M(M⊙)109–1012109–1012109–1012/angbracketleftbigLbulge/Ltotal/angbracketrightbigB0.30.13 0.05Diameter (D25, kpc) 5–1005–100 5–100⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)6.2±0.64.5±0.42.6±0.2⟨Vmax⟩(km s−1)299222 175Vmaxrange (km s−1) 163–367 144–330 99–304pitch angle∼6◦∼12◦∼18◦⟨B−V⟩0.750.64 0.52/angbracketleftbigMgas/Mtotal/angbracketrightbig0.040.08 0.16/angbracketleftbigMH2/MHI/angbracketrightbig2.2±0.6 (Sab) 1.8±0.30.73±0.13⟨SN⟩1.2±0.21.2±0.20.5±0.2TABLE 2Characteristics of Late Spiral and Irregular Galaxies.Sd/Sm Im/IrMB−15 to−20−13 to−18M(M⊙)108–1010108–1010Diameter (D25, kpc) 0.5–50 0.5–50⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)∼1∼1Vmaxrange (km s−1) 80–120 50–70⟨B−V⟩0.47 0.37/angbracketleftbigMgas/Mtotal/angbracketrightbig0.25 (Scd) 0.5–0.9/angbracketleftbigMH2/MHI/angbracketrightbig0.03–0.3∼0⟨SN⟩0.5±0.20.5±0.2galaxy of comparable luminosity, the Sa will be more massive (largerM/LB), have a higherpeak in its rotation curve (Vmax), have a smaller mass fraction of gas and dust, and containa higher proportion of older, red stars.TheK-CorrectionBefore we can consider these correlations in more detail, it is necessary to discuss the prob-lems associated determining the brightnesses of galaxies. As is the case with determiningabsolute magnitudes for stars, calculating the absolute magnitudes of galaxies requires mak-ing corrections to their observed apparent magnitudes if we are to properly account for theeffects of extinction, both within the Milky Way and within the target galaxy(Extinction is generally negligible in the nearly empty space between galaxies.) Further-more, for extragalactic objects another important correction must be considered as well..The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 975>>>

for very distant galaxies. If this effect were not considered, possible conclusions about theevolution of galaxies would be likely to be in errorThe Brightness of the Background SkyAnother problem that arises when making observations of faint galaxies, or when mea-suring their outermost regions, is the competition with the brightness of the backgroundsky. The dimly glowing night sky has an average surface brightness of aboutµsky=22B-mag arcsec−2(measured in theBwavelength band). Sources of this backgroundlight include light pollution from nearby cities, photochemical reactions in Earth’s upperatmosphere, the zodiacal light, unresolved stars in the Milky Way, and unresolved galaxies.However, in modern photometric studies using CCDs, the surface brightnesses of galax-ies can be measured down to levels of 29B-mag arcsec−2or fainter. Consequently, toaccurately determine the light distribution of a galaxy at these extremely faint levels, it isnecessary to subtract the contribution from the background sky.Isophotes and the de Vaucouleurs ProﬁleOnce the sky subtraction is performed, it becomes possible to map contours of constantsurface brightness. Such contours are known asisophotes(lines of constant photon number).In specifying the “radius” of a galaxy, it is necessary to deﬁne the surface brightness ofthe isophote being used to determine that radius.1/4ellipsoid having an isophotal surface brightness ofµH=26.5B-mag arcsec−2. A secondstandard radius in frequent use is theeffectiveradius,re, the projected radius within whichone-half of the galaxy’s light is emitted. The surface brightness level atre, designatedµe,depends on the distribution of the surface brightness with radius.For the bulges of spiral galaxies, and for large ellipticals, the surface brightness distri-bution typically follows anr1/4law given byµ(r)=µe+8.3268/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg.(2)This is just ther1/4de Vaucouleurs proﬁle written inunits of mag arcsec−2, rather thanL⊙pc−2. It is left as an exercise to showthat these two forms are equivalent..
,The Nature of GalaxiesSince most galaxies are observed to have measurable redshifts, some or even most of the light that would normally fall within the wavelength band of interest, say the B band, would be redshifted to longer-wavelength regions. Accounting for this ef-fect is known as the K  -correction. As we will learn, the K  -correction is most severe
No deﬁnite cutoff is known to exist in either the exponential distribu-tion of the disk or the r distribution of the spheroid. One commonly used  radius, introduced by Erik Holmberg, a Swedish astronomer, is the Holm-berg radius, rH, deﬁned to be the projected length of the semimajor axis of an


<<<PAGE 976>>>

µ(r)=µ0+1.09/parenleftbiggrhr/parenrightbigg,(3)wherehris the characteristic scale length of the disk along its midplaneA generalized version of ther1/4law is frequently used in which 1/4 is replaced by1/n. The resultinggeneralized de Vaucouleurs proﬁle, also known as theSérsic proﬁle(named for José Luis Sérsic), has the formµ(r)=µe+8.3268/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/n−1/bracketrightBigg,(4)whereµe,re, andnare all free parameters used to obtain the best possible ﬁt to the actualsurface brightness proﬁle. Note that whenn=1, Eq. ( 3) is a special case of Eq. ( 4),whereµ0andhrare written in terms ofµeandre, respectively.The Rotation Curves of GalaxiesWhile surface brightness proﬁles, such as the generalized de Vaucouleurs proﬁle, samplethe distribution of luminous matter in a galaxy, they do not reveal the distribution of thegalaxy’s dark matter. A direct means to determine the distribution of all matter, luminousand dark, is to measure the galaxy’s rotation curveExamples of rotation curves, averaged over groups of galaxiesof a givenMBrange and Hubble type, are shown in Fig. 8.When rotation curves are compared with either luminosity or Hubble type, a numberof correlations are found. For instance, with increasing luminosity in theBband,LB, therotation curves tend to rise more rapidly with distance from the center and peak at highermaximum velocities (Vmax). For galaxies of equalB-band luminosities, spirals of earliertype have larger values ofVmax. Within a given Hubble type, galaxies that are more luminoushave larger values ofVmax. Also, for a given value ofVmax, the rotation curves tend to riseslightly more rapidly with radius for galaxies of progressively earlier type. The fact thatgalaxies of different Hubble types, and therefore very different bulge-to-disk luminosityratios, exhibit rotation curves that are very similar in form if not in amplitude suggeststhat the shapes of their gravitational potentials do not necessarily follow the distribution ofluminous matter. This behavior is believed to be a signature of the existence of dark matterin these galaxies.Although the maximum rotational velocity within the disk increases for earlier-typegalaxies, a wide range inVmaxexists for each type. For typical samples of spirals oftype Sc and earlier, the mean maximum rotation velocities areVmax=299 km s−1forSa, 222 km s−1for Sb, and 175 km s−1for Sc, while the ranges in values are 163 km s−1to.
.The Nature of GalaxiesDisks are frequently modeled with an exponential decayHowever, as with ther1/4law, the disk luminosity per unit areacan be written in units of mag arcsec−2as.


<<<PAGE 977>>>

0100200300400
01002000100200Rotation velocity (kms)Sa
Sb
Sc–22.5–22–21–20–19–18–22.5–22–21–21.5–20–19–18–23–22–21–20–19–18MB0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0Fraction of isophotal radiusFIGURE8Variations in the average rotation curves of Sa, Sb, and Sc galaxies for various valuesof absolute magnitude in theBband. (Figure adapted from Rubin et al.,Ap. J.,289, 81, 1985.)367 km s−1, 144 km s−1to 330 km s−1, and 99 km s−1to 304 km s−1, respectively. Noticethat the value ofVmax≃250 km s−1for the Milky Way Galaxy (believed to be an SBbcis only slightly greater than the mean value ofVmaxfor Sb’s.The corresponding maximum rotation velocities for irregular galaxies is signiﬁcantlylower than it is for earlier-type spirals, typically ranging from 50 to 70 km s−1. This seemsto suggest that a minimum rotation speed of roughly 50 to 100 km s−1may be required forthe development of a well-organized spiral pattern. The slower rotation velocities of Im’simply that their values of the rotational angular momentum per unit mass are only about10% of the value found for our Galaxy in the solar neighborhood.The Tully–Fisher RelationAs the preceding discussion suggests, a relationship exists between the luminosity of aspiral galaxy and its maximum rotation velocity. This correlation, now known as theTully–Fisherrelation, was ﬁrst determined in 1977 by R. Brent Tully and J. Richard Fisher when)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 978>>>

NGC 3198H I global profile
400 500 600 700 800 900Heliocentric velocity (km s–1)0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Flux density (Jy)FIGURE9The global H I proﬁle for NGC 3198. (Data from Begeman,Astron. Astrophys.,223,81, 1991.)they measured the Doppler-broadened 21-cm radio emission line of neutral hydrogen ina sample of spiral galaxies. When the 21-cm line is sampled across the entire galaxy atone time, this line typically displays a double peak, as shown in Fig. 9. The doublepeak arises because of the ﬂat rotation curve of the galaxy, which generally has the highestrotational velocity in the ﬂat part of the curve. Since so much of the H I participates inthe rotation at this maximum velocity, the ﬂux density is greatest at this value. The doublepeak occurs because a portion of the disk is rotating toward the observer, causing the lineto be blueshifted, and a portion of the disk is rotating away from the observer, resulting ina redshifted line. The average radial velocity of the galaxy relative to the observer is themidpoint value between the two peaks.The shiftκDeltaζλof a peak from its rest wavelength is giveκDeltaζλλrest≃vrc=Vsinic.Here,vris the radial velocity, andiis the angle of inclination between the observer’s lineof sight and the direction perpendicular to the galactic plane (soi=90◦when viewing thegalaxy edge-on).Figure 10 shows the Tully–Fisher relation asMBvs.Vmaxfor a sample of Sa, Sb,and Sc galaxies. Notice the shift to lower values ofVmaxfor galaxies of later Hubble typebut with similarMB’s. When the data are ﬁtted with linear relations that depend on Hubbletype, we ﬁnd thatMB=−9.95 log10Vmax+3.15 (Sa),MB=−10.2 log10Vmax+2.71 (Sb),MB=−11.0 log10Vmax+3.31 (Sc).(5)(6)(7)The Tully–Fisher relation can be further reﬁned and tightened if observations are madeat infrared wavelengths. This offers two advantages. Observing at dust-penetrating infraredn by,The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 979>>>

Sa: MB = 3.15–9.95 log Vmax  r = –0.89Sb: MB = 2.71–10.2 log Vmax  r = –0.62Sc: MB = 3.31–11.0 log Vmax  r = –0.82
ScSbSa–18–19–20–21–22–23–24MB, blue absolute magnitudeSaSbSc100200300 400Vmax (km s–1)FIGURE 10The Tully–Fisher relation for early spiral galaxies. (Figure adapted from Rubin etal.,Ap. J.,289, 81, 1985.)wavelengths reduces extinction by a factor of 10. In addition, the infrared light comesprimarily from late-type giant stars that are good tracers of the galaxy’s overall luminousmass distribution; theBband tends to emphasize young, hot stars in regions of recent starformation. One expression of the Tully–Fisher relation in the infraredHwavelength band(1.66µm), devised by Pierce and Tully (1992), isMiH=−9.50(log10WiR−2.50)−21.67±0.08.(8)WiRis a measure of the rotation of the galaxy deﬁned asWiR≡(W20−Wrand)/sini,(9)whereW20is the velocity difference between the blueshifted and redshifted emission in theHband when the intensity of the emission is 20% of its blue and red peak values.Wrandis ameasure of the random velocities superimposed on observed velocities due to noncircularorbital motions in the galaxy. Finally,iis the inclination angle of the plane of the galaxy.An example of theH-band Tully–Fisher relation (Eq. 8) for galaxies in three clusters isshown in Fig. 11.Although the exact form of the Tully–Fisher relation depends on the distribution of masswithin galaxies, as well as on variations in their mass-to-light ratios, we can stillgain someinsight into its origin. As is evident in Fig.8, spiral galaxies have nearlyFor a Gaussian random velocity distribution, it can be shown thatWrandis related to the velocity dispersionσbyWrand=3.6σ.7
7The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 980>>>

2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7–17–18–19–20–21–22–23
Log10 WiRMiH
FIGURE11The Tully–Fisher relation in the infraredH-band (1.66µm) as given by Eq. ( 8).The data are for galaxies in the Local, Sculptor, and M81 groups of galaxies. (Data from Pierce andTully,Ap. J.,387, 47, 1992.)ﬂat rotation curves beyond a few kiloparsecs.Evaluating this for the entiregalaxy(r→RandMr→M) results inM=V2maxRG,(10)where the maximum rotation speed,Vmax, is equated with the ﬂat portion of the rotationcurve. Now,ifthe mass-to-light ratio has the same value for all spirals (M/L≡1/CML,whereCMLis a constant), thenL=CMLV2maxRG.Finally, if we make the crude assumption that all spirals have the same surface brightnessat their centers, thenL/R2≡CSB, whereCSBis another constant. EliminatingRfrom theexpression for the luminosity, we obtainL=C2MLCSBV4maxG2=CV4max,whereCincorporates the other constants. The absolute magnitude comes fromM=MSun−2.5 log10/parenleftbiggLL⊙/parenrightbigg=MSun−2.5 log10V4max−2.5 log10C+2.5 log10L⊙=−10 log10Vmax+constant.,The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 981>>>

Although the additive (zero-point) constant remains unevaluated, this simple argumentnearly reproduces the leading coefﬁcients of Eqs. ( 5– 8), the slopes of theB-bandTully–Fisher relations for Sa’s, Sb’s, and Sc’s, and the slope of the collective relationshipin theHband.Radius–Luminosity RelationAnother important pattern also emerges in the data of early-type spiral galaxies (e.g., Sa–Sc): Radius increases with increasing luminosity, independent of Hubble type. At the diskradius (R25) corresponding to a surface-brightness level of 25B-mag arcsec−2, the data arewell represented by the linear relationshiplog10R25=−0.249MB−4.00,(11)whereR25is measured in units of kpc.Masses and Mass-to-Light RatiosThrough the use of the Tully–Fisher relation (Eqs. 5– 7), combined with Eq. ( 11)and (24.49), it is now possible to estimate both the masses of early-type spiral galaxies andtheir mass-to-light ratios interior toR25. While masses range from greater than 109M⊙toat most about 1012M⊙, there is only a very weak relationship between a galaxy’s massand its Hubble type (on average, Sc’s areslightlyless massive than Sa’s), as might beexpected, given the lack of any dependence on Hubble type in the correlation betweenR25andMB. However, a correlation does exist for the mass-to-light ratios, with the averagevalue ofM/LBdecreasing with progressively later Hubble type;⟨M/LB⟩=6.2±0.6 forSa’s, 4.5±0.4 for Sb’s, and 2.6±0.2 for Sc’s.Colors and the Abundance of Gas and DustThe trend inM/LBsuggests that Sc’s tend to have a greater fraction of massive main-sequence stars relative to earlier spiralswe should also expect Sc’s to be bluer than Sa’s and Sb’s, which is just what is observed.The mean values of the color index,B−V, decrease with later Hubble types: 0.75 for Sa’s,0.64 for Sb’s, and 0.52 for Sc’s. For successively later-type galaxies, progressively greaterportions of the overall light from spirals is emitted in bluer wavelength regions, implyingan increasingly greater fraction of younger, more massive, main-sequence stars.Irregulars tend to be the bluest of all galaxies represented by the Hubble sequence, withcharacteristic values ofB−V∼0.4. Furthermore, Ir’s often get bluer toward their centers,rather than redder as is the case for early-type spirals. This suggests that irregulars are stillactively manufacturing stars in their central regions. For instance, the LMC and the SMCstill appear to be making blue globular clusters in their disks.It is an unfortunate consequence of the historical development of the terminology that galaxies of later Hubbletype are actually dominated by stars lying on the early (upper) part of the main sequence.(that upper main-sequence stars have low mass-to-light ratios). If this is the case,8
8The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 982>>>

Since blue main-sequence stars are short-lived, they must have formed relatively recently.Presumably an abundant supply of gas and dust exists in Sc’s from which these stars can beproduced. Based on the analysis of 21-cm radiation, Hαemission, and CO emission (whichis a good tracer of H2), we ﬁnd that the mass fraction of gas relative to the total mass interiortoR25increases steadily from Sa’s to Sc’s and later. For instance,⟨Mgas/Mtotal⟩=0.04 forSa’s, 0.08 for Sb’s, 0.16 for Sc’s, and 0.25 for Scd’s. This agrees with the observation thatthe brightness of H II emission also increases with later Hubble types.The relative amounts of atomic and molecular hydrogen also change with Hubble type.For Sab’s,⟨MH2/MHI⟩=2.2±0.6, decreasing to 1.8±0.3 for Sb’s, 0.73±0.13 forSc’s, and 0.29±0.07 for Scd’s. This observation has been interpreted as implying thatSa’s are somewhat more centrally condensed, containing correspondingly deeper gravita-tional wells in which gas can collect and combine to form molecules. This means that theinterstellar medium of Sa’s is dominated by molecular gas while the interstellar mediumof Scd’s is primarily composed of atomic hydrogen. Overall, the amount of molecular hy-drogen in spirals can range from 5×1010M⊙for the most massive galaxies to as little as106M⊙for dwarf spirals. The mass of dust is characteristically 150 to 600 times lower thanthe mass of gas in the ISM.It is dust that is primarily responsible for the far-infrared (FIR) luminosities of galaxies,although synchrotron radiation and the emissions of stars can also contribute to the total.From observations made by IRAS, astronomers have discovered thatLFIR/LB=0.07 forM31 (an SbI–II), 0.2 for M33 (an Sc(s)II–II), 0.4 for M101 (an Sc(s)I), 0.18 for the LMC(an SBmIII), and 0.09 for the SMC (an ImIV–V). In general, Sc’s have a larger fraction ofinfrared emission than Sa’s or Sb’s, consistent with the other observations of correspond-ingly greater fractions of their masses being in the form of gas and dust. Interestingly, SB’stend to have greater infrared luminosities than do normal S’s.Metallicity Gradients and Color Gradients of SpiralsNot only is there a dependence of color on Hubble type, but individual spiral galaxiesalso exhibitcolor gradients, with their bulges generally being redder than their disks.This arises for two reasons: metallicity gradients and star formation activity. The aver-age number of electrons per atom is larger for metal-rich stars than for metal-poor stars.Since ionization and the orbital transitions of electrons contribute to the opacity in stel-lar photospheres, the opacity in metal-rich stars is greater. Because it is more difﬁcult forlight generated in the interior to escape from a star with a higher-opacity photosphere,the star will tend to “puff up”; its radius will increase, with a corresponding decrease ineffective temperature. Hence, a higher-opacity star will be redder than a lower-opacitystar, all else being equalThe redness of bulges argues for those regions being more metal-rich than are the por-tions of disks farther from the center, as is the case in our own Galaxy. In fact, within theMilky Way, metallicity gradients have been measured at Galactocentric radii of between4 and 14 kpc with values ofd[He/H]/dr=−0.01±0.008 dex kpc−1,d[O/H]/dr=−0.07±0.015 dex kpc−1, andd[Fe/H]/dr=−0.01 to−0.05 dex kpc−1.“dex” refers to the logarithmic nature of the metallicity term in the gradient99.The Nature of Galaxies
.


<<<PAGE 983>>>

–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.0[O/H][Fe/H]
–8 –10 –12 –14 –16 –18 –20 –22MBFIGURE12Metallicity is observed to increase linearly with absolute magnitude. The symbolsin the upper panel correspond to dE’s (dwarf ellipticals, open squares) and ellipticals (open circles andopen triangles). In the lower panel, spirals are represented by ﬁlled circles and irregulars are indicatedby ﬁlled squares. (Figure adapted from Zaritsky, Kennicutt, and Huchra,Ap. J.,420, 87, 1994.)Star formation, the second major cause of color gradients, implies that the disks of spiralgalaxies are more actively involved in star-making than are their bulges. This is consistentwith the distribution of gas and dust in the galaxies. The spheroidal components of spiralsusually contain much less gas and have correspondingly lower star formation rates than theirdisks. Since disks are able to produce young, hot, blue stars at a greater rate, the spheroidsappear relatively redder and a color gradient is established.Color gradients have been observed within the spheroids of spiral galaxies as well, suchas NGC 7814. The galaxies’ spheroidal components become bluer with increasing radius.This is also the case for the Milky Way, with the more metal-rich, redder globular clustersorbiting closer to the Galactic center.Observations indicate that metallicity correlates with the absolute magnitudes of galax-ies;[Fe/H]and[O/H]both increase withMB(see Fig. 12). Apparently chemical enrich-ment was somehow more efﬁcient in luminous, massive galaxies. Composition enrichmenthistories and gradients have signiﬁcant implications for galaxy formation theoriesX-Ray LuminosityThe X-ray luminosities of galaxies also provide some information concerning their evolu-tion. In spirals, luminosities in the wavelength region sampled by the Einstein satellite (withphoton energies of 0.2 to 3.5 keV) typically range fromLX=1031Wt o1 034W. A sur-The Nature of Galaxies
.


<<<PAGE 984>>>

prisingly tight correlation exists between X-ray andB-band luminosities (LX/LB≃10−7),which has been interpreted as implying that the X-rays are due to a class of objects thatconstitutes an approximately constant fraction of the population of all objects in spirals. Thesuspected sources are X-ray binaries. It is probable that supernova remnants also contributeto the X-ray emission.Supermassive Black HolesObservations of stellar and gas motions near the centers of some spirals strongly suggestthe presence of supermassive black holes. For instance, near the center of M31,M/Lexceeds 35 M⊙/L⊙, indicating a large amount of nonluminous matter conﬁned to a smallregion. Rotational-velocity measurements can be used to estimate thedynamical massofthe central black hole of M31 in the same way it was done for Sgr A⋆in the Galactic center.Ap r e c i s ed e t e r m i n a t i o nb a s e do nk i n e m a t i cs t u d i e so ft h et r i p l en u c l e u sof M31 (Fig. 13) gives a mass of 1.4+0.9−0.3×108M⊙for the central supermassive blackhole.Another (although less precise) method of determining the mass of a central supermassiveblack hole uses the velocity dispersion to obtain a mass estimate via the virial theorem.galaxy’s central region are related by12/angbracketleftbiggd2Idt2/angbracketrightbigg−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩,
FIGURE13An HST image of the triple nucleus of theAndromeda galaxy (M31). Two groupingsof red stars are evident in this image. The brighter grouping of red stars on the left is P1, and thedimmer grouping is P2. P1 and P2 are believed to be portions of an elongated disk of stars orbitingthe galaxy’s supermassive black hole. P1 is farthest from the black hole (the apocenter), and P2 isnearest the black hole (the pericenter). A blue cluster of stars, known as P3, is superimposed on P2.P3 is believed to be orbiting the galaxy’s supermassive black hole. [Courtesy of NASA, ESA, and T.Lauer (NOAO/AURA/NSF).]The time-averaged kinetic and potential energies of stars in theThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 985>>>

whereIis the region’s moment of inertia. If the galaxy is in equilibrium, then⟨d2I/dt2⟩=0,resulting in the usual statement of the virial theorem,−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.Furthermore, for a large number of stars, the central bulge will look the same (in a statisticalsense) at any time, and the time-averaging can be dropped. So forNstars,−2N/summationdisplayi=112miv2i=U,For simplicity, we restrict our attention to a spherical cluster of radiusRwithNstars,each of massm, so the total mass of the bulge isM=Nm. Dividing the above expressionbyNproduces−mNN/summationdisplayi=1v2i=UN.(12)Of course, astronomers actually measure the radial component of the velocity vector (agalaxy is too far away to allow for detection of proper motions). Moreover, an astronomeris just as likely to see a star moving in the radial direction as in either of the other twoperpendicular directions. With the brackets denoting an average value,/angbracketleftbigv2/angbracketrightbig=/angbracketleftbigv2r/angbracketrightbig+/angbracketleftbigv2θ/angbracketrightbig+/angbracketleftbigv2φ/angbracketrightbig=3/angbracketleftbigv2r/angbracketrightbig,so1NN/summationdisplayi=1v2i=/angbracketleftbigv2/angbracketrightbig=3/angbracketleftbigv2r/angbracketrightbig=3σ2r,whereσris the dispersion in the radial velocity Inserting this result intoEq. ( 12), and usingthe (approximate) potential energy of a sphericaldistribution of total massMand radiusR, leads to−3mσ2r≈−35GM2NR.UsingM=Nmand solving for the mass giveMvirial≈5Rσ2rG,(13)where the mass obtained in this way is called thevirial mass..The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 986>>>

It is important to note that in order to determine an accurate value for the mass, anappropriate choice ofRmust be made. As the observations move farther from the blackhole, contributions to the total mass increase from surrounding stars and gas.Rmust bechosen to be within the black hole’s “sphere of inﬂuence.”Example 2.1.Equation ( 13) can be used to estimate a virial mass for the centralblack hole of M32, a companion galaxy of M31. From Fig. 14, the central radial-velocitydispersion is approximately 162 km s−1. This means that within 0.1′′(approximately 0.4 pc)of the center, there is a total mass of roughlyMvirial∼1×107M⊙.A more accurate estimate, based on the rotation curve, gives a value of between 1.5×106M⊙and 5×106M⊙.It is important to note that central supermassive black holes are not restricted to late-typegalaxies. For example, based on observations made using the Hubble Space Telescope, itappears that the giant elliptical galaxy M87 (NGC 4476) also contains a 3.2±0.9×109M⊙black hole. HST was able to resolve a disk of material within M87 that has rotationalspeeds reaching 550 km s−1; the disk itself is orbiting a central region no larger thanour Solar System. Given that the distance to M87 is nearly 20 Mpc, this is a remarkableobservation. (M87 is also known to have a relativistic jet that is believed to be powered bythe supermassive black hole at its center
Rotation curveVelocity dispersion
–5005050100150200
0V (km s–1)/H9268 (km s–1)
–1.0–0.50.00.51.0r (arcsec)FIGURE 14The stellar velocity dispersion and rotational velocities of stars near the center ofM32. Given the distance to M32 of 770 kpc, 1′′corresponds to a linear distance from the center of3.7 pc. (Data from Joseph, et al.,Ap. J.,550, 668, 2001.).)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 987>>>

100 150 200 250 300 350 400/H9268 (km s–1)1061071081091010Mass (M/M  )
FIGURE 15The relationship between the mass of a galaxy’s supermassive black hole and thevelocity dispersion,σ, of the galaxy’s spheroid. The data set includes elliptical, lenticular, and spiralgalaxies. (Data from Ferrarese and Ford,Space Science Reviews,116, 523, 2005. The open symbolrepresents the Milky Way with mass data from Ghez, et. al,Ap. J.,620, 744, 2005.)As the number of known central supermassive black holes has increased, it has becomepossible to look for relationships between the black holes and their host galaxies. A veryintriguing and useful correlation has been discovered between the mass of the supermassiveblack hole in a galaxy’s center and the velocity dispersion of the stars within the galaxy.The relationship is illustrated in Fig. 15 and is given by the best-ﬁt power law,Mbh=α(σ/σ0)β,(14)whereσis the velocity dispersion in units of km s−1,α=(1.66±0.24)×108M⊙,β=4.86±0.43, andσ0=200 km s−1. The velocity dispersion is measured for the stellar pop-ulation near the black hole. Correlations between the mass of supermassive black holes andother bulk galaxy parameters, such as the luminosity of the bulge, have also been uncovered.Apparently a fundamental link exists between the formation of the central supermassiveblack hole in a galaxy and the overall formation of the galaxy itself. Just what that link isremains to be determined.Evidence continues to mount that supermassive black holes may exist in the centers ofmost galaxies.Speciﬁc Frequency of Globular ClustersFinally, it is worth discussing the abundance of globular clusters in late-type galaxies,which, when compared with the numbers of globular clusters in ellipticals, has importantimplications for theories of galactic formation and evolution. It appears that galaxies thatThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 988>>>

are more spheroidally dominant (i.e., earlier Hubble types) were more efﬁcient at formingglobular clusters during their early histories.Although virtually all galaxies appear to containsome globular clusters, the number of clusters within a galaxy seems to increase with totalgalaxy luminosity and with progressively earlier Hubble type.To compare cluster systems among Hubble types more directly, the globular-clustercounts are usually normalized to a standard absolute magnitude for the parent galaxy ofMV=−15 mag (in the visual wavelength band). IfNtis the total number of globularclusters in a galaxy, then thespeciﬁc frequencyof globular clusters is deﬁned asSN=NtL15LV=Nt100.4(MV+15),(15)whereLVis the galaxy’s luminosity andL15is the reference luminosity corresponding toan absolute visual magnitude ofMV=−15 magAs can be seen in Fig. 16, for Sc galaxies and later, the average value ofSNis in the range of 0.5±0.2, while for Sa’s and Sb’s,⟨SN⟩increases to 1.2±0.2.⟨SN⟩iseven larger for elliptical galaxies, meaning that they have more clusters per unit luminositythan do spirals. In fact, by far the largest number of globular clusters per unit luminositybelongs to the gigantic elliptical galaxies (cD’s) that are frequently found near the centers oflarge clusters of galaxies (see Sections 4 and 3). It seems that the number of globularclusters offers important clues to galaxy formation theories.
SN vs. Galaxy type
0510152025SN
I Sc Sb Sa S0 dE ESERcDFIGURE16The association of the speciﬁc frequency of globular clusters with Hubble type. cDgalaxies are the largest elliptical galaxies in the universe; dE’s are dwarf ellipticals. (Figure adaptedfrom Harris,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,29, 543, 1991. Reproduced by permission from theAnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 29, ©1991 by Annual Reviews Inc.).The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 989>>>

3SPIRAL STRUCTUREGalaxies exhibit a rich variety of spiral structure, which may vary in number of arms andhow tightly wound they are, degree of smoothness in the distribution of stars and gas, surfacebrightness, and the existence or lack of bars. The most majestic spiral galaxies, known asgrand-designspirals, usually have two very symmetric and well-deﬁned arms. One of thebest-known examples of a grand-design spiral is M51 (NGC 5194), shown in Fig. 17.Also called the Whirlpool galaxy, M51 has a companion galaxy (NGC 5195, visible in theimage) near the end of one of the spiral arms.However, not all spirals are grand designs with two distinct arms. For instance, M101[Fig. 5(c)] has four arms, and NGC 2841 (Fig. 18) has a series of partial arm fragments.Galaxies like NGC 2841, which do not possess well-deﬁned spiral arms that are traceableover a signiﬁcant angular distance, are calledﬂocculent spirals. Only about 10% of allspirals are considered grand-design galaxies, another 60% are multiple-arm galaxies, andthe remaining 30% are ﬂocculent galaxies.The optical images of spiral galaxies are dominated by their arms. This is because veryluminous O and B main-sequence stars and H II regions are found preferentially in thearms. Since massive OB stars are short-lived objects relative to the characteristic rotationperiod of a galaxy, spiral structure must correspond to regions of active star formation. (Forinstance, the ages of OB stars are on the order of 10 Myr, compared to 230 Myr for the orbitalperiod of the local standard of rest in the Milky Way
FIGURE 17The Whirlpool galaxy, M51 (NGC 5194), is an Sbc(s)I–II grand-design spirallocated in the constellation Canes Venatici (the Hunting Dogs of Boötes, just below Ursa Major).Also visible is its companion NGC 5195, situated near the end of one of the spiral arms. (Image fromSandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington,D.C., 1994.).)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 990>>>

FIGURE18The Sb galaxy NGC 2841 is an example of a ﬂocculent spiral. (Image from Sandageand Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C.,1994.)
(a)(b)FIGURE 19M51 as seen in (a) blue light and (b) red light. (Figures from Elmegreen,Ap. J.Suppl.,47, 229, 1981.)Careful inspection of the various images found in this chapter reveals that dust bandsare also evident in the spiral arms; M51 (Fig. 17) is a particularly good example. Noticethat the dust bands tend to reside on the inner (concave) edges of the arms. Observation of21-cm H I emission indicates that gas clouds are also more prevalent near the inner edgesof the arms.As Fig. 19 illustrates, when spiral galaxies are observed in red light, the arms becomemuch broader and less pronounced, although they still remain detectable. Since observationsThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 991>>>

Trailing structureLeading structureFIGURE 20Trailing and leading spiral arm structures.at red wavelengths emphasize the emission of long-lived, lower-mass main-sequence starsand red giants, this implies that the bulk of the disk is dominated by older stars. However,despite the dominance of lower-mass stars between the spiral arms, observations indicatethat there is still an increase in the number density of older stars (and an accompanyingincrease in mass density) within the spiral arms.Trailing and Leading Spiral ArmsAlthough the general appearance of spiral galaxies suggests that their arms aretrailing,meaning that the tips of the arms point in the opposite direction from the direction of rotation(see Fig. 20), verifying this is not always a simple matter. Distinguishing between trailingandleadingspiral arms requires a determination of the orientation of the plane of the galaxyrelative to our line of sight so that radial-velocity measurements can be unambiguouslyinterpreted in terms of the direction of galaxy rotation. In almost all cases where such aclear determination can be made, it does appear that spiral arms are trailing. However, in onecase, NGC 4622, two arms are going one way and another arm is winding in the oppositedirection; at least one of these arms must be leading. It has also been suggested that M31(Andromeda) has one tightly wound leading arm. In each case it is likely that the cause ofthe leading spiral is a tidal encounter with a retrograde-moving object (M32 in the case ofAndromeda).The Winding ProblemGiven that spiral galaxies are commonplace within the universe, it is natural to ask whatcauses spiral structure, and whether spiral arms are long-lived (with lifetimes comparableto the age of a galaxy) or transient.One problem immediately arises when the nature of spiral structure is considered;ma-terial armscomposed of a ﬁxed set of identiﬁable stars and gas clouds would necessarily“wind up” on a timescale that is short compared to the age of the galaxy. This so-calledwindingproblemcan be understood by considering a set of stars that are originally along asingle line, but at varying distances from the center of the galaxy, as shown in Fig. 21(a).Since the disk of a spiral galaxy rotates differentially (except very near the center), the outerThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 992>>>

ABCDBCDAABCD(a)(b)(c)FIGURE 21The winding problem for material arms. The arms become progressively moretightly wound as time goes on. A ﬂat rotation curve is assumed withRB=2RA,RC=3RA, andRD=4RA. (a) The stars start out in a line at timet=0. (b) After starAhas completed one orbit.(c) After starAhas completed two orbits.stars will require more time to complete one orbit than will stars with smaller orbital radii.1This effect will of course lead to a natural generation of trailing spiral arms. However, afteronly a few orbits, the spiral arms will become too tightly wound to be observed; this situ-ation is depicted in Figs. 21(b) and 21(c). Another mechanism is needed to explainpersistent spiral structure.The Lin–Shu Density Wave TheoryIn the mid-1960s, the American astronomers C. C. Lin and Frank Shu proposed that spiralstructure arises because of the presence of long-livedquasistatic density waves. Densitywaves consist of regions in the galactic disk where the mass density is greater than average,perhaps by 10% to 20%. Stars, dust, and gas clouds move through the density waves duringtheir orbits around the galactic center, much like cars slowly working their way througha trafﬁc jam on a highway. Lin and Shu suggested that when the galaxy is viewed in anoninertial reference frame that is rotating with a speciﬁc angular speedκOmegaζgp, known astheglobal pattern speed, the spiral wave pattern appears to be stationary, as shown inFig. 22. This does not imply that the motions of the stars are also stationary in thatframe, however. Stars near the center of the galaxy can have orbital periods that are shorterthan the density wave pattern (orκOmegaζ>κOmegaζgp) and so they will overtake a spiral arm, movethrough it, and continue on until they encounter the next arm. Stars sufﬁciently far fromthe center of the galaxy will be moving more slowly than the density wave pattern and willbe overtaken by it (κOmegaζ<κOmegaζgp). At a speciﬁc distance from the center, called thecorotationradius(Rc), the stars and density waves will move together. In this noninertial referenceframe in which the density wave pattern is static, the stars withR<Rcwill appear to passthrough the arms moving in one direction, while stars withR>Rcwill appear to be movingin the opposite sense.The Lin–Shu hypothesis helps to explain many of the observations concerning spiralstructure that have been discussed—for instance, the ordering of H I clouds and dust bands1For ﬂat rotation curves, the orbital velocities of stars are nearly independent of distance from the center, but theangular velocity,κOmegaζ=v/R, still decreases with increasing distance.0
0The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 993>>>

AABBCC
(a)(b)SS¢S¢xy
xpypypWBWCWgpxpWA
FIGURE 22(a) A galaxy with trailing spiral arms as seen in an inertial reference frameSinwhich a quasistatic density wave is moving with a global angular pattern speedκOmegaζgp. StarAhas anangular speedκOmegaζA>κOmegaζgp, StarBhas an angular speedκOmegaζB<κOmegaζgp, and StarCis corotating with thedensity wave, meaning thatκOmegaζC=κOmegaζgp. (b) The motions of the stars as seen in a noninertial referenceframeS′, corotating with the density wave.on the inner (trailing) edges of spiral arms, the existence of young, massive stars and H IIregions throughout the arms, and an abundance of old, red stars in the remainder of the disk.⊙the brightest and bluest new stars, the massive O and B stars, will result in the creation ofH II regions as the UV ionizing radiation moves through the interstellar medium. Becausemassive stars have relatively short lifetimes, they will die before they can move entirelyout of the density wave in which they were born. Less massive, redder stars will be ableto live much longer (some longer than the current age of the galaxy) and so will continuethrough the density wave and become distributed throughout the disk. Local maxima inthe number density of red dwarfs within spiral arms are due to the presence of the densitywave during a subsequent passage, which causes the stars to collect at the bottom of thewave’s gravitational potential well. Of course, the same scenario could also occur on theouter (leading) edges of spiral arms outside the corotation radius. However, it is likely thatless dust and gas will be found in these outer regions of the galaxy.In principle, the density wave theory also suggests a solution to the winding problem.The problem arose because we considered material arms (arms composed of a ﬁxed set ofstars). If, instead, the stars are allowed to pass through a quasistatic density wave, then theproblem has been changed to one of establishing and maintaining the wave of enhanceddensity. This has been the focus of considerable research since the Lin–Shu hypothesis wasproposed.The Nature of Galaxies
Apparently, as dust and gas clouds within the corotation radius overtake a den-sity wave, they are compressed by the effects of the increase in local mass  density. This causes some of the clouds to satisfy the Jeans criterion and begin to collapse,  resulting in the formation of new stars. Since this process takes some time (approxi-mately 105 yr for a 15 M  star, the appearance of new stars will occur within the arm slightly “downstream” from dust and gas clouds at the edge of the wave. The birth of


<<<PAGE 994>>>

Small-Amplitude Orbital PerturbationsWe now turn our attention to developing the basic ideas of how the orbital motions ofindividual stars about the galactic center can result in spiral-shaped regions of enhanceddensity according to the Lin–Shu hypothesis. We begin by considering the general motion ofa star (or gas cloud) in an axially symmetric gravitational ﬁeld that is also symmetric aboutthe galactic midplane. This implies that we are assuming here that density waves make aninsigniﬁcant contribution to the gravitational ﬁeld, an assumption that may not be valid inall spiral galaxies. However, the assumption does simplify the analysis considerably.From Fig. 23, the position of a star at some general point above the galactic midplanecan be written in the formr=RˆeR+zˆez,(16)whereˆeR,ˆeφ, andˆezare the unit vectors in cylindrical coordinates.1To convert betweenrectangular and cylindrical coordinates, we see thatx=Rcosφ, y=Rsinφ, z=z,andˆeR=ˆicosφ+ˆjsinφ,ˆeφ=−ˆisinφ+ˆjcosφ,ˆez=ˆk.For a star of massM, Newton’s second law of motion in cylindrical coordinates isMd2rdt2=Fg(R, z),
yxzr/H9278RFIGURE23The position vector of a star in cylindrical coordinates. The origin of the coordinatesystem is at the center of the galaxy, and thex–yplane is in the galaxy’s midplane.1
14Note that we have chosen to use a traditional right-handed coordinate system here.To avoid confusion, we willuseφrather thanθto designate the azimuthal angle.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 995>>>

whereFgis the gravitational force on the star, and theφ-dependence is neglected due tothe assumption of axial symmetry. Replacing the force with the negative of the gradient ofthe gravitational potential energy, yieldsMd2rdt2=− ∇U(R, z)=−∂U∂RˆeR−1R∂U∂φˆeφ−∂U∂zˆez.Dividing both sides of the last expression by the star’s mass, writing the result in terms ofthe gravitational potentialκPhiζ≡U/M, and noting thatUis independent ofφgived2rdt2=−∂κPhiζ∂RˆeR−∂κPhiζ∂zˆez.(17)It is left as an exercise (Problem 13) to show that the star’s acceleration vector (theleft-hand side of Eq. 17) can be written in the formd2rdt2=/parenleftbig¨R−R˙φ2/parenrightbigˆeR+1R∂/parenleftbigR2˙φ/parenrightbig∂tˆeφ+¨zˆez,(18)where the dots represent time derivatives. Comparing Eqs. ( 17) and ( 18), we see thatthe motion in each coordinate is given by¨R−R˙φ2=−∂κPhiζ∂R,(19)1R∂/parenleftbigR2˙φ/parenrightbig∂t=0,(20)¨z=−∂κPhiζ∂z.(21)Because we have assumed axial symmetry, there is no component of the force vectorin theˆeφdirection and consequently no component of torque along thez-axis (recall thatτ=r×F). Therefore, thezcomponent of the star’s orbital angular momentum (Lz) must beconstant sinceτz=dLz/dt=0 (i.e., angular momentum is conserved throughout the star’smotion). This is exactly what Eq. ( 20) implies, sinceR2˙φ=Rvφ=Lz/M=constant.DeﬁningJz≡Lz/M=R2˙φto be the (constant)zcomponent of the orbital angular momentumper unit massof the star,we have that˙φ=JzR2andR˙φ2=J2zR3.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 996>>>

Substituting into Eq. (19) gives¨R=−∂κPhiζ∂R+J2zR3.To simplify the expression, we can deﬁne aneffective gravitational potentialthat incor-porates a term representing the portion of the star’s kinetic energy per unit mass that isassociated with its azimuthal motion (vφ=R˙φ=Jz/R):κPhiζeff(R,z)≡κPhiζ(R,z)+J2z2R2.(22)Now the radial and vertical equations of motion can be written in the forms¨R=−∂κPhiζeff∂R,(23)¨z=−∂κPhiζeff∂z,(24)the later expression coming from Eq. ( 21) with the azimuthal term inκPhiζeffbeing inde-pendent ofz.To solve Eqs. ( 23) and ( 24) for the motion of the star through the galaxy, we mustﬁrst determine the behavior ofκPhiζeff. Speciﬁcally, it would be helpful to know where theminima of the effective gravitational potential are located, since the star should attempt tosettle into an orbit of minimum possible energy. In other words, we want to ﬁnd the valuesofRandzfor which∂κPhiζeff∂R=0,(25)∂κPhiζeff∂z=0.(26)Given our assumption that the gravitational potential is symmetric about the midplane,it is clear that the second condition is satisﬁed atz=0, becauseκPhiζ, and thereforeκPhiζeff,must be either a local maximum or a local minimum there. SinceκPhiζis always less than zeroand is assumed to be identically zero at inﬁnity, it is necessary thatκPhiζeffbe aminimum atz=0.The physical signiﬁcance of the minimum inκPhiζeffwith respect toRcan be uncoveredby realizing that sinceJzis a constant for the star’s motion,∂κPhiζeff∂R=∂κPhiζ∂R−J2zR3=0for some radiusRmin the galaxy’s midplane (z=0). This gives∂κPhiζ∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(Rm,0)=J2z(Rm,0)R3m.(27)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 997>>>

But sinceJz=Rvφ, the right-hand side of the last expression is justJ2zR3m=v2φR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleRm,the centripetal acceleration for perfectly circular motion. Furthermore, the left-hand side ofEq. ( 27) is simply the radial component of the gradient of the true gravitational potential,which is nothing more than the negative of theRcomponent of the force per unit massexerted on the star. Therefore, the last expression is the familiar equation of perfectly circularmotion,FR(Rm)=−Mv2φR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleRm,and the minimum value forκPhiζeffoccurs when the star is executing perfectly circular orbitalmotion in the midplane of the spiral galaxy.a peculiar motion with respect to the LSR, known as its solar motion. As a result, to learnmore about the motion of our Sun (or, more generally, about the motions of stars in theplane of any spiral galaxy), it is necessary to explore deviations from the minimum valueofκPhiζeff.To understand these ﬁrst-order effects, we will expandκPhiζeffabout its minimum position(Rm,0)by means of a two-dimensional Taylor series.Lettingρ≡R−Rmand using the subscriptmto indicate that the leading constant and partial derivatives arebeing evaluated at the minimum position, we obtainκPhiζeff(R,z)=κPhiζeff,m+∂κPhiζeff∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglemρ+∂κPhiζeff∂z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglemz+12∂2κPhiζeff∂R∂z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglemρz+12∂2κPhiζeff∂R2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglemρ2+12∂2κPhiζeff∂z2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglemz2+···.(28)The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the constant minimum value inκPhiζeff, and the twoﬁrst-derivative terms are identically zero, since they were used to identify the point aboutwhich the expansion is being carried out (see Eqs. 25 and 26). The mixed-partial-derivative term is also identically zero because of the symmetry ofκPhiζeffabout thez=0The Nature of Galaxies
This is precisely the assumption we made in the last chapter regarding the motion of the local standard of rest at the position of the Sun. However, the Sun itself does not actually execute perfectly circular motion, but it does exhibit


<<<PAGE 998>>>

plane. Deﬁning the constantsκ2≡∂2κPhiζeff∂R2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglem,(29)ν2≡∂2κPhiζeff∂z2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglem,(30)and neglecting the remaining higher-order terms, the effective gravitational potential be-comesκPhiζeff(R,z)≃κPhiζeff,m+12κ2ρ2+12ν2z2.(31)Finally, noting that¨ρ=¨Rand recalling Eqs. ( 23) and ( 24), we arrive at two ofthe three ﬁrst-order expansions for the equations of motion about a perfectly circular orbitin the galaxy’s midplane:¨ρ≃−κ2ρ,(32)¨z≃−ν2z,(33)which are the familiar differential equations of simple harmonic motion. Physically,Eqs. ( 32) and ( 33) represent the components of a star’s acceleration relative to apoint that is executing perfectly circular motion.Equation (32) can be solved to giveρ(t)=R(t)−Rm=ARsinκt,(34)whereκis called theepicyclefrequency.1Rmis the radius of the energy-minimum circularorbit, andARis the amplitude of the radial oscillation. We have arbitrarily assumed that thestar is passing through equilibrium and moving outward at some timet=0.Equation ( 33) is identical to the result obtained for the sinusoidaloscillations of theSun above and below the Galactic midplane, withνbeing theverticaloscillation frequency.The star’s position along thez-axis is given byz(t)=Azsin(νt+ζ),(35)whereAzis the amplitude of the oscillation in thezdirection andζis a general phase shiftbetweenρ(t)andz(t).To help visualize the relationship betweenκPhiζeff, as given in Eq. ( 31) and the equa-tions of motion (Eqs. 34 and 35), imagine that the star is located inside a grav-itational well described by a surface in the three-dimensional “space” of(R,z,κPhiζeff),depicted in Fig. 24. (The shape is similar to that of a bed sheet held at its corners,with(R=Rm,z=0)located at the lowest point.) Now consider the special case wherethe star is constrained to remain in the midplane (Az=0) but can oscillate about the path1The choice of the termepicycle frequencywill be described shortly.2
2The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 999>>>

7.67.88.08.28.4R (kpc)z (kpc)0.100.050.00–0.05–0.1050100150DFeff (km2 s–2)
FIGURE24The effective gravitational potential well for a star that is executing a general ﬁrst-order simple harmonic oscillation about a perfectly circular orbit near the midplane of a disk galaxy.In this case, the star is assumed to be oscillating about the equilibrium position (Rm=8 kpc,z=0).κDeltaζκPhiζeff≡κPhiζeff−κPhiζeff,m.of perfectly circular motion. This implies that the star is able to move only along theR-axisin Fig. 24. When the star is displaced from the minimum value ofκPhiζeff, a restoring force(given per unit mass by Eq. 32) will try to bring the star back toward equilibrium. Sincethe force is always directed toward the position of minimumκPhiζeff, the star will acceleratetoward the bottom of the potential well, overshoot the equilibrium position, and climb backup the opposite side. The star will then turn around and fall back down toward the bottomof the well again, continually executing simple harmonic motion. The same type of be-havior would occur if the star were orbiting in a perfect circle projected onto the midplane(AR=0), but with superimposed vertical oscillations. However, since in generalκ̸=νandζ̸=0, the general motion within the well can be quite complicated, as Fig. 24 illustrates.We now have two expressions (Eqs. 34 and 35) that describe the motion of astar about an equilibrium position (R=Rm,z=0) that is moving in a circular orbit. Tocomplete our description of the approximate motion of the star, consider its azimuthal orbitalangular speed, given by˙φ=vφR(t)=Jz[R(t)]2.ButR(t)=Rm+ρ(t)=Rm(1+ρ(t)/Rm). Assuming thatρ(t)≪Rm, as is required ofour approximations, and using the binomial expansion theorem to ﬁrst order,13˙φ≈JzR2m/parenleftbigg1−2ρ(t)Rm/parenrightbigg.1Forδ≪1,(1+δ)n≈1+nδ.3The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1000>>>

Substituting the expression forρ(t)from Eq. ( 34) and integrating with respect to time,we ﬁnd thatφ(t)=φ0+JzR2mt+2JzκR3mARcosκt=φ0+κOmegaζt+2κOmegaζκRmARcosκt,whereκOmegaζ≡Jz/R2m. The ﬁrst two terms in this expression correspond to the perfectly circularorbit traced out by the equilibrium point, moving at a constant angular speed,κOmegaζ. The lastterm represents the oscillation of the star about the equilibrium point in theφdirection.Finally, deﬁningχ(t)≡[φ(t)−(φ0+κOmegaζt)]Rmto be the difference in azimuthal position between the star and the equilibrium point, wehaveχ(t)=2κOmegaζκARcosκt.(36)The three equations—( 34), ( 35), and ( 36)—represent the motions of the star intheR,z, andφcoordinates, respectively, about an equilibrium position that is moving in aperfect circle around the center of the galaxy and in the galactic midplane.κtakes its name from an epicycle model for the ﬁrst-order perturbation, as shown inFig. 25. In general, in an inertial reference frame the star’s orbit is not closed, but produces
xy/H9267cStarWt
FIGURE25In an inertial reference frame a star’s orbital motion in the galactic midplane (solidline) forms a nonclosing rosette pattern. In the ﬁrst-order approximation, the motion can be imaginedas being the combination of a retrograde orbit about an epicycle and the prograde orbit of the center ofthe epicycle about a perfect circle (dashed line). The dimensions of the epicycle have been exaggeratedby a factor of ﬁve to illustrate the effect.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1001>>>

a rosette pattern. However, the star can be imagined as being located on an epicycle, withthe center of the epicycle corresponding to the equilibrium position. As the star moves ina retrograde direction about the epicycle, it is carried alternately closer to and then fartherfrom the galactic center. The epicycle is also oval in shape and has an axial ratio that isgiven by the ratios of the amplitudes of the oscillations inχandρ,o r2κOmegaζ/κ. The(χ, ρ)coordinate system of the epicycle rotates about the galaxy’s center with the angular speedκOmegaζ(the angular speed of the equilibrium point) and is indicated in Fig. 25.Example .ur Sun is moving relative to the perfectlycircular motion of the LSR, as reﬂected in the Sun’s peculiar solar motion. Sinceu⊙̸=0(theRcomponent of its peculiar motion), the Sun must have a nonzero epicycle frequency.Information about the radial component of the Sun’s peculiar motion is also contained inthe Oort constants,since they involve derivatives of the Sun’sorbital speed,κThetaζ0, withrespect to Galactocentric radius,R0.From the condition for perfectly circular motion, Eq. (27) gives∂κPhiζ∂R=J2zR3=κThetaζ20R0,where the last expression arises becauseJz=R0κThetaζ0for the orbital angular momentum perunit mass at the solar Galactocentric distance. Substituting into the expression for the squareof the epicycle frequency (Eq. 29) and making use of Eq. ( 22), we ﬁnd that the solarepicycle frequency isκ20=2κThetaζ0R0/bracketleftBiggκThetaζ0R0+∂κThetaζ0∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0/bracketrightBigg.(37)Rewriting this in terms of the Oort constants producesκ20=−4B(A−B).(38)P=2π/κ0=170 Myr.The ratio of the Sun’s epicycle frequency to its orbital angular speed (or orbital frequency,κOmegaζ0=κThetaζ0/R0=A−Bisκ0κOmegaζ0=2/parenleftbigg−BA−B/parenrightbigg1/2=1.35.Therefore, the Sun executes 1.35 epicycle oscillations for every orbit around the Galacticcenter.1This model bears a strong resemblance to the epicycle–deferent models of planetary motion devised by Hip-parchus and PtolemyHowever, in those ancient planetary models, the epicycles wereassumed to be perfectlycircular.142O
 
4.The Nature of Galaxies
Using the values for the Oort constants A = 14.8 km s−1 kpc−1 and B = −12.4 km s−1 kpc−1, respectively, the epicycle frequency for our Sun is κ0 = 36.7 kms−1 kpc−1 = 1.2 × 10−15 rad s−1. (Note that when kiloparsecs are converted to kilom-eters, κ0 has units of rad s−1.) This value for the epicycle frequency corresponds to an oscillation period of


<<<PAGE 1002>>>

The axial ratio of the Sun’s epicycle is given byχmaxρmax=2κOmegaζ0κ0≃1.5.Closed Orbits in Noninertial FramesThe number of oscillations per orbit about the galaxy’s center is equal to the ratio of thestar’s epicycle frequency to its orbital angular speed. If the ratioκ/κOmegaζis a ratio of integers,the orbit is closed. Like the Sun’s, however, most stellar orbits are not closed and a rosettepattern results. But in a noninertial reference frame that is rotating with alocalangularpattern speed,κOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ, relative to the inertial frame, the star’s path would appear to bevery simple, tracing out aclosed orbitthat is retrograde and centered at a distanceRmfromthe galaxy’s center (see Fig. 25). Such a reference frame corresponds to the epicycle’sown coordinate system in which the equilibrium point is stationary and the closed pathsimply traces the epicycle itself.To obtain a closed orbit in a noninertial reference frame, we need not necessarily choosean angular pattern speed that equals the unperturbed orbital angular speedκOmegaζ. Instead, wecould choose to have the star completenorbits as seen in the rotating frame while executingmepicycle oscillations (wherenandmare positive or negative integers), after which timethe star would be back at its starting point. That is, we could choosem(κOmegaζ−κOmegaζℓp)=nκ,o rκOmegaζℓp(R)=κOmegaζ(R)−nmκ(R).(39)Note that this is a local pattern speed, soκOmegaζℓpis a function ofR. Although in principle, thereare an inﬁnite number of local pattern speeds at eachR, only a small number of values fornandmproduce substantial enhancements in mass density.1Figure 26 shows the rotation of a coordinate system for which the local patternspeed corresponds to(n=1,m=2), together with the position of the star at one point.Figure 27 shows the motion of the star as seen in four rotating reference frames with(n, m)=(0,1),(1,2),(2,3), and(1,4). The position of the star that was indicated inFig. 26 corresponds to the same position in Fig. 27(a).Now imagine a large number of stars at various distancesRfrom the center of a spiralgalaxy, all observed in a reference frame rotating with theglobalangular pattern speedκOmegaζgp.If we consider the case(n, m)=(1,2)andifthe local pattern speedκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ(R)−κ(R)/2is a constant for all values ofR, then we can setκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζℓp. Seen from the noninertial frame,the resulting orbital patterns could be nested with their major axes aligned, as illustrated inFig. 28(a). The structure that results bears a signiﬁcant resemblance to the bars presentin roughly two-thirds of all spiral galaxies. Of course, we could also orient each successiveoval-shaped orbit so that its major axis is rotated slightly relative to the one immediatelyinterior to it. In this example the result is a trailing two-armed grand-design spiral wave1This problem is analogous to situations encountered within the Solar System. For example, the orbital resonancesof Saturn’s moons (primarily Mimas) with particles in the planet’s ring system produce gaps in the rings. In addition,small integer ratios between Jupiter’s orbital period and the orbital periods of asteroids result in either increasesor decreases in the number of asteroids having certain orbital radii.5
5The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1003>>>

xyypxpStarW/H5129pt
FIGURE 26A noninertial coordinate system,(xp,yp), rotating within a ﬁxed inertial frame(x, y)with the local angular pattern speedκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ−κ/2, for which(n=1,m=2). The dashedline corresponds to the perfectly circular motion of the equilibrium point, and the solid line representsthe orbital motion of the star in the galaxy’s inertial reference frame. The position of the star on thediagram, along with the position of the noninertial coordinate system, corresponds to one-eighth ofthe orbital period of the equilibrium point.(2, 3)(1, 4)xpxpypyp(0, 1)(1, 2)
(a)(b)FIGURE27Stars appear to trace out closed orbits in noninertial coordinate systems that rotatewith appropriately chosen angular pattern speeds. The motion of a star as it would appear in coordinatesystems having local angular pattern speeds corresponding to(n, m)values of (a)(0,1)=solid line,(1,2)=dashed line, (b)(2,3)=solid line, and(1,4)=dashed line.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1004>>>

(a)(b)FIGURE28(a) Nested oval orbits with aligned major axes, as seen in a reference frame rotatingwith the global angular pattern speed(n=1,m=2),o rκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζ−κ/2. The result is a bar-likestructure. (b) Each oval is rotated relative to the orbit immediately interior to it. The result is atwo-armed grand-design spiral density wave.pattern, shown in Fig. 28(b). Twisting the ovals in the opposite sense would result in aleading two-armed spiral. The two-armed spiral M51 (Fig. 17) is an example of a trailing-arm,(n=1,m=2)pattern structure, while the four-armed spiral M101 [Fig. 5(c)] isan(n=1,m=4)system. Patterns withm=2 are the most common type of density wavestructure.It is important to remember that the individual stars are following their own orbits inan inertial reference frame and that these orbits appear only as simpliﬁed oval shapes in areference frame that is rotating with the local angular pattern speed. Furthermore, even inthe rotating frame the stars themselves are still moving along the oval orbits. Only the spiralpattern appears to be static in that frame (if we still assume thatκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζℓp, independent ofR); in the nonrotating inertial frame the spiral pattern will appear to move with an angularspeed ofκOmegaζgp. It is the “trafﬁc jam” of stars becoming packed together where their ovalorbits approach one another that leads to the density waves.The stability of the structures shown in Fig. 28 depends crucially on whetherκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ(R)−κ(R)/2 is actually independent ofR—that is, on whether there is an appropriateglobal value ofκOmegaζgp. Figure 29 shows curves ofκOmegaζ(R)−nκ(R)/mwith several ratiosofn/mfor one model of our Galaxy. Notice thatκOmegaζ−κ/2 is nearly ﬂat over a wide rangeof values forR, a fact ﬁrst realized by the Swedish astronomer Bertil Lindblad (1895–1965). The same general behavior is exhibited by a large number of spiral galaxies andprobably accounts for the prevalence of two-armed spirals. Of course,κOmegaζ−κ/2i sn o texactly constant with respect to galactocentric radius, so some drifting of epicycle orbitsrelative to one another does occur, leading once again to a winding problem. However, inthis case the winding occurs for density waves rather than material waves, and because therelative drift is slower, the winding takes about ﬁve times longer to develop. If a means canbe found to stabilize the galaxy against this remnant winding effect, the original Lin–Shuhypothesis of a quasistatic density wave will be realized.Lindblad, Corotation, and Ultraharmonic ResonancesSinceκOmegaζ−κ/2 is not exactly constant across the entire galactic disk, stars at varying radiido not encounter the spiral arms at precisely the same point in their epicyclic paths onThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1005>>>

050100km s–1 kpc–1W – /H9260W – /H9260/2W + /H9260/2W
0510R (kpc)FIGURE29The Bahcall–Soneira model of our Galaxy has been used to construct the functionsκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ−nκ/mfor various ratios ofn/m. Note the nearly constant curve forn/m=1/2 overmuch of the Galactic disk. (Figure adapted from Binney and Tremaine,Galactic Astronomy, PrincetonUniversity Press, Princeton, NJ, 1987.)successive passages through the density waves. However, there are certain radii for whichthis can happen and a resonance develops, analogous to the resonance that can occur when aspring is forced to oscillate at its natural frequency. For instance, if a star is at its maximumvalue ofχ(Eq. 36) each time it encounters a density wave, the perturbation it experiencesdue to the local increase in density and gravitational potential will always be in the samesense, and the effect will be cumulative. A similar argument applies to each of the localpattern speeds, such asκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ(R)andκOmegaζℓp=κOmegaζ(R)+κ/2.This ampliﬁcation can occur at several radii in a galaxy, depending on its mass distributionand its resulting rotation curve.AninnerLindbladresonanceexists when the local angularpattern speed of the star equals the global angular pattern speed of the density wave for thecase whenκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζ−κ/2 forn/m=1/2. It is possible that either zero, one, or two innerLindblad radii may exist for a given galaxy, depending on the shape of the rotation curve. Acorotation resonancecan occur ifκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζfor some value ofR, and anouterLindbladresonancemight exist ifκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζ+κ/2. Theultraharmonicresonancemay also developforκOmegaζgp=κOmegaζ−κ/4. The inner rings of galaxies such as NGC 7096 and M81 [Figs. 5(a)and (b)] are apparently due to either inner Lindblad resonances or ultraharmonic resonances,while the outer rings of galaxies like NGC 4340 [Fig. 4(f)] are found at the outer Lindbladresonance.The positions of the Lindblad and corotation resonances are depicted in Fig. 30for two different rotation curves.Resonances have the effect that epicycle oscillation amplitudes increase dramatically. Asa result, collisions of gas clouds should also increase signiﬁcantly at resonance positions,and energy will be dissipated. Consequently, resonance locations (if they exist in a speciﬁcgalaxy) can actually lead to damping of spiral waves unless other processes are capable ofNote that we are now going beyond the assumption made on page 969 that the density waves make an insigniﬁcantcontribution to the gravitational ﬁeld.16
16The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1006>>>

Galactocentric radius(a)(b)ILR CR OLRGalactocentric radiusILR ILR CRWWW – /H9260/2W – /H9260/2WgpWgpW + /H9260/2W + /H9260/2W/H5129p
W/H5129p
FIGURE30The existence of resonance radii depends on the global angular pattern speed of thearms and the shape of the galaxy’s rotation curve. (a) A galaxy with a single inner Lindblad resonance(ILR), a corotation resonance (CR), and an outer Lindblad resonance (OLR). (b) A galaxy with twoILRs, a CR, and no OLR. Note that for sufﬁciently large values ofκOmegaζgp, there may not be any ILRs.continually building the waves back up again. This situation is analogous to that of stellarpulsationregions of partial ionization (primarily hydrogen and helium) drivepulsations,while other regions of the star damp the oscillations.Nonlinear Effects in Density Wave TheoryDespite a great deal of work, a complete understanding of density waves has not yet beenfully realized. For instance, various effects not considered in the simple model presented heremay play important roles, such as nonlinear (higher-order) terms inκPhiζeff(recall Eq. 28).Also, the waves themselves alter the gravitational potential in which they originate so thatazimuthal symmetry breaks down.One important driving mechanism in a number of grand-design spirals, including M51(Fig. 17), is the presence of a companion galaxy that triggers spiral structure through tidal
NumericalN-Body SimulationsAn important example of a nonlinearN-body simulation of a rotating disk is one that wascalculated in an early work by F. Hohl in 1971 (see Fig. 31). In that calculation, 105stars were initially placed in axisymmetric orbits (t=0), but as the simulation progressed,Hohl’s model proved to be very unstable against the development of them=2 pattern (alsoknown as them=2 mode), and a two-armed spiral density wave developed (t=2.0). Asthe simulation continued, the disk became “hot,” meaning that the velocity dispersion of;The Nature of Galaxies
interactions. A more detailed discussion of the physical driving mechanisms that help to establish and maintain density waves is beyond the level of the current discussion, but it is worth pointing out that the techniques for studying spiral density waves have much in common with the theoretical procedures used to investigate stellar pulsation; both linear and nonlinear models have been employed in the investigation of spiral structure.


<<<PAGE 1007>>>

t = 0t = 0.5t = 1.0
t = 1.5t = 2.0t = 2.5
t = 3.0t = 4.0t = 5.0
t = 6.0t = 8.0t = 10.0FIGURE31An early study of a rotating disk with anN-body simulation using 105stars. The diskbegan with complete axial symmetry and quickly developed anm=2 mode instability. Eventuallythe disk “heated up,” destroying the spiral arms but leaving a long-lived bar. (Figure from Hohl,Ap.J.,168, 343, 1971.)its stars became large relative to their orbital velocities, and the spiral structure dissipated.Interestingly, a bar instability persisted throughout the rest of the simulation, and the ﬁnalstructure bears a strong resemblance to an SB0 galaxy.Such bar instabilities have proved themselves to be common features inN-body calcu-lations. Apparently a rotating disk is highly susceptible to a bar-mode instability, at least oncomputers. Of course, there is strong support for the idea that bar modes are favored in realgalaxies as well, since roughly two-thirds of all disk galaxies do exhibit bar-like structuresin their centers.Hohl’s work does suggest one possible means of stabilizing disks against various modeinstabilities: the presence of high-velocity dispersions of its stars. In his original simulations,Hohl’s bar heated the disk, destroying them=2 trailing-arm mode.disks of spiral galaxies.Tidal interactions and/or mergers may also play important roles in heating theThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1008>>>

In modernN-body simulations, models have also included the effects of highly cen-tralized masses, such as the gravitational inﬂuence of supermassive black holes. Variousresearchers have shown that the inclusion of sufﬁciently condensed and massive centralmass concentrations can weaken, and even destroy, the bar instability. Most studies ﬁndthat a mass on the order of a few percent of the mass of the galaxy’s disk is required in orderto affect the bar.Stochastic, Self-Propagating Star FormationAlthough most of the discussion found in this section has focused on the Lin–Shu hypothesisof quasistatic density waves and the existence of grand-design spirals, many of the galaxiesobserved in the universe are ﬂocculent spirals. It may be that these objects are composedof a linear combination of several stable density perturbations (somewhat reminiscent ofmodes in stellar oscillations), along with sufﬁcient patchiness in the interstellar medium togive the appearance of less well-deﬁned spirals. Alternatively, it may be that an entirelydifferent mechanism is responsible for the spiral structure seen in these galaxies.In 1976 M. W. Mueller and W. David Arnett proposed a theory of spiral structure forﬂocculent spirals known asstochastic,self-propagatingstarformation(SSPSF). In theirtheory they imagine spiral structure arising from outbursts of star formation that propagateacross the galaxy. When one region of the galaxy undergoes a star formation episode, itsmost massive stars will age rapidly, producing core-collapse supernovae. The supernovaeshock waves will travel through the interstellar medium, triggering the collapse of othergas clouds in nearby regions, where further star formation will occur, allowing the processto continue. This scheme has been compared to a forest ﬁre, with the ﬂames jumping fromtree to tree. Spiral structure arises when the differential rotation of the galaxy draws thesenewly “lit” regions into trailing arms.Although SSPSF has been successful in producing ﬂocculent spiral structure in computersimulations, it is unable to account for the transitions from dust lanes to OB stars to red starsacross the spiral arms of grand-design spirals, so it probably cannot explain those galaxies.Of course, it may well be that we will need both of these theories (and perhaps others) tounderstand the abundance of spiral structure found throughout the universe.4ELLIPTICAL GALAXIESAlthough Hubble type correlates well with a wide variety of physical parameters for late-type galaxies, thereby ensuring its continued usefulness for those systems, the Hubble-typedesignation for early galaxies (which is based solely on apparent ellipticity) has shownitself to be virtually irrelevant in terms of trying to categorize other characteristics. As aresult, subtype distinctions are made for ellipticals that are independent of the ellipticity,focusing instead on other morphological features, such as the size, absolute magnitude, andsurface brightness of the image. Once thought to be the simplest of the major galaxy types,since the 1980s ellipticals have come to be seen as remarkably diverse and complex.environmental evolution,possibly involving tidal interactions or mergers with neighboringgalaxies.Some of this complexity may arise, at least in part, from strongThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1009>>>

Morphological Classes of Elliptical GalaxiesToday a number of separate morphological classes are commonly used to distinguish amongthe elliptical galaxies:•cD galaxiesare immense, but rare, bright objects that sometimes measure nearly1 Mpc across and are usually found only near the centers of large, dense clusters ofgalaxies. Their absoluteBmagnitudes range from less than−22 mag to−25 mag,and they have masses of between 1013and 1014M⊙. cD galaxies are characterizedby having central regions with high surface brightnesses (µ=18B-mag arcsec−2)and very extended, diffuse envelopes (µ=26 to 27B-mag arcsec−2). They mayalso possess tens of thousands of globular clusters, with typical speciﬁc frequencies,SN, of 15 (see Eq. 15). Furthermore, these galaxies are known to have very highmass-to-light ratios, sometimes exceeding 750 M⊙/L⊙, implying large quantities ofdark matter.•Normal elliptical galaxiesare centrally condensed objects with relatively highcentral surface brightnesses. They include the giant ellipticals (gE’s), intermediate-luminosity ellipticals (E’s), and compact ellipticals (cE’s). The absoluteBmagnitudesof normal E’s range from−15 to−23, masses of between 108and 1013M⊙, diame-ters from less than 1 kpc to nearly 200 kpc, mass-to-light ratios from 7 to more than100 M⊙/L⊙, and speciﬁc frequencies of globular clusters in the range of 1 to 10.Lenticular galaxies (S0’s and SB0’s) are often grouped with normal E’s.•Dwarfellipticalgalaxies(dE’s) have surface brightnesses that tend to be much lowerthan those of cE’s of the same absolute magnitude. The absoluteBmagnitudes ofdE’s fall between−13 and−19, they have typical masses of 107to 109M⊙, and theirdiameters are on the order of 1 to 10 kpc. Their metallicities also tend to be lowerthan for normal E’s. The average value of the speciﬁc frequency of globular clustersis⟨SN⟩=4.8±1.0, which is still higher than for spirals.•Dwarf spheroidal galaxies(dSph’s) are extremely low-luminosity, low-surface-brightness objects that have been detected only in the vicinity of the Milky Way.Their absoluteBmagnitudes are only−8t o−15 mag, their masses are roughly 107to 108M⊙, and their diameters are between 0.1 and 0.5 kpc.•Blue compact dwarf galaxies(BCD’s) are small galaxies that are unusually blue,with color indices ranging from⟨B−V⟩=0.0 to 0.3. This corresponds to main-sequence stars of spectral class A, indicating that these galaxies are undergoingparticularly vigorous star formation. They have absoluteBmagnitudes of−14 to−17, masses on the order of 109M⊙, and diameters of less than 3 kpc. As is ex-pected for very active star formation, BCD’s also have a large abundance of gas, withMHI=108M⊙andMHI I=106M⊙constituting roughly 15% to 20% of the entiremass of the galaxy. They also have correspondingly low mass-to-light ratios; in anextreme case, ESO400−G43 hasM/LB=0.1 despite the dominance of dark matterat large radii.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1010>>>

TABLE 3Characteristic Data for cD, Elliptical, and Lenticular Galaxies.cDES0/SB0MB−22 to−25−15 to−23−17 to−22M(M⊙)1013–1014108–10131010–1012Diameter (D25, kpc) 300–1000 1–200 10–100⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)>100 10–100∼10⟨SN⟩∼15∼5∼5TABLE 4Characteristic Data for Dwarf Elliptical, Dwarf Spheroidal, and Blue CompactDwarf Galaxies.dEdSph BCDMB−13 to−19−8 to−15−14 to−17M(M⊙)107–109107–108∼109Diameter (D25, kpc) 1–10 0.1–0.5<3⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)∼10 5–100 0.1–10⟨SN⟩4.8±1.0— —Tables 3 and 4 summarize some of the characteristics of early-type galaxies. Lentic-ular galaxies have also been included in the list, since they appear to have much in commonwith many ellipticals.Surface Brightness ProﬁlescD’s and normal ellipticals have surface brightness proﬁles that closely follow ther1/4law(Eq. 2). As an example, the brightness proﬁle of NGC 3379, a gE galaxy, is shown inFig. 32. However, as the mass of the galaxy decreases, there is a fairly smooth transitionover to an exponential proﬁle (Eq. 3). This is particularly true of dE’s and dSph’s.Dust and Gas in Elliptical GalaxiesThe low gravitational binding energy of dE’s and dSph’s means that it would be very difﬁcultfor these galaxies to retain a signiﬁcant amount of gas, which is indeed what is observed.In fact, dSph’s are virtually devoid of gas. Consequently, dE’s and dSph’s are not activelyforming stars today. Moreover, they have very low metallicities, with values similar to thosefound in globular clusters. It has been suggested that these systems lost most of their gas viasupernova-driven mass loss or byram-pressure strippingas the galaxies passed throughthe gas found in clusters of galaxie .For many years it was believed that all elliptical galaxies had been largely strippedof any dust or gas that had not yet formed into stars or, alternatively, that star formationhad proceeded very efﬁciently during the earliest history of these galaxies, depleting allavailable gas. However, we have now come to realize that gas and dust are present withinmost normal elliptical galaxies, albeit at somewhat diminished levels relative to spirals.sThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1011>>>

32302826242220181614/H9262BNGC 3379
123 45 67r1/4FIGURE 32The surface brightness proﬁle of the giant elliptical galaxy NGC 3379 is wellrepresented by anr1/4law. (Figure adapted from de Vaucouleurs and Capaccioli,Ap. J. Supp.,40,699, 1979.)The hydrogen gas that is present in E/S0’s is usually evident in several forms. A 107KX-ray-emitting hot-gas component of 108to 1010M⊙makes up the majority of all the gasthat is present in a typical E/S0 galaxy. (Possible heating mechanisms include supernovaeand stellar winds.) A warm-gas component (104to 105M⊙at 104K), observable in Hα,i salso present in the form of H II regions. Furthermore, 107to 109M⊙of cold H I (∼102K) isdetectable at 21 cm. CO emission studies indicate that 107to 109M⊙of molecular hydrogencan be found in early-type galaxies as well.Astronomers have also discovered that perhaps 50% of all elliptical galaxies containappreciable amounts of dust, with typical masses in the range of 105to 106M⊙. One in-triguing observation is that there exist dust lanes that are essentially randomly oriented withrespect to their parent galaxy’s optical-light axes. Frequently, the dust is even found to becounter-rotating relative to the rotation direction of other (stellar) components. Apparently,much of this gas was acquired after the initial formation of the galaxy.Metallicity Gradients and Color GradientsAs we saw in Fig. 12 during our discussion of spirals, the metallicity of elliptical galaxiesis well correlated with luminosity; brighter galaxies have higher overall metal content.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1012>>>

Furthermore, as with spiral galaxies, metallicity gradients and color gradients also exist inellipticals. Generally, the central regions of E’s are redder and more metal-rich than areregions at larger radii. This trend can be expressed in terms of the gradient of the massfraction of metals found in the distribution of stars; typicallydlog10Z/dlog10r≈−0.13.The same is also true for lenticular galaxies. In addition, the disks of S0’s are bluer thantheir bulges, as is the case for galaxies of later Hubble type [for S0’s,(U−V)disk−(U−V)bulge∼−0.1t o−0.5]. Any successful theory of galaxy formation must incorporate theavailable observations concerning chemical enrichment.The Faber–Jackson RelationOne relationship that dE’s, dSph’s, normal E’s, and the bulges of spirals all have in commonis the correlation between their central radial-velocity dispersion andMB. This relationis shown in Fig. 33. To see why the relation arises, we begin with the result of thevirial theorem for the central radial-velocity dispersion of a spherically symmetric massdistribution (Eq. 13). In that case we made the simple approximation that a massMwas uniformly distributed throughout a volume of radiusR. Now, if we further assume thatthe mass-to-light ratio is essentially constant for all galaxies and that their average surfacebrightnesses are all equal (assumptions that were also made in “deriving” the Tully–Fisherrelation), we arrive at the resultL∝σ40,(40)whereσrhas been replaced byσ0to signify that the central value for the radial-velocitydispersion is being assumed. This relationship was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Sandra Faber andRobert Jackson and is now referred to as theFaber–Jackson relation. Expressing theluminosity in solar units, taking the logarithm of both sides of the equation, and writing
–6 –8 –10 –12 –14 –16 –18 –20 –22 –240.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.6gE’sInt E’s cE’sBright dE’sdSph’sBulgesLinear FitLog10 /H92680 (km s-1)
MBFIGURE 33The Faber–Jackson relation represents a correlation between central velocity dis-persion and luminosity. The relation is a consequence of the virial theorem. (Data from Bender et al.,Ap. J.,399, 462, 1992.)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1013>>>

log10(L/L⊙)as a difference inMB’s we ﬁnd the linear relationship betweenlog10σ0andMBillustrated in Fig. 33, namelylog10σ0=−0.1MB+constant.(41)[Note the resemblance to the Tully–Fisher relations given by Eqs. ( 5– 7) if thoseexpressions are solved for log10Vmax.]The Fundamental PlaneAs is readily apparent by inspecting Fig. 33, there is considerable scatter in the data.This is further reﬂected in the fact that the slope of the best-ﬁt line through the data differsslightly from the one found in Eq. ( 41). Apparently Eq. ( 40) is not strictly true, whichshould not be surprising given the assumptions made in its development. Depending on thesample set used,L∝σα0, with 3<α<5.In an effort to ﬁnd a tighter ﬁt to the data, astronomers have introduced a second parameterinto the expression, the effective radius. One representation of this ﬁt isL∝σ2.650r0.65e.(42)Here, galaxies are visualized as residing on a two-dimensional “surface” in the three-dimensional “space” represented by the coordinatesL,σ0, andre. Known as thefun-damental plane, Eq. ( 42) combines the contributions of a galaxy’s gravitational well(σ0) with its radius and luminosity. Alternatively, the fundamental plane can be written interms of the effective surface brightness of a galaxy at its effective radius:re∝σ1.240I−0.82e.(43)The fundamental plane appears to represent the whole family of elliptical galaxies andseems to imply something about the formation of these systems.The Effects of RotationParameterizations such as the fundamental plane do a much better job of classifying ellip-ticals than Hubble’s original scheme based on ellipticity. But then, what is the source of agalaxy’s shape? Although the answer is not yet entirely clear, it is evident that most ellip-ticals are not purely oblate or prolate rotators with two axes, but are triaxial, meaning thatthere is no single preferred axis of rotation. We have already encountered this situation inthe randomness of the dust lanes found in at least one-half of all ellipticals. Further evidenceexists in the frequent observations of counter-rotating stellar cores in as many as 25% oflarger ellipticals. It appears that in at least some of these cases, material in the form of gas,dust, globular clusters, or dwarf galaxies has been captured sometime since the galaxy’sformation.When the rotational velocities of elliptical galaxies are measured, we ﬁnd that the moreluminous ones have mean rotational velocities that are much less than their velocity disper-sions, implying that the shapes of these galaxies are not due to rotation. Instead, their,The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1014>>>

shapes are caused by the anisotropic velocity dispersion of stars in the galaxies. Inone particularly extreme case, the luminous E4 galaxy, NGC 1600 (MB=−22.87), hasVrot=1.9±2.3k ms−1andVrot/σ <0.013; it has no unique axis of rotation that is sta-tistically signiﬁcant.If the ellipticity,ϵ(Eq. 1), of a galaxy were due to its being an ideal, oblate rotatorwith an isotropic stellar velocity distribution, then it can be shown that/parenleftbiggVrotσ/parenrightbiggisotropic≈/parenleftbiggϵ1−ϵ/parenrightbigg1/2.For NGC 1600 this means that if its ellipticity ofϵ=0.4 were due to pure rotation, thenVrot/σshould be approximately 0.8. Deﬁning the rotation parameter(V/σ)∗to be(V/σ)∗≡(Vrot/σ)observed(Vrot/σ)isotropicgives(V/σ)∗<0.016 for NGC 1600. Although the distinction is somewhat arbitrary, agalaxy is considered to be primarilyrotationally supportedif(V/σ)∗>0.7.Bright E’s and gE’s have typical values of⟨(V/σ)∗⟩≈0.4 and arepressure-supported,meaning that their shapes are due primarily to random stellar motions. In addition, thediffuse, faint dwarf E’s have predominantly anisotropic velocity dispersions and are alsopressure-supported. On the other hand, galaxies for which−18>MB>−20.5 mag have⟨(V/σ)∗⟩≈0.9, implying that they are largely rotationally supported (this includes thecE’s). Interestingly, the bulges of spiral galaxies tend to be rotationally supported as well.Correlations with Boxiness or DiskinessIn 1988 Ralf Bender, Jean-Luc Nieto (1950–1992), and their collaborators proposed thatmany of the characteristics of elliptical galaxies can be understood in terms of the degreeofboxinessordiskinessthat their isophotal surfaces exhibit. As a means of quantifyingthe deviation from an elliptical shape, the shape of an isophotal contour (deﬁned for somespeciﬁc value ofµ) is written in polar coordinates as a Fourier series of the forma(θ)=a0+a2cos(2θ)+a4cos(4θ)+···,(44)whereais the contour’s radius and the angleθis measured counterclockwise from the majoraxis of the ellipsoid. The ﬁrst term in the expansion represents the shape of a perfect circle,the second term corresponds to the amount of ellipticity, and the third term is associatedwith the degree of boxiness. Ifa4<0, the isophotal surface tends toward a “boxy” ap-pearance, and ifa4>0, the surface tends toward being “disky” (see Fig. 34). Typically,|a4/a0|∼0.01, with deviations from perfect ellipses routinely measured to an accuracy ofapproximately 0.5%.Figure 35 shows the correlations of various quantities with the isophotal Fourierparametera4, measured in units of 100a4/a0. The upper left-hand panel illustrates thatdisky galaxies tend to be rotationally supported [with larger values of(V/σ)∗], while boxyAn anisotropic velocity distribution is one for which one or two directions of motion are preferred, rather thanbeing completely random in all three dimensions, as in an isotropic distribution.17
17The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1015>>>

FIGURE 34Two examples of galaxies withϵ=0.4.|a4/a0|has been set to the rather largevalue of 0.03 to illustrate the effect. The solid line represents a “boxy” galaxy (a4/a0<0), and thedashed line represents a “disky” galaxy (a4/a0>0).
–0.4–0.20.00.20.4–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5/H9254 Log10 M/LvLog10 (V//H9268)*
Log10 Lradio/H9280
–1–10123 0 123100a4/a100a4/a–1–10123 0 123100a4/a100a4/a
2022240.00.20.40.60.8
Rotation parameter/H9254 (M/Lv)cRadio luminosityEllipticity
FIGURE35The correlations of various parameters witha4(isophotal shape). “Disky” ellipticalshavea4>0, while “boxy” ellipticals havea4<0. (Figure adapted from Kormendy and Djorgovski,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,27, 235, 1989. Reproduced with permission from theAnnual Reviewof Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 27, ©1989 by Annual Reviews Inc.)The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1016>>>

galaxies are largely pressure-supported. The lower left-hand panel indicates the deviationof the core mass-to-light ratio (measured in theVband) from the average value for galaxiesof the same luminosity; boxy galaxies tend to have higher-than-average ratios, while diskygalaxies have lower-than-average values. The panel in the lower right-hand corner showsthat boxy ellipticals tend to be much brighter at radio wavelengths than are disky galaxies.However, the spread in the radio luminosities of boxy galaxies is quite large, while thevariation in radio luminosity for disky galaxies is much smaller. The same sort of correlationis found in other wavelength regions as well (such as X-ray, UV , and Hα). For disky E’s, thesources of X-rays tend to be consistent with compact sources only, as is the case for S0’s,while boxy E’s show evidence of diffuse sources (i.e., hot gas). Finally, the upper right-hand panel indicates that ellipticity (and therefore Hubble type) tends to increase with theabsolute value ofa4(|a4|). However, this suggests that two galaxies of identical Hubble typecould have very different characteristics when other physical parameters are considered. Forinstance, for two E4 galaxies (ϵ=0.4), one could be rotationally supported (a4>0) whilethe other is pressure-supported (a4<0), and the former galaxy would probably have a coremass-to-light ratio lower than average while the latter galaxy would have a higher-than-average core mass-to-light ratio.Also, the former galaxy would have a low radio luminosity,and the latter might have a much higher radio luminosity.Other parameters also seem to be associated with the boxiness or diskiness of a galaxy.Whereas rotationally supported disky galaxies have relatively large ratios of rotational an-gular momentum to mass (speciﬁc angular momentum), pressure-supported boxy galaxieshave rather low ratios. Boxy galaxies are frequently observed to contain counter-rotatingcores, while disky galaxies rarely possess counter-rotating cores. Finally, disky galaxiesgenerally have rotational symmetries that are oblate, and boxy galaxies tend to be muchmore triaxial.Although it is likely that the degree of boxiness among galaxies represents a continuumrather than two distinctly different classes of objects, apparently some 90% of all ellipticalsare generally disky in nature. It has been suggested that disky galaxies may simply representan extension of the sequence of S0’s to progressively smaller and smaller disk-to-bulgeratios, and that some disky galaxies are actually misclassiﬁed S0’s. However, boxy galaxiesmay well represent a tell-tale signature of some level of environmental evolution, such astidal interactions or mergerThe Relative Numbers of Galaxies of Various Hubble TypesBefore leaving the discussion of morphology, it is important to address the question of therelative numbers of galaxies of various Hubble types. This is usually represented by theluminosityfunction,φ(M) dM, deﬁned to be the number of galaxies in a particular samplethat have absolute magnitudes betweenMandM+dM. Figure 36 shows luminosityfunctions for two samples; the top graph is for galaxies located in the vicinity of the MilkyWay and the bottom graph is for a sample of galaxies in the Virgo cluster of galaxies.The total luminosity function in either environment is the sum of theindividual luminosity functions of each Hubble type.In an attempt to ﬁnd a general analytic ﬁt to galactic luminosity functions, Paul Schechterproposed the functional formφ(L) dL∼Lαe−L/L∗dL,(45)s.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1017>>>

Local field
Virgo clusterTotalIrr
IrrSd+Sm
Sd+SmBCDSa+Sb
Sa+SbS0
S0E
EdE
dESc
ScSpiral
SpiralTotal
0123012Log10 /H9278 (M)Log10 /H9278 (M)
–22 –20 –18 –16 –14 –12MBT–22 –20 –18 –16 –14 –12MBT
FIGURE 36Luminosity functions for two samples of galaxies. The top panel is based on asample of galaxies near the Milky Way Galaxy, and the bottom panel is for galaxies located in theVirgo cluster of galaxies. The zero point of the log10φ(M)axis is arbitrary. (Figure adapted fromBinggeli, Sandage, and Tammann,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,26, 509, 1988. Reproduced withpermission from theAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 26, ©1988 by AnnualReviews Inc.)which can also be written in the equivalent formφ(M) dM∼10−0.4(α+1)Me−100.4(M∗−M)dM.(46)In both forms,αandL∗(orM∗) are free parameters that are used to obtain the best possibleﬁt to the available data. For the data in Fig. 36,α=−1.0 andM∗B=−21 for the localThe Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1018>>>

ﬁeld of galaxies near the Milky Way, whileα=−1.24±0.02 andM∗B=−21±0.7 forthe Virgo cluster. Although the values are similar, it is clear that there is not a universalluminosity function. Instead, each luminosity function depends on the environment of theparticular sample of galaxies.As can be seen for either environment depicted in Fig. 36, dE’s and dwarf irregularsrepresent the largest fraction of all galaxies, even though S’s and E’s are the most prominentin terms of both cluster luminosity and mass. Careful inspection of the ﬁgures also showsanother important detail: Although spirals represent the largest fraction of bright galaxies ineach case, there is a somewhat higher proportion of ellipticals in the Virgo cluster. When theVirgo cluster is compared with the much larger and more densely populated Coma cluster,the relative numbers of spirals and ellipticals change dramatically. In the Virgo cluster weﬁnd 12% E’s, 26% S0’s, and 62% S+Ir, while in the Coma cluster, the proportions are 44%E’s, 49% S0’s, and only 7% S+Ir. Once again there is evidence that environment plays a rolein galaxy formation and/or evolutionSUGGESTED READINGGeneralFerris, Timothy,Galaxies, Stewart, Tabori, and Chang, New York, 1982.Silk, Joseph,The Big Bang, Third Edition, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 2001.Waller, William H., and Hodge, Paul W.,Galaxies and the Cosmic Frontier, Harvard Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.TechnicalAthanassoula, E., Lambert, J. C., and Dehnen, W., “Can Bars Be Destroyed by a CentralMass Concentration? – I. Simulations,”Monthly Notices of the Royal AstronomicalSociety,363, 496, 2005.Bender, Ralf, Burstein, David, and Faber, S. M., “Dynamically Hot Galaxies. I. StructuralProperties,”The Astrophysical Journal,399, 462, 1992.Bender et al., “HST STIS Spectroscopy of the Triple Nucleus of M31: Two Nested Disksin Keplerian Rotation around a Supermassive Black Hole,”The Astrophysical Journal,631, 280, 2005.Bertin, Giuseppe,Dynamics of Galaxies, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.Binggeli, Bruno, Sandage,Allan, and Tammann, G.A., “The Luminosity Function of Galax-ies,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,26, 1988.Binney, James, and Merriﬁeld, Michael,Galactic Astronomy, Princeton University Press,Princeton, NJ, 1998.Binney, James, and Tremaine, Scott,Galactic Dynamics, Princeton University Press, Prince-ton, NJ, 1987.Combes, F., Boissé, P., Mazure, A., and Blanchard, A.,Galaxies and Cosmology, SecondEdition, Springer, 2002.de Vaucouleurs, Gerard,Third Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies, Springer-Verlag,New York, 1991..The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1019>>>

de Zeeuw, Tim, and Franx, Marijn, “Structure and Dynamics of Elliptical Galaxies,”AnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,29, 1991.Elmegreen, Debra Meloy,Galaxies and Galactic Structure, Prentice-Hall, Upper SaddleRiver, NJ, 1998.Gallagher, John S. III, and Wyse, Rosemary F. G., “Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies: Keystonesof Galaxy Evolution,”Publications of the Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc,106, 1225,1994.Gilmore, Gerard, King, Ivan R., and van der Kruit, Pieter C.,The Milky Way as a Galaxy,University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA, 1990.Hubble, Edwin, “Extra-Galactic Nebulae,”The Astrophysical Journal,64, 321, 1926.Hubble, Edwin,The Realm of the Nebulae, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, 1936.Kormendy, John, and Djorgovski, S., “Surface Photometry and the Structure of EllipticalGalaxies,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,27, 1989.Kormendy, John, and Richstone, Douglas, “Inward Bound: The Search for SupermassiveBlack Holes in Galaxy Nuclei,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,33, 1995.Mateo, Mario, “Dwarf Galaxies in the Local Group,”Annual Review of Astronomy andAstrophysics,36, 435, 1998.Pierce, Michael J., and Tully, R. Brent, “Luminosity–Line Width Relations and the Extra-galactic Distance Scale. I. Absolute Calibration,”The Astrophysical Journal,387, 47,1992.Rubin, Vera C., Burstein, David, Ford, W. Kent Jr., and Thonnard, Norbert, “RotationVelocities of 16 Sa Galaxies and a Comparison of Sa, Sb, and Sc Rotation Properties,”The Astrophysical Journal,289, 81, 1985.Sandage, Allan, “The Classiﬁcation of Galaxies: Early History and Ongoing Develop-ments,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,43, 581, 2005.Sandage, Allan, and Bedke, John,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution ofWashington, Washington, D.C., 1994.Sofue, Yoshiaki, and Rubin, Vera, “Rotation Curves of Spiral Galaxies,”Annual Review ofAstronomy and Astrophysics,39, 137, 2001.Sparke, Linda S., and Gallagher, John S.,Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction, Cam-bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.van den Bergh, Sidney,Galaxy Morphology andClassiﬁcation, Cambridge UniversityPress, 1998.Wyse, Rosemary F. G., Gilmore, Gerard, and Franx, Marijn, “Galactic Bulges,”AnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,35, 637, 1997.The Nature of Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1020>>>

PROBLEM SETUsing Shapley’s assumption that M101 has a diameter of 100 kpc, and adopting van Maanen’sﬂawed observation of a measurable rotational proper motion, estimate the speed of a point atthe edge of the galaxy and compare it to the characteristic rotation speed of the Milky Way.The Nature of Galaxies12 (a)The absolute magnitude of M101, an Sc galaxy, is−21.51 in theBband. Using Eq. ( 11),estimate its isophotal radius (R25) at 25B-mag arcsec−2.(b)Use the Tully–Fisher relation (Eq. 7) to estimate the rotational velocity of M101.(c)Estimate the angular rotation speed of a star atR25, in units of arcsec yr−1.(d)Could van Maanen have detected the rate of rotation of M101? How long would it takefor the galaxy to rotate through 1′′?3 (a)From the data given in the table  below estimateMBfor our Galaxy.Hint:MBfor the Sun in your calculations, notMbol;seeAppendi(b)Using the Tully–Fisher relation, calculate the maximum rotation speed of the Galactic diskBe sure to include,.MB=−11.0 log10Vmax+3.31 (Sc).
4Neglecting the effects of extinction and theK-correction, show that the surface brightness ofa galaxy is independent of its distance from the observer.5Prove that Eq. (2) follows directly from the following equation:µ(r)=µe+8.3268/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg.log10/bracketleftbiggI (r)Ie/bracketrightbigg=−3.3307/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg6Prove that Eq. (3) follows directly from the   following equation:µ(r)=µ0+1.09/parenleftbiggrhr/parenrightbigg,L(R, z)=L0e−R/hRsech2(z/z0)From Chapter 25 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.log10R25=−0.249MB−4.00(11)(7)
(2)
(3)x:Stellar Data..
.

<<<PAGE 1021>>>

7 (a)Showthatthe below equation canbewrittenas
whereb=7.67.(b)Integrating over the entire surface brightness proﬁle, show that the luminosity of the galaxycan be expressed in terms ofreandIeasLtot=/integraldisplay∞02πr I (r) dr=8!e7.67(7.67)8πr2eIe≃7.22πr2eIe.(47)Hint:/integraltext∞0e−xx7dx=κGammaζ(8)=7!.(c)Recalling thatIe≡I (re), show that if the integration of Eq. ( 47) is carried over 0≤r≤rerather than over 0≤r<∞, then the resulting luminosity is12Ltot, consistent withthe deﬁnition ofre.8NGC 2639 is an Sa galaxy with a measured maximum rotational velocity of 324 km s−1andan apparent magnitude ofB=12.22 mag (after making corrections for extinction).(a)Estimate its absolute magnitude in theBband from the Tully–Fisher relation.(b)Determine the distance to NGC 2639 using its distance modulus.(c)What is the galaxy’s radius (R25) at a surface brightness level of 25B-mag arcsec−2?(d)Find the mass of NGC 2639 that is interior toR25.(e)What is the luminosity of the galaxy in theBband? (Refer to the hint in Problem 3.)(f)Calculate the mass-to-light ratio for NGC 2639 in theBband, interior toR25.9Referring to the color indices (⟨B−V⟩)giveninTable1 and Appendix: Stellar Data eestimatetheaverage(orintegrated)spectralclassiﬁcationofmain-sequencestarsinspiralSa, Sb, and Sc.log10/bracketleftbiggI (r)Ie/bracketrightbigg=−3.3307/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg,
TABLE1Characteristics of Early Spiral Galaxies.SaSbScMB−17 to−23−17 to−23−16 to−22M(M⊙)109–1012109–1012109–1012/angbracketleftbigLbulge/Ltotal/angbracketrightbigB0.30.13 0.05Diameter (D25, kpc) 5–1005–100 5–100⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)6.2±0.64.5±0.42.6±0.2⟨Vmax⟩(km s−1)299222 175Vmaxrange (km s−1) 163–367 144–330 99–304pitch angle∼6◦∼12◦∼18◦⟨B−V⟩0.750.64 0.52/angbracketleftbigMgas/Mtotal/angbracketrightbig0.040.08 0.16/angbracketleftbigMH2/MHI/angbracketrightbig2.2±0.6 (Sab) 1.8±0.30.73±0.13⟨SN⟩1.2±0.21.2±0.20.5±0.2The Nature of Galaxies: Problem SetI (r)=Iee−b[(r/re)1/4−1],
galaxiesoftypes


<<<PAGE 1022>>>

11 (a)From the data shown in Fig. 37 for the stellar rotational velocities near the center ofM31, estimate the amount of mass within 1′′of the center of the galaxy. Compare youranswer with the value quoted in the text.(b)Estimate the amount of mass within the central 1′′based on the velocity dispersion data.(c)Comment on the source of the asymmetries evident in Fig. 37. Recall Fig. 13.10Use the rotation curve data in Fig. 14 to estimate the mass within the central 1′′of the centerof M32. Compare your answer with the value obtained using the velocity dispersion data inExample 2.1     and with the estimated range quoted in that example.“The Nature of Galaxies”
Rotation curveVelocity dispersion
–5005050100150200
0V (km s–1)/H9268 (km s–1)
–1.0–0.50.00.51.0r (arcsec)FIGURE 14The stellar velocity dispersion and rotational velocities of stars near the center ofM32. Given the distance to M32 of 770 kpc, 1′′corresponds to a linear distance from the center of3.7 pc. (Data from Joseph, et al.,Ap. J.,550, 668, 2001.)
Rotation curveVelocity dispersion
–300–200–100010020030050100150200250300350400
0V (km s–1)/H9268 (km s–1)
–1.5–1.0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5r (arcsec)FIGURE 37The stellar velocity dispersion and rotational velocities of stars near the center ofM31, measured along the major axis of the bulge. Given the distance to Andromeda of 770 kpc, 1′′corresponds to a linear distance from the center of 3.7 pc. (Data from Bender et al.,Ap. J.,631, 280,2005.)The Nature of Galaxies: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1023>>>

16Determine the epicycle axis ratio,χmax/ρmax, for a Keplerian orbit (a point mass orbiting acentral, spherically symmetric mass).Hint:Begin with Eq. (37).17Show that if the surface brightness of an elliptical galaxy follows ther1/4law given byreis given by⟨I⟩=3.607Ie.15 (a)From the information given in the text, derive Eq. ( 37) for the square of the solarepicycle frequency.(b)Show that Eq. (38) follows directly from Eq. (37).12Beginning with the general expression for the position vector in rectangular coordinatesshow that the vector can be represented in cylindrical coordinates by Eq. (16).13Show that the acceleration vector is given by Eq. ( 18) in cylindrical coordinates.Hint:Notethat the unit vectorsˆeRandˆeφare position-dependent and therefore time-dependent. You mayﬁnd their relationships with rectangular-coordinate unit vectors helpful.14d2rdt2=/parenleftbig¨R−R˙φ2/parenrightbigˆeR+1R∂/parenleftbigR2˙φ/parenrightbig∂tˆeφ+¨zˆez,
κ20=2κThetaζ0R0/bracketleftBiggκThetaζ0R0+∂κThetaζ0∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0/bracketrightBigg.κ20=−4B(A−B).
κ20=2κThetaζ0R0/bracketleftBiggκThetaζ0R0+∂κThetaζ0∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0/bracketrightBigg.log10/bracketleftbiggI (r)Ie/bracketrightbigg=−3.3307/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg,The Nature of Galaxies: Problem Setr=xˆi+yˆj+zˆk,r=RˆeR+zˆez,(16)
(18)
()37(38)
()37the below equation thentheaveragesurfacebrightnessovertheareaofacirculardiskofradiusκ20=2κThetaζ0R0/bracketleftBiggκThetaζ0R0+∂κThetaζ0∂R/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0/bracketrightBigg.(37)Estimate the amplitude of the Sun’s excursion in the radial direction relative to a perfectly circular orbit. Assume that the Sun is currently at the midpoint of its oscillation. Does your result represent a minimum or a maximum estimate of the actual deviation?


<<<PAGE 1024>>>

18Show that the Holmberg radius of a galaxy obeying ther1/4law is related to the galaxy’seffective radius,re, and the corresponding isophotal surface brightness,µe, byrH=re(4.18−0.12µe)4.19 (a)Use the result of Problem 17 to show that⟨µ⟩=µe−1.393 for an elliptical galaxythat follows ther1/4law.(b)NGC 3091 has an effective radius of 10.07 kpc in theBband and an average surfacebrightness within the effective radius of 52B-mag arcsec−2. From this information,determineµein theBband.(c)What is the Holmberg radius of NGC 3091? You may ﬁnd the result of Problem 18useful.20According to the virial theorem, the central radial-velocity dispersion is related to the massand size of the galaxy byσ2r∝M/R(see Eq. 13). Use arguments similar to those for theTully–Fisher relation to show thatL∝σ4r, which is the Faber–Jackson relation, Eq. ( 40).
21 (a)From the data given in Fig. 33, estimate the slope of the curve that represents the best-ﬁtlinear relationship.(b)How does the slope in Fig. 33 compare with Eq. ( 41)? Why wouldn’t you expectthem to be exactly the same?Mvirial≈5Rσ2rG,L∝σ40,The Nature of Galaxies: Problem SetHint:Begin by rewriting ther1/4law in the formI (r)=Iee−α[(r/re)1/4−1]
(13)(40)
–6–8–10–12–14–16–18–20–22–240.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.6gE’sInt E’s cE’sBright dE’sdSph’sBulgesLinear FitLog10 /H92680 (km s-1)
MBFIGURE33The Faber–Jackson relation represents a correlation between central velocity dis-persion and luminosity. The relation is a consequence of the virial theorem. (Data from Bender et al.,Ap. J.,399, 462, 1992.)You may also ﬁnd it helpful to write your integral in such a way that the limits of integration extend from zero to inﬁnity. This can be done by considering the deﬁnition of re.


<<<PAGE 1025>>>

24Plot log10φ(M), the logarithm of the Schechter luminosity function, for both the local ﬁeldof galaxies near the Milky Way and the Virgo cluster over the range−23<MB<−12 (seeEq. 46). Use the values ofαandM∗given in the text. To compare your results with thosegiven in Fig. 36, shift your data so that log10φ(−23)=0 for both groups of galaxies.The Nature of Galaxies: Problem Set
(b)Make a polar-coordinate plot ofaas a function ofθfor an E4 galaxy witha0=30 kpc anda2determined from the relationship found in part (a). Again assume that all higher-orderterms are identically zero.(c)Make a polar-coordinate plot for the same E4 galaxy, but witha4=0.1a0.(d)Make a polar-coordinate plot for the same E4 galaxy, but witha4=−0.1a0.(e)Comment on the general appearance of your last two plots. Which one looks more like alenticular galaxy?22 (a)It is estimated that M31 has approximately 350 globular clusters. If its absolute visualmagnitude is−21.7, estimate the speciﬁc frequency for its clusters.(b)NGC 3311 is a cD galaxy with an estimated 17,000 globular clusters and an absolute visualmagnitude of−22.4. Estimate the speciﬁc frequency of clusters in this galaxy.(c)Discuss the problem of globular cluster statistics in the suggestion that cD galaxies aredue to mergers of already formed spiral galaxies.23 (a)Find a general expression fora2, the coefﬁcient of the ﬁrst-order Fourier term in Eq. ( 44),written in terms ofa0andϵ(see Eq. 1).Assume that all higher-order terms are identicallyzero for this part of the problem.log10σ0=−0.1MB+constant.
a(θ)=a0+a2cos(2θ)+a4cos(4θ)+···,ϵ≡1−β/α,(41)
(44)(1)


<<<PAGE 1026>>>

Local field
Virgo clusterTotalIrr
IrrSd+Sm
Sd+SmBCDSa+Sb
Sa+SbS0
S0E
EdE
dESc
ScSpiral
SpiralTotal
0123012Log10 /H9278 (M)Log10 /H9278 (M)
–22–20–18–16–14–12MBT–22–20–18–16–14–12MBT
FIGURE36Luminosity functions for two samples of galaxies. The top panel is based on asample of galaxies near the Milky Way Galaxy, and the bottom panel is for galaxies located in theVirgo cluster of galaxies. The zero point of the log10φ(M)axis is arbitrary. (Figure adapted fromBinggeli, Sandage, and Tammann,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,26, 509, 1988. Reproduced withpermission from theAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 26, ©1988 by AnnualReviews Inc.)φ(M) dM∼10−0.4(α+1)Me−100.4(M∗−M)dM.(4 ) 6The Nature of Galaxies: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1027>>>



<<<PAGE 1028>>>

From Chapter 2  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,4The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1029>>>

The Milky Way Galaxy1Counting the Stars in the Sky2The Morphology of the Galaxy3The Kinematics of the Milky Way4The Galactic Center1COUNTING THE STARS IN THE SKY
In this chapter we will explore the complex system of stars, dust, gas, and dark matterknown as theMilky Way Galaxy.1Although it is possible to get at least a general ideaabout the nature of other galaxies from our external viewpoint, studying our own Galaxyhas proved to be very challenging. As we will learn, we live in a disk of stars, dust, and gasthat severely impacts our ability to “see” beyond our relative stellar neighborhood whenwe look along the plane of the disk. The problem is most severe when looking toward thecenter of the Galaxy in the constellation Sagittarius. In Section 1 we will discover thatstudying the distribution of stars while considering the effects of extinction provides us withour ﬁrst hint of what the Milky Way looks like from an outside perspective. In Section 2,a detailed description of the many varying components of the Galaxy will be presented.Much of what we know today about the formation and evolution of the Milky Way isencoded in the motions of the Galaxy’s constituents, especially when combined with infor-mation about variations in composition. Unfortunately, measuring the motions of the starsand gas in the Galaxy is done from an observing platform (Earth) that is itself undergoinga complex motion that involves the orbit of Earth around the Sun and the Sun’s elaboratepath around the Galaxy. In Section 3 we will investigate these motions, allowing us tomove from a description of motions relative to the Sun to motions relative to the center of1Throughout the remainder of this text, we may refer to the Milky Way Galaxy alternately in the shortened forms“the Galaxy” and “our Galaxy.”Human beings have long looked up at the heavens and contemplated its vastness, propos-ing various models to explain its form. In some civilizations the stars were believed to be located on a celestial sphere that rotated majestically above a ﬁxed, central Earth.When Galileo made his ﬁrst telescopic observations of the night sky in 1610, we started down a long road that has dramatically expanded our view of the universe.


<<<PAGE 1030>>>

the Galaxy. We will also be led to the remarkable conclusion that the luminous, baryonicmatter in the Galaxy is only a small fraction of what our Galaxy is composed of.Finally, in Section 4, we will probe the center of the Milky Way and study the exoticenvironment found there, including indisputable evidence for a supermassive black hole.Way. We will also study the large-scale structure of the universe and trace our developingunderstanding of the earliest moments of the universe and its ultimate fate.Historical Models of the Milky Way GalaxyAs can be seen by even a casual observation of the dark night sky, an almost continuousband of light appears to circle Earth, inclined about 60◦with respect to the celestial equator(see Fig. 1). It was Galileo who ﬁrst realized that this Milky Way is a vast collectionof individual stars. In the mid-1700s, in order to explain its circular distribution across theheavens, Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) and Thomas Wright (1711–1786) proposed that theGalaxy must be a stellar disk and that our Solar System is merely one component withinthat disk. Then, in the 1780s, William Herschel (1738–1822) produced a map of the MilkyWay based crudely on counting the numbers of stars that he could observe in 683 regionsof the sky (see Fig. 2). In his analysis of the data, Herschel assumed that (a) all stars
FIGURE 1A mosaic of the Milky Way showing the presence of dust lanes. (Courtesy of TheObservatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington.)
FIGURE 2William Herschel’s map of the Milky Way Galaxy, based on a qualitative analysis ofstar counts. He believed that the Sun (indicated by a larger star) resided near the center of the stellarsystem. (Courtesy of Yerkes Observatory.)The Milky Way GalaxyWe will investigate other, more distant galaxies; we will study their morphologies and evolution, as well as the evolution of our own Milky


<<<PAGE 1031>>>

have approximately the same absolute magnitude, (b) the number density of stars in spaceis roughly constant, (c) there is nothing between the stars to obscure them, and (d) he couldsee to the edges of the stellar distribution. From his data, Herschel concluded that the Sunhad to be very near the center of the distribution and that the dimensions measured alongthe plane of the disk were some ﬁve times greater than the disk’s vertical thickness.Jacobus C. Kapteyn (1851–1922) essentially conﬁrmed Herschel’s model of the Galaxy,again using the technique of star counting. However, through the use of more quantitativemethods, Kapteyn was able to specify a distance scale for his model of the Galaxy. TheKapteyn universe, as it is now called, was a ﬂattened spheroidal system with a steadily de-creasing stellar density with increasing distance from the center. A depiction of the Kapteynuniverse is shown in Fig. 3. In the plane of the Galaxy and at a distance of some 800 pcfrom the center, the number density of stars had decreased from its central value by a factorof two. On an axis passing through the center and perpendicular to the central plane, thenumber density decreased by 50% over a distance of only 150 pc. The number densitydiminished to 1% of its central value at distances of 8500 pc and 1700 pc in the plane andperpendicular to the plane, respectively. Kapteyn concluded that the Sun was located 38 pcnorth of the Galactic midplane and 650 pc from the center, measured along the Galacticmidplane.To get some idea of how Kapteyn arrived at his nearly heliocentric (or Sun-centered)model of the universe, recall the equation for the distance to a star whose absolute magnitudeis knownd=10(m−M+5)/5.Assuming a value forM(for instance, if the spectral class and luminosity class are known),and measuringmat a telescope, the distance modulusm−Mand the distancedare readilyobtained. And given the known coordinates of the star on the celestial sphere, its three-dimensional position relative to Earth is determined.In actuality, since the number of stars in any given region is so great, it is impractical toestimate the distance to each individual star in the way just described. Instead, a statisticalapproach is used that is based on counting the number of stars in a speciﬁed region downto a predetermined limiting apparent magnitude. From this counting procedure, the numberdensity of stars at a given distance from the Sun can be estimated. We will discuss some
FIGURE 3The Kapteyn universe. Surfaces of constant stellar number density are indicatedaround the Galactic center. Note that the open circle does not represent the position of the Sun derivedby Kapteyn. Rather, the open circle was used as an estimate from which Kapteyn began his analysisof the available data. (Figure from Kapteyn,Ap. J.,55, 302, 1922.):The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1032>>>

of the details of this method shortly. In his original study, Kapteyn used over 200 selectedregions of the sky.During the years between 1915 and 1919, shortly before Kapteyn’s model was published,Harlow Shapley (1885–1972) estimated the distances to 93 globular clusters using RR LyraeIn analyzing his data, Shapley recognized that the globular clusters are not distributeduniformly throughout space but are found preferentially in a region of the sky that is centeredin the constellation of Sagittarius, at a distance that he determined to be 15 kpc from theSun. Furthermore, he estimated that the most distant clusters are more than 70 kpc from theSun, over 55 kpc beyond the center. As a result, by assuming that the extent of the globularclusters was the same as the rest of the Galaxy, Shapley believed that the diameter of theGalaxy was on the order of 100 kpc, close to ten times the value proposed by Kapteyn.Shapley’s picture of the Galaxy also differed from Kapteyn’s in another important way:Kapteyn’s model located the Sun relatively near the center of the distribution of stars,whereas Shapley’s Galactic center was much farther away.We know today that both Kapteyn and Shapley were in error; Kapteyn’s universe wastoo small and the Sun was too near the center, and Shapley’s Galactic model was toolarge. Surprisingly, both models erred in part for the same reason: the failure to include intheir distance estimates the effects of interstellar extinction due to dust and gas. Kapteyn’sselected regions were largely within the Galactic disk where extinction effects are mostsevere; as a result, he was unable to see the most distant portions of the Milky Way, causinghim to underestimate its size. The problem is analogous to someone on Earth trying tosee the surrounding land while standing in a dense fog with limited visibility. Shapley, onthe other hand, chose to study objects that are generally found well above and below theplane of the Milky Way and that are inherently bright, making them visible from greatdistances. It is in directions perpendicular to the disk that interstellar extinction is leastimportant, although it cannot be neglected entirely. Unfortunately, errors in the calibrationof the period–luminosity relation used by Shapley led to overestimates of the distances tothe clusters. The calibration errors were traced to the effects of interstellar extinctionInterestingly, Kapteyn was aware of the errors that interstellar extinction could introduce,but he was unable to ﬁnd any quantitative evidence for the effect, even though researcherssuspected that dust might be responsible for the dark bands seen running across the MilkyWay (see Fig. 1). Further evidence for strong extinction could also be found in Shapley’sown data; no globular clusters were visible within a region between approximately±10◦ofthe Galactic plane, called thezone of avoidance. Shapley suggested that globular clusterswere apparently absent in the zone of avoidance because strong gravitational tidal forcesdisrupted the objects in that region. In reality, interstellar extinction is so severe within thezone of avoidance that the very bright clusters are simply undetectable. Clearly the problemsencountered by Kapteyn and Shapley in deducing the structure of our Galaxy point out thedifﬁculty of determining its general morphology from a nearly ﬁxed location within the.The Milky Way Galaxyand W Virginis variable stars. Since these stars are easily identiﬁed in the clusters through their periodic variations in luminosity, it is a relatively simple matter to use their absolute magnitudes (obtained from a period–luminosity relation) to estimate their distances from the Sun. The distances to the variable stars correspond to the distances to the clusters in which they reside.


<<<PAGE 1033>>>

Galaxy’s disk. Unfortunately, given the immense distances involved, we are not likely tobe able to reach another, more favorable vantage point any time soonThe Effects of Interstellar ExtinctionTo see how interstellar extinction directly affects estimates of stellar distances,we ﬁndd=10(mλ−Mλ−Aλ+5)/5=d′10−Aλ/5,(1)whered′=10(mλ−Mλ+5)/5is the erroneous estimate of distance made when extinction isneglected, andAλis the amount of extinction in magnitudes, and as a function of wavelength,that has occurred between the star and Earth. SinceAλ≥0 in all cases (after all, extinctioncannot make a star appear brighter),d≤d′; the true distance is always less than the apparentdistance.In the disk of the Milky Way the typical rate of extinction in visible wavelengths is1 magnitude kpc−1, although that value can vary dramatically if the line of sight includesdistinct nebulae such as giant molecular clouds. Fortunately, it is often possible to estimatethe amount of extinction by considering how dust affects the color of a star (interstellarreddening)Example 1.1.Suppose that a B0 main-sequence star with an absolute visual magnitudeofMV=−4.0 is observed to have an apparent visual magnitude ofV=+8.2. Neglectinginterstellar extinction (i.e., assuming naively thatAV=0), the distance to the star wouldbe estimated to bed′=10(V−MV+5)/5=2800 pc.However, if it is known by some independent means (such as reddening) that the amountof extinction along the line of sight is 1 mag kpc−1, thenAV=kdmag, wherek=10−3mag pc−1anddis measured in pc. This givesd=10(V−MV−kd+5)/5=2800×10−kd/5pc,which may be solved iteratively or graphically, giving a true distance to the star ofd=1400 pc.In this case the distance to the star would have been overestimated by almost a factor oftwo if the effects of interstellar extinction were not properly accounted for.Differential and Integrated Star CountsAs we have already mentioned, Kapteyn’s method of star counting was not based on directlydeterminingdfor individual stars. Rather, the numbers of stars visible in selected regionsof the sky are counted over a speciﬁed apparent magnitude range. Alternatively, all starsin the regions brighter than a chosen limit of apparent magnitude can be counted. These.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1034>>>

approaches are known asdifferentialandintegrated star counts, respectively. The tech-nique of star counting is still used today to determine the number density of stars in the sky.The distribution depends on a variety of parameters, including direction, distance, chemicalcomposition, and spectral classiﬁcation. Such information is very helpful to astronomers intheir efforts to understand the structure and evolution of the Milky Way Galaxy.LetnM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r) dMbe the number density of stars with absolute magnitudes be-tweenMandM+dMand attributeSthat lie within a solid angle/Omegaϵin a speciﬁc directionat a distancerfrom the observer (Scould be composition or the Morgan–Keenan spectraln(S, /Omegaϵ, r)=/integraldisplay∞−∞nM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r) dM.(2)If other speciﬁc information is also desired, those attributes could be included inSas well.However, the amount of data required to carry out star count analyses is formidable and oftenprohibitive; as the number of variables increases, so does the amount of data required. Inhis original study, Kapteyn consideredgeneralstar counts that tracked absolute magnitudeonly, regardless of spectral class.If the number densitynM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r) dMis integrated over the volume of a cone deﬁnedby the solid angle/Omegaϵand extending from the observer atr=0 to some distancer=d, theresult isNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, d) dM, the total number of stars with absolute magnitudes in therangeMtoM+dMthat are found within that conical volume of space (see Fig. 4).UsingdV=/Omegaϵr2drin spherical coordinates, this isNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, d) dM=/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd0nM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r) /Omegaϵr2dr/bracketrightbiggdM.(3)Equation ( 3) is the general expression for theintegrated star count, written in terms of
dWObserver
FIGURE 4An observer on Earth counting the number of stars within a speciﬁed range ofMorgan–Keenan spectral and luminosity types out to a distancedlocated within a cone of solid angle/Omegaϵ. When the effects of interstellar extinction are considered, this is equivalent to counting the samegroup of stars down to a corresponding apparent magnitude,m.The Milky Way Galaxy
class, for example). According to the notation used here,  has units of pc−3mag−1, and the actual number density of stars having attribute S that lie within a solid angle Ω and located a distance r from the observer is given bynM


<<<PAGE 1035>>>

the limiting distance,d. Note that this means thatnMdMcan be obtained fromNMdM(with limiting distancer) by differentiating:nM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r) dM=1/Omegaϵr2dNMdMdr.Of course, those stars sharing the same absolute magnitude will have different appar-ent magnitudes because they lie at different distances from us. We can use Eq. ( 1)to replace the limiting distance,d, with the apparent magnitudem. This results inNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m) dM, the integrated star count written in terms of the limiting magni-tude,m. (Note that the “bar” designation now indicates that the integrated star count is afunction ofmrather thand.) ThusNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m) dMis the total number of stars withabsolute magnitudes in the rangeMtoM+dMthat appear brighter than the limitingmagnitude,m.If the limiting magnitude is increased slightly, then the limiting distance becomes corre-spondingly greater and the conical volume of space is extended to include more stars. Theincrease in the number of included stars is/bracketleftBiggdNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)dmdm/bracketrightBiggdM.This deﬁnes thedifferential star count,AM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m) dM dm≡dNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)dmdM dm,(4)the number of stars with an absolute magnitude betweenMandM+dMthat are foundwithin a solid angle/Omegaϵand have apparent magnitudes in the range betweenmandm+dm.As a simple (and unrealistic) illustration of the use of integrated and differentialstar counts, consider the case of an inﬁnite universe of uniform stellar density [i.e.,nM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, r)=nM(M, S)=constant] and no interstellar extinction (A=0). ThenEq. ( 3) becomes, after cancelingdM,NM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, d)=nM(M, S) /Omegaϵ/integraldisplayd0r2dr=/Omegaϵd33nM(M, S).(Note that when the last expression is considered over all directions,/Omegaϵ=4πand/Omegaϵd3/3is just the volume of a sphere of radiusd.) Expressingdin units of parsecs and writing itin terms of the apparent magnitudem(Eq. 1), we haveNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)=/Omegaϵ3nM(M, S)103(m−M+5)/5=/Omegaϵ3nM(M, S) eln 103(m−M+5)/5=/Omegaϵ3nM(M, S) e[3(m−M+5)/5]ln 10.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1036>>>

Now, the differential star count formula is, from Eq. (4),AM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)=dNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)dm=ln 105/OmegaϵnM(M, S)103(m−M+5)/5=3l n1 05NM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m).(5)If eitherNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)orAM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)is known from observations, the equationscan be used to determine the spatial number densitynM(M, S) dM.Olbers’s paradox, a problem known since the time of Kepler but brought to the attentionof the general public by Heinrich Olbers (1758–1840). If we restrict our attention to theMilky Way Galaxy only, the solution rests in its ﬁnite size and nonconstant stellar numberdensity. However, the resolution of Olbers’s paradox is not as simple when applied to theuniverse as a wholeThe modern process of gathering star count data involves the automated use of CCDdetectors to determineNMorAM. Traditionally, these data are then combined with stellarnumber densities in the neighborhood of the Sun to estimate the number density of stars ofa given spectral type in other regions of the Galaxy. More recently, an iterative computer
2THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE GALAXYArmed with numerous examples of other galaxies beyond the Milky Way, together with thedata obtained from star counts and information gathered from various distance indicators,abundance analyses, and so on, astronomers have been able to piece together a model ofthe structure of our own Galaxy. However, it is important to point out that many of thedetails of the model remain uncertain and may even change in signiﬁcant ways as moreinformation becomes available. With that caveat, we will attempt to describe our currentunderstanding of the general morphology of the Galaxy in this section, leaving details ofits complex motions and fascinating nucleus until later in the chapter..The Milky Way Galaxy
The constant-density model just described suffers from a dramatic ﬂaw. When it is used to calculate the amount of light received at Earth due to the stars contained in the solid angle Ω, the result diverges exponentially as m increases. This implies an inﬁnite amount of light arriving from inﬁnitely far away This dilemma is one expression of
modeling approach has been used with some success. A general model, based in part on observations of other galaxies believed to be similar to the Milky Way, is superimposed on the data; through successive iterations, the density function, the amount of interstellar extinction, and variations in composition with position are ﬁne-tuned until a satisfactory match to the original data is obtained. However, given the complexity of the data and analysis, signiﬁcant uncertainties remain in our picture of stellar distributions within the Milky Way.


<<<PAGE 1037>>>

Distance to the Galactic CenterJust as Herschel and Kapteyn had believed, the Milky Way is a galaxy that possesses adisk of stars, of which the Sun is one member. However, as Shapley had suspected, the Sundoes not reside near the center of the disk but is actually located roughly one-third of theway out from the middle. As viewed from Earth, the center of the disk is in the direction ofthe constellation of Sagittarius corresponding to a very compact emission source known asSgr A⋆(see Section 4) at the J2000.0 equatorial coordinatesαSgr A⋆=17h45m40.0409s(6)δSgr A⋆=−29◦00′28.118′′.(7)Face-on and edge-on diagrams of the Galaxy are given in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively.Some of the details of the Galaxy’s components (to be discussed later) are presented inTable 1.The Sun’s distance from the center of the Galaxy, known as thesolar Galactocentricdistance,R0, has been revised downward many times since Shapley’s ﬁrst estimate of15 kpc. In 1985 the International Astronomical Union (IAU) recommended a standardizedvalue ofR0=8.5 kpc for the purpose of allowing direct comparisons of Galactic structureamong various researchers. (R0is often used to normalize other distances in the Galaxy.)However, a number of studies have found that the value ofR0is about 8 kpc. For example,in 2003 Frank Eisenhauer and colleagues determined a value of 7.94±0.42 kpc based onastrometric and spectroscopic measurements of S2, the closest star to the Galactic center.Given the remaining uncertainties in the distance to the Galactic center, and given the
FIGURE 5An artist’s depiction of the Milky Way Galaxy seen face-on. The shapes of the spiralarms and the length of the bar associated with the central bulge are based on currently available data.The position of the Sun is shown. [Courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC).]The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1038>>>

DustGalacticcenterGalacticbulgeGalactic diskGlobularclustersStellarhaloSun50 kpc8 kpc
FIGURE 6An edge-on diagram of the Galaxy, not strictly to scale; see Table 1.common use of 8 kpc in the literature, in this text we will adopt a value ofR0=8 kpc(8)for the solar Galactocentric distance.The full diameter of the disk, including the dust, gas, and stars, is believed to be roughly50 kpc, with estimates ranging from 40 to 50 kpc. Furthermore, it appears that the disk maynot be completely cylindrically symmetric. Rather, the disk may be somewhat elliptical,with a ratio of the lengths of the minor and major axes of about 0.9. The Sun is probablylocated near the major axis of the disk. Thesolar circleis deﬁned to be a perfect circle ofradiusR0.The Structure of the Thin and Thick DisksThe disk is actually composed of two major components. Thethin disk, which is composedof relatively young stars, dust, and gas, has a vertical scale height ofzthin≃350 pc and isthe region of current star formation (recall that one scale height is the distance over whichthe number density decreases bye−1). A portion of the thin disk (sometimes referred toas the young thin disk) also corresponds to the central plane of the Galactic dust and gasdistribution; it has a scale height of perhaps 90 pc, although some researchers have founda scale height as small as 35 pc. Thethick disk, which is probably an older population ofstars, has a scale height of approximatelyzthick≃1000 pc. The number of stars per unitvolume in the thick disk is only about 8.5% of that in the thin disk at the Galactic midplane.When the thin and thick disks are combined, empirical ﬁts to the stellar number densityderived from star count data given(z, R)=n0/parenleftbige−z/zthin+0.085e−z/zthick/parenrightbige−R/hR,(9)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1039>>>

TABLE 1Approximate Values for Various Parameters Associated with the Components of theMilky Way Galaxy. Deﬁnitions and details are discussed in the text.DisksNeutral ThinThickGasDiskDiskM(1010M⊙)0.5a60.2 to 0.4LB(1010L⊙)b—1.80.02M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)— 3 —Radius (kpc)252525Forme−z/hze−z/hze−z/hzScale height (kpc)<0.10.351σw(km s−1)51635[Fe/H]>+0.1−0.5 to+0.3−2.2 to−0.5Age (Gyr)/lessorsimilar108c10dSpheroidsCentral Stellar Dark-MatterBulgeeHaloHaloM(1010M⊙)10.3190+360−170fLB(1010L⊙)b0.30.10M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)3∼1—Radius (kpc)4>100>230Formboxy with barr−3.5(r/a)−1(1+r/a)−2Scale height (kpc) 0.1 to 0.5g3170σw(km s−1) 55 to 130h95—[Fe/H]−2 to 0.5<−5.4 to−0.5—Age (Gyr)<0.2 to 10 11 to 13∼13.5aMdust/Mgas≃0.007.bThe total luminosity of the Galaxy isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙,Lbol,tot=3.6×1010L⊙(∼30% in IR).cSome open clusters associated with the thin disk may exceed 10 Gyr.dMajor star formation in the thick disk may have occurred 7–8 Gyr ago.eThe mass of the black hole in Sgr A⋆isMbh=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.fM=5.4+0.2−3.6×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the center.gBulge scale heights depend on age of stars: 100 pc for young stars, 500 pc for old stars.hDispersions increase from 55 km s−1at 5 pc to 130 km s−1at 200 pc.wherezis the vertical height above the midplane of the Galaxy,Ris the radial distance2from the Galactic center,hR>2.25 kpc is the disk scale length, andn0∼0.02 stars pc−3for the absolute magnitude range 4.5≤MV≤9.5. It should be pointed out that the relativedensity coefﬁcient, the scale heights, and the disk scale length are all somewhat uncertain;2In general, we reserve the use ofRto denote the cylindrical coordinate radius within the disk and the use ofrtorepresent the spherical coordinate radius, both measured from the Galactic center.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1040>>>

different researchers give somewhat different values for these parameters. The Sun is amember of the thin disk and is currently located about 30 pc above the midplane.Theluminosity density(the luminosity per unit volume) of the thin disk is often modeledwith the functional formL(R, z)=L0e−R/hRsech2(z/z0),(10)wheresech(z/z0)=2ez/z0+e−z/z0is the hyperbolic secant function. For the thin diskz0=2zthinandL0≃0.05 L⊙pc−3.The Age–Metallicity RelationThe thin and thick disks not only are identiﬁable by separate scale heights and stellarnumber densities but are further distinguished by the chemical compositions and kinematicproperties of their members. We will discuss composition effects now but will delay ourdiscussion of kinematics until the next section.dance of heavier elements; Population I stars are metal-rich, withZ∼0.02, Population IIstars are metal-poor, withZ∼0.001, and Population III stars are essentially devoid ofmetals, withZ∼0. In reality, a wide range of metallicities exists in stars. At one end arethe extreme Population I stars, and on the other, the hypothetical Population III stars (ifthey still exist). Between Population I and Population II stars are theintermediate(or,alternatively and suggestively,disk) population stars.To more carefully quantify the important parameter of composition, theratioof ironto hydrogen has become almost universally adopted by researchers because iron lines aregenerally readily identiﬁable in stellar spectra. During a supernova detonation (particularlyof Type Ia), iron is ejected, enriching the interstellar medium. New stars can then be createdwith a greater abundance of iron in their atmospheres than in their predecessors. As a result,iron content should correlate with stellar age, the youngest, most recently formed starshaving the highest relative abundance of iron. The iron-to-hydrogen ratio in the atmosphereof a star is compared with the Sun’s value through the expression[Fe/H]≡log10/bracketleftbigg(NFe/NH)star(NFe/NH)⊙/bracketrightbigg,(11)a quantity often referred to as themetallicityStars with abundances identical to the Sun’s have[Fe/H]=0.0, less-metal-rich stars havenegative values, and more-metal-rich stars have positive values. Values ranging from−5.4for old, extremely metal-poor stars to about 0.6 for young, extremely metal-rich stars havebeen measured in our Galaxy. According to studies of the main-sequence turn-off points inclusters (both globular and galactic), metal-rich stars tend to be younger than metal-poorones of similar spectral type. The apparent correlation between age and composition isreferred to as theage–metallicity relation.Stars are generally classiﬁed according to the relative abun-
.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1041>>>

However, in many situations the correlation between age and[Fe/H]may not be asreliable as ﬁrst believed. For example, signiﬁcant numbers of Type Ia supernovae do notappear until roughly 109years after star formation begins, and since Type Ia supernovaeare responsible for most of the iron production, iron is not available in large quantitiesto enrich the interstellar medium. Furthermore, mixing of the interstellar medium after aSN Ia event may not be complete. In other words, a local region of the ISM may becomeenriched in iron after 109years, while another region may not experience the same level ofenrichment. Therefore, according to the age–metallicity relation, the iron-rich region wouldsubsequently produce stars that appear younger, when in fact both regions are the same age.A second measure of ISM enrichment (and age) is based on[O/H], deﬁned in a waycompletely analogous to Eq. ( 11). Since core-collapse supernovae appear after only 107years following the onset of star formation (recall that they are the result of massive-starevolution) and they produce a higher abundance of oxygen relative to iron,[O/H]may alsobe used to determine the ages of Galactic components; some astronomers use[O/Fe]forthe same purpose.To complicate matters further, accurate age estimates depend critically on precise valuesfor distance moduli, which are needed to determine cluster main-sequence turn-off pointsAge Estimates of the Thin and Thick DisksIn the thin disk, typical values for the iron–hydrogen metallicity ratio are in the range−0.5<[Fe/H]<0.3, while for the majority of stars in the thick disk,−0.6<[Fe/H]<−0.4 is more characteristic, although some thick-disk members may have metallicities atleast as low as[Fe/H]∼−1.6.According to various age determinations, the stellar members of the thin disk are probablysigniﬁcantly younger than their thick-disk counterparts. It appears that star formation beganseveral billion years. On the other hand, star formation in the thick disk appears to havepredated the onset of star formation in the thin disk by two to three billion years. It isgenerally believed that the episode of thick-disk star formation spanned the time intervalbetween 10 and 11 Gyr ago.Mass-to-Light RatiosBased on data from star counts and orbital motions, the estimated stellar mass of the thindisk is roughly 6×1010M⊙with another 0.5×1010M⊙of dust and gas. Furthermore,the luminosity in the blue-wavelength band isLB=1.8×1010L⊙. When the ﬁrst of theseparameters is divided by the second, the resultingmass-to-light ratioisM/LB≈3M⊙/L⊙.This quantity gives us information about the kinds of stars responsible for the generationof the light.;The Milky Way Galaxy
errors of 0.1 in distance moduli lead to 10% errors in age. Needless to say, the important task of Galactic age determinations remains a major challenge in astronomy.
in the thin disk about 8 Gyr ago and is ongoing today. This conclusion is supported by the observations of white dwarf stars in the thin disk and theoretical estimates of their cooling times. There is also some evidence that star formation in the thin disk may not have been continuous over time but may have come in bursts with intervening gaps of


<<<PAGE 1042>>>

luminosity depends rather strongly on its mass, withLL⊙=/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbiggα,(12)whereα≃4 above about 0.5M⊙andα≃2.3 for less massive stars. Assuming that mostof the stars in the disk are main-sequence stars, an “average” stellar mass can be estimated.Substituting the observed mass-to-light ratio and solving for the mass, we have⟨M⟩=31/(1−α)M⊙.Assuming thatα≃4, we ﬁnd that⟨M⟩≃0.7M⊙. Apparently the total luminosity of thefact that dwarf M stars are the most common class of stars in the vicinity of the Sun.TheB-band luminosity of the thick disk is about 2×108L⊙, or 1% of the value of thethin disk (which explains why the thick disk has been so difﬁcult to detect). The mass of thethick disk is probably about 2 to 4×109M⊙, or approximately 3% of the thin-disk mass.Spiral StructureSigniﬁcant structure exists within the disk itself. When neutral hydrogen clouds or relativelyyoung objects such as O and B stars, H II regions, and galactic (open) clusters are used astracers of Galactic structure, aspiral structureemerges, giving the disk the appearance ofa pinwheel. When other galaxies that possess distinct disks are observed in blue light (thedominant visible-wavelength band of hot, bright, young, high-mass main-sequence stars),these galaxies often exhibit similarly beautiful spiral structure. One such example is thegreat spiral galaxy of Andromeda, shown in Fig. 7. However, when the galaxies arein Fig. 8, the Sun seems to be located close to, but not actually in, one of the spiral armfeatures known as theOrion–Cygnus arm, or simply theOrion arm(this feature is alsoknown as theOrion spursince it is probably not a full spiral arm structure). Spiral armsget their names from the constellations in which they are observed.The interstellar gas and dust clouds that plagued Kapteyn’s attempts at determining theoverall structure of the Galaxy and that are clearly evident in Fig. 1 are primarily locatednear the midplane and found preferentially in the spiral arms. If it were possible to view ourGalaxy from a vantage point outside the disk but along the plane, it would probably appearsimilar to NGC 891,3the galaxy shown in Fig. 9.3NGC is a designation indicating that the galaxy is a member of theNewGeneralCatalogAlong the main sequence, a star’s
.The Milky Way Galaxy
disk is dominated by stars somewhat less massive than the Sun. This should not be sur-prising since the initial mass function indicates that many more low-mass than high-mass stars are created out of the interstellar medium, which is consistent with the
viewed in the red light characteristic of older, low-mass stars, the spiral structure is less pronounced. It appears that spirals are associated with ongoing star formation and that older stars have had ample time to drift out of the spiral pattern. As we can see


<<<PAGE 1043>>>

FIGURE 7The Andromeda galaxy (also known as M31 or NGC 224) is a spiral galaxy believedto be much like our own. M31 is located 770 kpc from the Milky Way Galaxy. (From Sandage andBedke,The CarnegieAtlas of Galaxies, The Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C.,1994.)
270900180
1 kpcFIGURE 8The spatial distribution of young Galactic clusters and H II regions reveals thepresence of spiral arms within the disk of the Galaxy. The Sun is shown at the origin of the diagram(the intersection of the degree tick marks). The Sun is located near the Orion–Cygnus arm. [Figureadapted from Becker and Fenkart,TheSpiralStructureofOurGalaxy, Becker and Contopoulos (eds.),D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1970.]The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1044>>>

FIGURE 9NGC 891, seen edge-on, clearly shows a thin dust band in the plane of the disk. TheMilky Way Galaxy probably appears much like NGC 891 when viewed from a distant vantage point.(From Sandage and Bedke,TheCarnegieAtlasofGalaxies, The Carnegie Institution of Washington,Washington, D.C., 1994.)Interstellar Gas and Dustwithin the Milky Way by measuring the effects of obscuration by and emissivity of dust,as well as the location of 21-cm H I emission, and by using the CO molecule as a tracer ofH2. Molecular hydrogen and cool dust are found predominantly in the regions 3 to 8 kpcand 3 to 7 kpc from the Galactic center, respectively (i.e., inside the solar circle), whileatomic hydrogen can be found in the region from 3 kpc out to the edge of the Galactic disk(25 kpc). It appears that H2and the dust are most tightly conﬁned to the plane of the Galaxy,with vertical scale heights above or below the midplane of perhaps 90 pc or less. This isonly about 25% of the value for stars in the thin disk and on the order of 9% of the scaleheight of thick-disk stars. In the region near the Sun, the scale height for atomic hydrogenis approximately 160 pc. The total mass ofHIi sestimated to be 4×109M⊙and the massof H2is approximately 109M⊙. In the solar neighborhood the total mass density of gasis 0.04 M⊙pc−3, of which atomic hydrogen accounts for approximately 77%, moleculescontribute 17%, and ions add an additional 6%.At distances beyond 12 kpc from the center of the Galaxy, the scale height of H I increasesdramatically, reaching a value of more than 900 pc. In addition, the distribution of H I in theouter reaches of the Galaxy is no longer strictly conﬁned to the plane but, rather, exhibitsa well-deﬁnedwarpthat reaches a maximum angle of deviation from the plane of 15◦.Amap of the H I distribution at a Galactic radius of 13.6 kpc is shown in Fig. 10. TheThe Milky Way Galaxy
Gas and dust clouds exist in the Milky Way with a range of masses, tempera-tures, and densities. It is from these clouds that new stars are ultimately formed. Astronomers have been able to map out the overall distribution of dust and gas


<<<PAGE 1045>>>

–5–4–3–2–1012345Z (kpc)–5–4–3–2–1012345
360 320 280 240 200 160 120 80 40 0/H9258360 320 280 240 200 160 120 80 40 0
FIGURE 10The H I warp in the Milky Way at a distance of 13.6 kpc from the Galactic center.The Galaxy’s midplane is located atz=0, and the direction toward the center of the Milky Way is at0◦. (Figure adapted from Burton and te Lintel Hekkert,Astron.Astrophys.Suppl.Ser.,65, 427, 1986.)line of sight toward the center of the Milky Way is labeled as 0◦in the ﬁgure. Warped H Idistributions such as the one observed in our own Galaxy appear to be common featuresin other spiral galaxies as well, including Andromeda (in some spiral galaxies the warpangle can reach 90◦). Although we do not yet fully understand the dynamics that lead to thecreation of warps (they do not seem to be the result of simple gravitational perturbationsfrom one or more external galaxies, for example), they do seem to be associated with thedistribution of mass in the outer regions of the Galaxy, beyond where most of the luminosityis produced.Hydrogen clouds can also be found at high latitudes. Although some of these clouds havepositive radial velocities, implying that they are moving away from the disk, the majoritypossess large negative radial velocities (up to 400 km s−1or more), as measured by their21-cm emission. There appear to be two types of sources responsible for thesehigh-velocityclouds. In one process, clouds of gas ejected from supernovae are driven to large values ofz, where they eventually cool and rain back down onto the Galactic plane. This suggestionis known as theGalactic fountain model. It also appears that the Galaxy is accreting gasfrom intergalactic space, as well as from a number of its small satellite galaxies; hence thepredominance of negative-radial-velocity clouds.In addition, a very hot, tenuous gas exists at distances up to or exceeding 70 kpc fromthe Galactic center. TheFar Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer(FUSE) has been able todetect O VI absorption lines in the spectra of distant extragalactic sources and halo starsproduced when the light passes through the gas in the Galactic halo. Using O VI as a tracerof the hydrogen gas, the strengths of the O VI absorption lines imply a number density ofThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1046>>>

hydrogen ofnH∼10−11m−3. Assuming that the distribution is approximately sphericalwith a radius ofR∼70 kpc leads to an estimate of the mass of the gas ofM≃4×108M⊙.If the gas distribution is somewhat ﬂattened, the total mass could exceed 109M⊙. In orderto support the gas against gravitational collapse, the gas temperature must be every hot. Itis estimated that the temperature of this hot, tenuous gas is in excess of 106K, with thehigh gas temperature perhaps being due to collisions between infalling gas and existing gasin the Galaxy. The gas is sometimes referred to as acoronal gas, suggestive of its hightemperature.The Disruption of Satellite GalaxiesAnother unusual high-latitude feature is theMagellanic Stream, a narrow band of H Iemission stretching more than 180◦across the sky and trailing the Southern Hemisphere’sMagellanic Clouds (recall that the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds are small satellitegalaxies of the Milky Way; the LMC and SMC are located 52 and 61 kpc from Earth,respectively).4The Magellanic Stream appears to be the result of a tidal encounter of theMagellanic Clouds with the Milky Way some 200 Myr ago. It has also been suggested thatthe Magellanic Stream may owe some of its structure to the interaction with our Galaxy’shot coronal gas.Other satellite galaxies have also tidally interacted with the Milky Way, and still othersare currently doing so. For example, in 1995 Rodrigo Ibata and his colleagues announcedthe discovery of a previously unknown dwarf spheriodal galaxy in Sagittarius. At a distanceof only 24 kpc from Earth and 16 kpc from the center of the Milky Way, the Sagittarius dwarfspheroidal is the closest galaxy to Earth. It is clearly elongated with the long axis directedtoward the center of the Galaxy and, with a radial velocity of 140 km s−1, has had onlya few orbital encounters with the Milky Way. Evidently the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidalgalaxy, along with its globular clusters, is being incorporated into the Milky Way Galaxy.Using the2-Micron All Sky Survey(2MASS) catalog, researchers have also identiﬁedan overdensity of stars in the constellation Canis Major near the plane of the Milky Way.A group of globular clusters and open clusters are associated with this overdensity in bothposition and radial velocity. This feature strongly suggests that another dwarf satellite galaxywas integrated into the Milky Way in the past and may now be a part of the thick disk.The unusual globular clusterωCentauri also seems to be the remnant of a dwarf galaxythat has been subsumed by the Milky Way.ωCen is the largest and brightest globular clustervisible from Earth and has an unusually high surface brightness. It appears that this globularcluster is the stripped core of another former satellite galaxy. (It has been suggested that theglobular clusters M54 and NGC 2419 were also once dwarf galaxies that suffered the samefate asωCen.)The Galactic BulgeAlthough the vertical scale height of the thin disk is near 350 pc in the vicinity of the Sun,that value increases somewhat toward the inner regions of the Galaxy, where the disk meetstheGalactic bulge. The bulge is not simply an extension of the disk but is an independent4The LMC contains 30 Dorodus and SN 1987A.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1047>>>

FIGURE 11An infrared view of the Galaxy, as seen by COBE. The image was produced fromobservations at 1.2µm, 2.2µm, and 3.4µm, and extends 96◦either side of the Galactic center.(Courtesy of the COBE Science Working Group and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center.)component of the Galaxy. The mass of the bulge is believed to be roughly 1010M⊙anditsB-band luminosity is near 3×109L⊙. This gives a mass-to-light ratio of 3 M⊙/L⊙,avalue comparable to that found for the thin disk.The boxy (or elongated) bulge is evident in theCOsmic Background Explorer satel-lite(COBE) image shown in Fig. 11. The image, which was produced by combiningobservations at 1.2µm, 2.2µm, and 3.4µm, should be compared to the optical pictureof NGC 891, shown in Fig. 9. Using the COBE data, together with observations ofRR Lyraes and K and M giants, we ﬁnd that the variation in the number density of stars inthe bulge corresponds to a vertical scale height that ranges from 100 pc to 500 pc, dependingon the ages of the stars used to make the determination; younger stars yield smaller scaleheights.The surface brightness,I, of the bulge (measured in units of L⊙pc−2) exhibits anapproximate radial dependence of the formlog10/bracketleftbiggI (r)Ie/bracketrightbigg=−3.3307/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggrre/parenrightbigg1/4−1/bracketrightBigg,(13)which is often referred to as ar1/4law[the law was ﬁrst formulated by Gerard deVaucouleurs(1918–1995) in 1948 and is also referred to as ade Vaucouleurs proﬁle].reis a referenceradius (called theeffective radius) andIeis the surface brightness atre. Formally,reisdeﬁned to be that radius within which one-half of the bulge’s light is emitted. At the infraredwavelength of 12µm, star count data from theInfraRed Astronomical Satellite(IRAS)suggests an effective radius of about 0.7 kpc. Similar results were found by COBE. (Wewill ﬁnd that the de Vaucouleurs proﬁle is a general distribution for relaxed, spheroidalsystems.)A serious difﬁculty in observing the properties of the bulge rests in the large amount ofextinction at visible wavelengths due to the dust between the Sun and the Galactic center.The total amount of extinction within several degrees of the center can be more than 30magnitudes. However, a number of lines of sight exist for which the amount of extinctionis minimal. The most well known of these isBaade’s window, which Walter Baade (1893–The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1048>>>

1960) discovered in 1944 while observing the globular cluster NGC 6522. Baade realizedthat by observing in that region of the sky, he was able to see RR Lyraes that were actuallybeyond the Galactic center. Baade’s window is 3.9◦below the Galactic center, and the lineof sight passes within 550 pc of the center. It is believed that NGC 6522 is located withinthe bulge.From the observational evidence, the chemical abundances of stars in the bulge varysigniﬁcantly, ranging from quite metal-poor to very metal-rich;−2<[Fe/H]<0.5. In fact,based on the chemical abundances, it appears that three somewhat distinct age groupingsexist in the central bulge. One set of stars appear to be very young, with ages less than200 Myr, a second set has ages between 200 Myr and 7 Gyr, and the third set tends to beolder than 7 Gyr (perhaps up to 10 Gyr or older).In a trend that on initial reﬂection appears to be counterintuitive, the oldest stars in thebulge tend to have the highest metallicities, while the youngest stars have a fairly uniformdistribution of metallicities across the range from−2t o0.5. This pattern is probably dueto a burst of massive star formation when the Galaxy was young. Apparently core-collapsesupernovae enriched the interstellar medium early in the life of the bulge, implying thatsubsequent generations of stars contained an enhanced abundance of heavier elements. Themore uniform distribution of metallicity in recent generations of stars could be the resultof fresh, infalling material. It is this type of complication that must be considered carefullywhen employing the age–metallicity relationThe Milky Way’s Central BarAlthough it was originally thought to be essentially spheroidal in nature, a number ofobserving campaigns and database studies have determined that the budge contains a distinctbar.5The Milky Way’s central bar is clearly depicted in the artist’s drawing of the Galaxyshown in Fig. 5. The bar has a radius (one-half length) from the galactic center of4.4±0.5 kpc and is oriented at an angle ofφ=44◦±10◦with respect to the line-of-sightangle from Earth to the Galactic center. It also seems that the bar is somewhat thicker in theplane of the Galaxy than in thezdirection; the dimension ratios are approximately 1:0.5:0.4.ars are dynamically stable structures and common featuresof many spiral galaxies.)The 3-kpc Expanding ArmA unique feature in the inner regions of the Galaxy that is most easily observed at the 21-cmwavelength ofHIi st h e3-kpc expanding arm, a gas cloud that is moving toward us atroughly 50 km s−1. Once believed to be the product of a gigantic explosion in the center ofthe Galaxy, the rapidly moving structure is now thought to be a consequence of the presenceof the stellar bar. Rather than being driven away from the center in an explosive event thatwould require an unrealistic 1052J of energy, the gas cloud is merely in a very ellipticalorbit about the Galactic center resulting from gravitational perturbations from the bar.5One such database study is the analysis of the GLIMPSE (Galactic Legacy Mid-Plane Survey Extraordinaire)point source catalog of some 30 million infrared sources in the direction of the inner Galaxy, produced by theSpitzer Space Telescope. The Galactic bulge is much more transparent to infrared wavelengths than to visiblewavelengths..
BThe Milky Way Galaxy
(


<<<PAGE 1049>>>

The Stellar Halo and Globular Cluster SystemThe last luminous component of the Galaxy is thestellarhalo(or simply the halo), composedof the globular clusters and thoseﬁeld stars(stars that are not members of clusters) that havelarge velocity components perpendicular to the Galactic plane. These ﬁeld stars are oftenreferred to ashigh-velocity starssince, as we will learn in the next section, their velocitycomponents differ signiﬁcantly from those of the Sun. Most of the globular clusters and thehigh-velocity stars can reach positions that are far above or below the plane of the Galaxy.Although it appeared to Shapley that all of the known globular clusters were distributednearly spherically about the Galactic center, it has become apparent that two distinct spatialdistributions exist, delineated by metallicity. Older, metal-poor clusters whose membershave[Fe/H]<−0.8 belong to an extended spherical halo of stars, while younger clusterswith[Fe/H]>−0.8 form a much ﬂatter distribution and may even be associated with thethick disk. The spatial distribution of the two metallicity groups is shown in Fig. 12.The notable exception is the well-studied globular cluster 47 Tucana (47 Tuc; also knownas NGC 104), which is located 3.2 kpc below the Galactic plane and has an unusually highmetallicity of[Fe/H]=−0.67. Some astronomers have argued that 47 Tuc is a memberof the halo population, while others consider 47 Tuc to be a member of the thick disk.Our Galaxy is known to contain at least 150 globular clusters with distances from thecenter of the Milky Way ranging from 500 pc to 120 kpc. The youngest globular clustersappear to be about 11 Gyr old, and the oldest are probably a little over 13 Gyr old.6It nowappears that a signiﬁcant age spread of two billion years or so exists between the youngestand oldest members of the halo.
[Fe/H] £ –0.8[Fe/H] ! –0.8N
SESE+50–5+50–5N
47 TucFIGURE 12Metal-poor globular clusters form a nearly spherical distribution about the Galacticcenter, while more metal-rich clusters are found preferentially near the plane of the Galaxy, possiblyassociated with the thick disk. (Figure adapted from Zinn,Ap. J.,293, 424, 1985.)6Krauss and Chaboyer,Science,299, 65, 2003, ﬁnd a best-ﬁt age for the globular clusters of 12.6 Gyr, withlower and upper limits of 10.4 Gyr and 16 Gyr, respectively, at 95% conﬁdence levels. Gratton et al.,Aston.Astrophys.,408, 529, 2003, ﬁnd ages for NGC 6397, NGC 6752, and 47 Tuc of 13.9±1.1 Gyr, 13.9±1.1 Gyr,and 11.2±1.1 Gyr, respectively. For comparison, the age of the universe is 13.7±0.2 Gyr.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1050>>>

Although 144 of the globular clusters are found within 42 kpc of the Galactic center, 6globular clusters have been found between 69 and 123 kpc of the Galactic center. Someastronomers have suggested that those six most distant clusters may have been captured bythe Milky Way or may be dwarf spheroidal galaxies, much asωCen and the Sagittariusdwarf galaxy may have been. If we do not include these very remote objects, the metal-poorclusters seem to be conﬁned to a halo with a radius of approximately 42 kpc. However, thedetection of extremely distant and luminous ﬁeld stars suggests that a stellar halo radius of50 kpc may be more appropriate.The number density proﬁle of the metal-poor globular clusters and the ﬁeld stars in thehalo has the formnhalo(r)=n0,halo(r/a)−3.5,(14)wheren0,halo≃4×10−5pc−3is roughly 0.2% of the thin disk’s midplane value (seeEq. 9). The scale length (a) of the number density distribution is several thousandparsecs. At visible wavelengths, the effective radius of the halor1/4law (Eq. 13) isre=2.7 kpc.Metal-rich globular clusters seem to have many characteristics in common with thick-disk ﬁeld stars, including spatial distribution. Just like the thick-disk ﬁeld stars, the verticalscale height of these clusters is on the order of 1 kpc, unlike the much larger scale lengthof the metal-poor clusters.However, based on studies that use RR Lyraes as tracers of other ﬁeld stars in the halo,there is some question about whether ﬁeld stars actually share the same spatial distributionpattern as the corresponding metal-poor clusters. Instead, the ﬁeld stars may occupy avolume that is appreciably ﬂattened, perhaps as much asc/a∼0.6, wherecis the minoraxis of a spheroid in the direction perpendicular to the Galactic plane, andais the majoraxis (see Fig. 13). Such a discrepancy in distributions, if real, could have a signiﬁcantinﬂuence on an ultimate model of Galaxy formation and evolution. On the other hand, other
bcaDiskStellar halo
FIGURE 13The general shape of a triaxial spheroidal system, where the three axes of thespheroid are assumed to havea≥b≥c. The Galactic disk (shown foreshortened by perspective) isroughly circular.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1051>>>

astronomers believe that a single value of 0.8≤c/a≤0.9 probably applies to the ﬁeld starsand clusters alike.Based largely on star counts, the totalstellarmass density in the solar neighborhoodis approximately 0.05 M⊙pc−3. Of that total, the contribution due to high-velocity halostars is on the order of 0.2%, or 1×10−4M⊙pc−3. Combining this with the spatial densitypower law yields a total estimated mass of the stellar halo on the order of 1×109M⊙,o fwhich roughly 1% is the combined mass of the globular clusters; the remainder is lockedup in ﬁeld stars. TheB-band luminosity of the halo is estimated to be 1×109L⊙, giving amass-to-light ratio on the order of unity (the exact value is quite uncertain).When all of the components of the Galaxy are considered together, its totalB-band lumi-nosity isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙. However, approximately one-third of the Galaxy’semission is in the infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum and is primarily associatedwith interstellar dust. Including IR emissions, the bolometric luminosity of the Galaxy isLbol=3.6×1010L⊙.The Dark Matter HaloWhen the masses of all of the luminous components of the Galaxy are combined (the thinand thick disks, the interstellar dust and gas, the Galactic bulge, the stellar halo, and thebar), the total mass of luminous matter in the Galaxy is estimated to be 9×1010M⊙.A swe shall see in the next section, this value is in good agreement with the orbital motionof the Sun about the Galactic center, but it does not explain the orbits of stars and gasat Galactocentric distances much greater thanR0. Apparently there is still another crucialcomponent to the overall structure of our Galaxy. Along with inﬂuencing orbital motions,this unseen element of Galactic structure may also be responsible for the generation of thewarps seen in the H I distribution near the outer edges of the luminous disk.Thisdark matter haloseems to be roughly spherically distributed, enveloping the stellarhalo and extending out to at least 230 kpc. Based on its gravitational inﬂuence over luminousmatter, the dark matter halo has an apparent mass distribution of the formρ(r)=ρ0(r/a)(1+r/a)2,(15)whereρ0andaare chosen by ﬁtting the mass distribution in the dark matter haloThis functional dependence behaves as 1/rwhenr≪aand as 1/r3whenr≫a. The mass of the dark matter halo may be as great as5.4×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the Galactic center and 1.9×1012M⊙within 230 kpc ofthe Galactic center. It appears that the dark matter halo accounts for about 95% of the entiremass of the Galaxy. [The empirical justiﬁcation for a dark matter density distribution suchas Eq. (15) will be discussed]The composition of the dark matter halo is still a mystery. It cannot be in the formof interstellar dust, because dust betrays its presence through the extinction of starlight.Furthermore, the dark matter halo cannot be composed of gas, because absorption lineswould be apparent when observing halo stars. One possible class of candidates are referredto asweakly interacting massive particles(WIMPs). WIMPs would not contribute tothe overall luminosity of the Galaxy, but they would affect it through their gravitational.in Section 3The Milky Way Galaxy
.


<<<PAGE 1052>>>

ObserverStarMACHOFIGURE14Gravitationallensing(focusing)ofstarlightproducedbyaninterveningMACHO.interactions.InsupportofaWIMP-dominatedGalaxy,theoreticalconsiderationsrelatedtotheformationandsubsequentevolutionoftheuniversesuggestthatnonbaryonicmatter(constituentsofmatterotherthanprotons,neutrons,andrelatedmassiveparticles)mayconstitutethemajorityofthedarkmatterhalo’smassIthadbeensuggestedthatneutrinos(whichareleptons)ﬁllthebill,althoughitnowappearsthattheyaren’tmassiveenoughtoexplaintheamountofmassthatmustbepresentinthedarkmatterhalo.Perhapscurrentlyhypothetical(andundetected)particlesareresponsible,suchasthesuggestedsupersymmetricparticlesknownasneutralinosthatareimpliedinsomegranduniﬁedtheoriesofparticlephysics.Acompetinghypothesisforthepossiblemakeupofdarkmattersuggeststhatmassivecompacthaloobjects(MACHOs)mayberesponsible.MACHOsthatcouldsupplytheunseenmassmaybeintheformofwhitedwarfs,neutronstars,blackholes,orlessex-oticreddwarfsorbrowndwarfs.SomesearchesforMACHOshavebeenbasedonthegeneral-relativisticpredictionthatstarlightisdeﬂectedasitpassesnearamassiveobject.talesignatureoftemporarybrighteningthatispredictedtooccurwhenaMACHOpassesthroughthelineofsight.Figure15showsthelightcurvesofoneeventthatlastedfor33days.Fromastatisticalanalysisofthesmallnumberofsuchevents,itappearsthattherearetoofewMACHOstoaccountforasigniﬁcantfractionofthemasscontainedinthedarkmatterhalo.Thatconclusionisalsosupportedbysearchesforwhitedwarfsandsmallreddwarfstars,carriedoutusingtheHubbleSpaceTelescope.Inthosestudies,thenumberofstarsdetectedistoosmalltoconstituteamajorcomponentofthedarkmatterintheGalaxy.Basedonthefaintest(deepest)searchesyetconductedatthetimeofwriting,whitedwarfscancontributenomorethan10%ofthedarkmatterhalo’smass,andreddwarfsnomorethan6%ofit.TheGalacticMagneticFieldLikemanyotherastrophysicalenvironments,theGalaxypossessesamagneticﬁeld.Theorientationandstrengthoftheﬁeldcanbemeasuredinavarietyofways,includingtheZeemaneffectandthepolarizationofvisible-andradio-wavelengthelectromagneticradi-ationbyreﬂectionfrominterstellargrainsalignedwiththeﬁeld.Itappearsthatwithinthedisk,theﬁeldtendstofollowtheGalaxy’sspiralarmsandhasatypicalstrengthof0.4nT.Theﬁeldstrengthinthestellarhalomaybeanorderofmagnitudeweakerthaninthedisk,andtheﬁeldstrengthneartheGalacticcentermayreach1µT(seeSection4).AlthoughtheglobalGalacticmagneticﬁeldisquiteweakrelativetothemagneticﬁeldnearthesurfaceofEarth(about50µT),itprobablyplaysasigniﬁcantroleinthestructure.The Milky Way Galaxy
If a MACHO is located between a distant star and Earth, the light from the star can be focused with the MACHO acting as a gravitational lens. In 1993, while observing stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud, astronomers detected the tell-


<<<PAGE 1053>>>

a
b
cblue
redAmax = 6.86t = 33.9
00.511.524602468
0Ared/AblueAredAblue
400 420 440 460Days from 2 January 1992FIGURE 15The light curve of a star in the LMC brightened over a period of 33 days, apparentlybecause a MACHO passed through the line of sight. The data are shown for (a) blue light, (b) redlight, and (c) the ratio of blue light to red light. (Figure adapted from Alcock et al.,Nature,365, 621,1993. Reprinted with permission, © 1993, Macmillan Magazines Limited.)and evolution of the Milky Way. This can be seen by considering its energy density, whichappears to be comparable (perhaps equal) to the thermal energy density of gas within thedisk3THE KINEMATICS OF THE MILKY WAYOne of the great challenges in understanding the nature of our Galaxy lies in determiningits internal kinematics. In this section, we will discuss how astronomers have been ableto uncover the complexities of motions in the Milky Way from our vantage point in orbitaround a moving Sun.The Galactic Coordinate SystemThe Galactic midplane is not aligned with the plane of the celestial equator but is inclinedat an angle of 62.87◦to it. As a result, rather than using the Earth-based equatorial coordi-.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1054>>>

nate system, it is more convenient to introduce a new coordinate system when discussingthe structure and kinematics of the Milky Way Galaxy. TheGalactic coordinate systemexploits the natural symmetry introduced by the existence of the Galactic disk.The intersection of the midplane of the Galaxy with the celestial sphere forms what isvery nearly a great circle, known as theGalactic equator.7This orientation is depicted inFig. 16.Galactic latitude(b) andGalactic longitude(ℓ) are deﬁned from a vantagepoint taken to be the Sun, as shown in Fig. 17. Galactic latitude is measured in degrees
62.6ObserverNGPNCPEclipticNEPGalactic equator
Celestial equatorGalacticascending nodeGalactic centerVernal equinox
FIGURE 16The relative orientations of the celestial equator, the ecliptic, and the Galacticequator as they appear on the celestial sphere. Note that from the vantage point depicted in the ﬁgure,the north celestial pole (NCP), the north ecliptic pole (NEP), and north Galactic pole (NGP) are allon the front of the celestial sphere.
StarGalactic centerTo NGPRotationSunb/H5129FIGURE 17The deﬁnition of the Galactic coordinatesℓandb. The direction of rotation of theGalaxy is also labeled.7Technically, the Galactic midplane does not exactly trace out a great circle, because the Sun is not precisely inthe midplane; however, the deviation is very small. Recall from Section 2 that the Sun is located just 30 pcabove the plane.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1055>>>

north or south of the Galactic equator along a great circle that passes through thenorthGalactic pole. Galactic longitude (also in degrees) is measured east along the Galacticequator, beginningnearthe Galactic center, to the point of intersection with the great circleused to measure Galactic latitude.By international convention, the J2000.0 equatorial coordinates of the north Galacticpole (b=90◦) areαNGP=12h51m26.28sδNGP=27◦7′41.7′′,and the origin of the Galactic coordinate system (ℓ0=0◦,b0=0◦) corresponds toα0=17h45m37.20sδ0=−28◦56′9.6′′.Note that the center of the Galaxy(αSgr A⋆,δSgr A⋆)given by Eqs. ( 6) and ( 7) is veryclose to, but not exactly aligned with, (ℓ0=0◦,b0=0◦).Two other useful positions on the sky are also worth specifying in both coordinatesystems. The location of the north celestial pole (δNCP=90◦), given in J2000.0 Galacticcoordinates, isℓNCP=123◦55′55.2′′bNCP=27◦7′41.7′′.And the intersection of the celestial equator with the Galactic equator moving eastward fromnegative to positive declination (theascending node) is given in equatorial coordinates byαascending=18h51m24sδascending=0◦and in Galactic coordinates byℓascending=33.0◦bascending=0◦.The transformations between equatorial and Galactic coordinates involves the applica-tion of the methods of spherical trigonometry. To make the transformation from equatorialto Galactic coordinates (assuming epoch J2000.0):sinb=sinδNGPsinδ+cosδNGPcosδcos(α−αNGP)(16)cosbsin(ℓNCP−ℓ)=cosδsin(α−αNGP)(17)cosbcos(ℓNCP−ℓ)=cosδNGPsinδ−sinδNGPcosδcos(α−αNGP).(18)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1056>>>

For transformations from Galactic to equatorial coordinates (again assuming epochJ2000.0):sinδ=sinδNGPsinb+cosδNGPcosbcos(ℓNCP−ℓ)(19)cosδsin(α−αNGP)=cosbsin(ℓNCP−ℓ)(20)cosδcos(α−αNGP)=cosδNGPsinb−sinδNGPcosbcos(ℓNGP−ℓ).(21)Note that care must be taken in inverting these expressions to solve forαorℓ, becausecomputers and electronic calculators may return the wrong (default) quadrant when thecalculation of an inverse trigonometric function is performed. A graphical form of thetransformations that does not suffer from this multiplicity is presented in Fig. 18.A Cylindrical Coordinate System for Galactic MotionsThe motions of stars in the solar neighborhood allow us to glean important clues regardingthe large-scale structure of the Galaxy. Although the Galactic coordinate system is usefulfor representing the locations of objects within the Galaxy as seen from Earth, it is not themost convenient choice for studying kinematics and dynamics. One reason is that the Sun,which is the origin of the Galactic system, is itself moving about the center of the Galaxy. Inaddition, a coordinate system centered on the Sun constitutes a noninertial reference framewith respect to Galactic motions.Therefore, to complement the Galactic coordinate system, a cylindrical coordinate sys-tem is used that places the center of the Galaxy at the origin. In this system the radialcoordinateRincreases outward, the angular coordinateθis pointed in the direction of ro-tation of the Galaxy, and the vertical coordinatezincreases to the north (see Fig. 19).Furthermore, the corresponding velocity components are traditionally labeled/Piϵ≡dRdt,/Thetaϵ≡Rdθdt,Z≡dzdt.(22)It is worth noting that this set of directional choices results in a left-handed coordinatesystem instead of a more conventional right-handed one. This occurs because, when viewedfrom the north Galactic pole, the Galaxy rotates clockwise, rather than counterclockwise.(Fortunately, we are not going to be concerned with cross products in this analysis. Recallthat cross products are right-handed by deﬁnition.)Peculiar Motions and the Local Standard of RestSince all of our observations are made from Earth (or at least relatively near it, in the caseof satellites), and because we can transform those observations to Sun-centered ones byremoving any effects resulting from the rotational and orbital motions of Earth or motionsof the spacecraft, we will consider the Sun as the site of all observations of the Galaxy.In particular, since the Earth–Sun distance is very small when compared to any distanceson a Galactic scale, we need not concern ourselves with the change in position, only withchanges in velocity.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1057>>>

FIGURE 18A chart for converting between equatorial and Galactic coordinates. (From Kraus,RadioAstronomy, Second Edition, Cygnus-4uasar Books, 1986, used by permission.)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1058>>>

/H9258zRZPQStarGalactic centerRotationSunFIGURE 19The cylindrical coordinate system used to analyze Galactic kinematics. (Note thatsome authors deﬁne the radial coordinate to be positive toward the Galactic center. It should also benoted that the coordinate system deﬁned here isnota right-handed coordinate system.)Before we can hope to make a ﬁnal transformation from the Sun to the center of theGalaxy, however, we must also understand the Sun’s motion. In fact, the Sun does notfollow a simple planar orbit or even a closed nonplanar orbit; instead, as it moves about theGalactic center, it is also currently moving slowly inward (in the negative-Rdirection) andfarther north, away from the midplane (positive-zdirection).To investigate the motion of the Sun and the other stars in the solar neighborhood, wewill ﬁrst deﬁne thedynamical local standard of rest(dynamical LSR) to be a point thatisinstantaneouslycentered on the Sun and moving in aperfectly circular orbitalong thesolar circle about the Galactic center. An alternative deﬁnition for the LSR known as thekinematic local standard of restis based on the average motions of stars in the solarneighborhood. Although with the right choice of reference stars, dynamical and kinematicLSRs agree quite well, it can be shown that the kinematic LSR systematically lags behindthe dynamical LSR. Throughout the remainder of this text, “the LSR” will always refer tothe dynamical LSR.The velocity components of the LSR must be/PiϵLSR≡0,/ThetaϵLSR≡/Thetaϵ0,ZLSR≡0,where/Thetaϵ0≡/Thetaϵ(R0)andR0is the solar Galactocentric distance. Note that once the LSR ischosen, the Sun immediately begins to drift away from it, implying that we would effectivelyneed to redeﬁne the reference point constantly. In reality this is not a signiﬁcant problembecause (fortunately) the 230-Myr orbital period of the LSR is very long compared to thetime since modern telescopic observations began (and even longer compared to the lifetimeof a typical research grant); consequently, there has not been sufﬁcient time for the effectto become noticeable.The velocity of a starrelativetotheLSRis known as the star’speculiar velocityand isgiven byV=(VR,Vθ,Vz)≡(u, v, w),(23)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1059>>>

whereu=/Piϵ−/PiϵLSR=/Piϵ,(24)v=/Thetaϵ−/ThetaϵLSR=/Thetaϵ−/Thetaϵ0,(25)w=Z−ZLSR=Z.(26)The Sun’s peculiar velocity relative to the LSR is generally referred to simply as thesolarmotion.The average ofuandwfor all stars in the solar neighborhood, excluding the Sun, shouldbe nearly zero if we assume an axisymmetric Galaxy. The reason is that with symmetriesabout both the rotation axis and the midplane, there should be as many stars moving inwardas outward, and there should be as many stars moving toward the north Galactic pole astoward the south Galactic pole. In reality this is not quite true because the Galaxy is notprecisely axisymmetric, but the error is not signiﬁcant for our purposes here. As a result,we shall assume that, summing over a sample ofNnearby stars,⟨u⟩=1NN/summationdisplayi=1ui≃0,(27)⟨w⟩=1NN/summationdisplayi=1wi≃0.(28)The same assumption cannot be made for thevcomponent, however. To see why, considerthe situations depicted in Fig. 20. Stars with different average orbital radii must followpaths that bring them very close to the LSR if they are to be considered members of thesolar neighborhood and eligible for inclusion in the calculation of⟨v⟩. If we consider thespecial case thatu=0 andw=0 for all stars in our sample, then the stars must be at eithertheir most distant point from the Galactic center (apogalacticon) or their closest approachto the Galactic center (perigalacticon) when they coincide with the LSR; this is true ofAandB, respectively. Then, for the two stars to follow their speciﬁed orbits, it is necessaryCurrent LSRCAR0BGalacticcenterFIGURE 20The orbits of three hypothetical stars intersecting at the LSR.AandBrepresentstars in elliptical orbits with semimajor axesaA<R0andaB>R0, respectively.Crepresents a starfollowing the perfectly circular path of the LSR.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1060>>>

that/ThetaϵA(R0)</Thetaϵ0and/ThetaϵB(R0)>/Thetaϵ0. This implies thatvA<0 andvB>0. Finally, sincemore stars reside inside the solar Galactocentric distance than beyond it (see, for example,Eq. 9),⟨v⟩<0.(29)(This explains why the kinematic LSR systematically lags behind the dynamical LSR, asmentioned previously.)The velocity that is measured for a particular star relative to the Sun is just the differencebetween the star’s peculiar velocity and the solar motion with respect to the LSR, or/Deltaϵu≡u−u⊙,/Deltaϵ v≡v−v⊙,/Deltaϵ w≡w−w⊙.Using the average values of the stellar peculiar velocity components given by Eqs. ( 27),(28), and (29), and solving for the solar motion, we haveu⊙=−⟨/Deltaϵu⟩,(30)v⊙=⟨v⟩−⟨/Deltaϵv⟩,(31)w⊙=−⟨/Deltaϵw⟩.(32)Theuandwcomponents of the solar motion simply reﬂect the averagedrelativevelocitiesof the other stars with respect to the Sun in theRandzdirections. 4ualitatively, these starsappear to be “streaming” past the Sun as it moves through spaceTo ﬁnd thevcomponent of the solar motion, we must ﬁrst determine the average value ofvfor stars in the solar neighborhood. Unfortunately, this requires a theory of Galactic motionthat is beyond the scope of the present argument. However, qualitatively the procedureinvolves deriving an analytical expression for⟨v⟩in terms of the radial variation in thenumber density of stars in the solar neighborhood. The justiﬁcation for this relationshiplies in the argument made concerning the lag of stellar motions behind the LSR due tothe increase in number density with decreasing Galactocentric distance. The result is anequation of the form⟨v⟩=Cσ2u,whereCis a constant andσu≡/angbracketleftbigu2/angbracketrightbig1/2measures the spread in theRcomponents of the peculiar velocities of stars in the solarneighborhood with respect to the LSR; of course,σ2u=⟨/Piϵ2⟩.Note thatσuis related to the standard deviation of the velocity distribution, deﬁned asstandard deviation≡1√N/bracketleftBiggN/summationdisplayi=1(u−⟨u⟩)2/bracketrightBigg1/2..The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1061>>>

In the special case that⟨u⟩=0, thenσu=⟨u2⟩1/2is identical to the standard deviation.σuis known as thevelocity dispersioninu.Turning again to Fig. 20, we can see whyσushould correlate with⟨v⟩. A stellarsample that produces a larger dispersion inumeans that a wider range of elliptical orbitsare included. This results in a more negative average value ofvfor the sample because ofthe larger fraction of the stellar population withR<R0; there are more stars in the samplewithv<0 than withv>0. Alternatively, asσ2udecreases, fewer stars will have orbits thatare appreciably noncircular and⟨v⟩will approach zero. From Eq. (31),⟨/Deltaϵv⟩=Cσ2u−v⊙and−v⊙is simply the ordinate intercept on a graph of⟨/Deltaϵv⟩versusσ2u.Cis the slope of the linear relationship.The components of the Sun’s peculiar velocity areu⊙=−10.0±0.4 km s−1,(33)v⊙=5.2±0.6 km s−1,(34)w⊙=7.2±0.4 km s−1,(35)so that relative to the LSR, the Sun is moving (a) toward the Galactic center, (b) more rapidlyin the direction of Galactic rotation, and (c) north out of the Galactic plane. Overall, thesolar motion is approximately 13.4k ms−1toward a point in the constellation of Hercules.The point toward which the Sun is moving is called thesolar apex; the point away fromwhich the Sun is retreating is thesolar antapex(located in Columba). It is important tonote, however, that the exact value for the solar motion and the location of the solar apexdepend on the choice of reference stars.Now that the solar motion is known, the velocities of stars relative to the Sun canbe transformed into peculiar motions relative to the LSR. It is then possible to plot onecomponent of peculiar motion against another for a speciﬁed sample of stars in the solarneighborhood in order to obtain important information about their kinematics. Such plotsresult in patterns known asvelocity ellipsoids. As depicted in a diagram ofuversusv(Fig. 21), when young, metal-rich main-sequence A stars are used, the range in velocitiesabout the LSR is fairly limited (a small dispersion), for older K giants a wider variation inbothuandvis observed, and when old, metal-poor red dwarfs are plotted, the spread iseven larger (a large dispersion). The same general behavior is seen in plots ofwversusv,whereas a much more symmetric diagram results whenwis plotted againstu.Speciﬁc features of Fig. 21 are worth discussing in more detail. First is the very notice-able relationship between metallicity and velocity dispersion, called avelocity–metallicityrelation. When the velocity–metallicity and age–metallicity relations are combined, the ve-locity ellipsoids suggest that the oldest stars in the Galaxy have the widest range of peculiarvelocities, a trend that is evident in all three coordinates. Because stars with the smallestpeculiar velocities do not drift away from the LSR as quickly, they must occupy orbits thatare similar to that of the LSR, implying that these young stars are members of the thin disk.On the other hand, the stars with the largest peculiar velocities follow very different pathsabout the center of the Galaxy. In particular, stars with large|w|must be passing throughThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1062>>>

–250 –200 –150 –100 –50 0 50 100 150–150–100–50050100150
LSREnvelopeOld, metal-poorred dwarfsCenter ofenvelopeIntermediatepopulationK giantsYoung,metal-richA dwarfsu (km s–1)
v (km s–1)FIGURE 21A schematic diagram of the peculiar velocity componentsvandufor stars in thesolar neighborhood. The innermost contour represents metal-rich main-sequence A stars, the middlecontour depicts older K giants, and the outer contour indicates very metal-poor red dwarfs. The LSRis located at(v, u)=(0,0). An enveloping circle with an approximate radius of 300 km s−1andcentered atv=−220 km s−1reveals the orbital velocity of the LSR.the solar neighborhood on trajectories that will carry them to great distances above andbelow the disk. These old, metal-poor stars are the high-velocity stars that were mentionedin the last section as being members of the stellar halo.A second common feature of peculiar velocity diagrams is the clear asymmetries in thevelocity ellipsoids along thev-axis as a function of metallicity or age (this effect is knownasasymmetric drift). Few stars are observed withv>+65 km s−1, but there are metal-poor RR Lyraes and subdwarfs withv<−250 km s−1. In fact, as suggested by the dashedline in Fig. 21, a nearly circular “envelope” with a radius of roughly 300 km s−1canbe drawn around the high-velocity stars. The center of the velocity envelope appears to benearv=−220 km s−1for bothu–vandw–vdiagrams. If on average the stellar halo isrotating very slowly (if at all), then the orbital velocity of the LSR should reveal itself asa point of symmetry along thev-axis. This is because halo stars with/Thetaϵ≃0 (no velocitycomponent in the direction of Galactic rotation) should exhibit peculiarvvelocities thatsimply reﬂect the motion of the LSR (i.e.,v≃−/Thetaϵ0). Stars that have orbital componentsthat are in the opposite sense from the overall Galactic rotation direction havev<−/Thetaϵ0.By this argument it appears that the orbital speed of the LSR is/Thetaϵ0(R0)=220 km s−1,(36)the presently accepted IAU standard. This value has also been measured using groups ofexternal galaxies for reference.88Kuijken and Tremaine (1994) have suggested that the IAU value of/Thetaϵ0may be too large. Based on a set ofself-consistent solutions to various Galactic parameters, they argue for/Thetaϵ0=180 km s−1.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1063>>>

Example 3.1.An estimate of the mass of the Milky Way Galaxy interior to the solarGalactocentric distance can be made using Kepler’s third law, together withR0and/Thetaϵ0.UsingR0=8 kpc and/Thetaϵ0=220 km s−1, the orbital period of the LSR isPLSR=2πR0/Thetaϵ0=230 Myr.Assuming that the mass of the Galaxy within the solar circle is much greater than the massof a test particle orbiting along with the LSR, and that the bulk of the Galaxy’s mass isdistributed spherically symmetrically, Kepler’s third law givesMLSR=4π2R30GP2LSR=8.8×1010M⊙.This value compares well with the estimate of the mass of luminous matter quoted onmatter halo is included.In 1927, Jan Oort (1900–1992) proposed that since no stars had been observed withv>+65 km s−1, the escape velocity of the Galaxy must be/Thetaϵ0+65 km s−1∼300 km s−1relative to the Galactic center. In fact, we know today that a small number of extremely high-velocity stars do exist in the solar neighborhood with speeds of∼500 km s−1relative to thecenter of the Galaxy. Since these stars have not escaped from the Galaxy, it seems that thestrong asymmetry nearv∼+65 km s−1simply points to a deﬁciency in very high-velocitystars.Differential Galactic Rotation and Oort’s ConstantsIn 1927 Jan Oort also derived a series of relations that have become the framework withwhich astronomers have attempted to determine the differential rotation curve of the Galacticdisk. To simplify the discussion, we will assume that all motions are circular about the centerof the Galaxy.Consider the situation depicted in Fig. 22. Assume that the Sun (atO) and a star orsome other object (atS) are orbiting the Galactic center (atC) in the Galactic midplane. Thevelocity vector that is measured between the Sun and the star at pointSis therelativevelocitybetween the two objects. Therefore, in order to compare the observed-velocity vector tothe object’s true velocity with respect to the Galactic center, it is necessary to consider thedifference between the star’s motion and the Sun’s motion. Of course, in practice it is notthe relative space motion that is measured directly but the radial velocity and the propermotion, with the proper motion being converted into the transverse velocity if the distancedto the star is known.If the line of sight is in the direction of the Galactic longitudeℓ, and if/Thetaϵ(R)is the orbitalvelocity curve as a function of distance from the Galactic center, then the relative radialand transverse velocities of the star are, respectively,vr=/Thetaϵcosα−/Thetaϵ0sinℓ,vt=/Thetaϵsinα−/Thetaϵ0cosℓ,earlier,butitismuchlessthanthetotalmassestimateoftheGalaxywhenthedarkThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1064>>>

/H5129dSCTR
O/H9251/H9251/H9252R0
FIGURE 22The geometry of analyzing differential rotation in the Galactic plane. The Sun isat pointO, the center of the Galaxy is located atC, and the star is atS, located a distancedfrom theSun.ℓis the Galactic longitude of the star atS, andαandβare auxiliary angles. The directions ofmotion reﬂect the clockwise rotation of the Galaxy as viewed from the NGP.where/Thetaϵ0is the orbital velocity of the Sun in the idealized case of perfectly circular motion(actually the orbital velocity of the LSR) andαis deﬁned in the ﬁgure. Deﬁning theangular-velocity curve to be/Omegaϵ(R)≡/Thetaϵ(R)R,the relative radial and transverse velocities becomevr=/OmegaϵRcosα−/Omegaϵ0R0sinℓ,vt=/OmegaϵRsinα−/Omegaϵ0R0cosℓ.Now, by referring to the geometry of Fig. 22 and considering the right triangle/DeltaϵOT C,we ﬁndRcosα=R0sinℓ,Rsinα=R0cosℓ−d.Substituting these relations into the previous expressions, we havevr=(/Omegaϵ−/Omegaϵ0)R0sinℓ,(37)vt=(/Omegaϵ−/Omegaϵ0)R0cosℓ−/Omegaϵd.(38)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1065>>>

Equations ( 37) and ( 38) are valid as long as the assumption of circular motion isjustiﬁed.Although the Sun’s motion around the Galactic center is not perfectly circular, its peculiarvelocity relative to the LSR is small compared to/Thetaϵ0(only about 6%). As a result, to aﬁrst approximation, Eqs. ( 37) and ( 38) provide a reasonable estimate of/Omegaϵ=/Omegaϵ(R)if the other parameters are known. However,dis in general very difﬁcult to measureunless the object is close enough to yield to trigonometric parallax, or perhaps some otherreasonably reliable distance estimate may be applicable (for instance, the star may be aCepheid variable).Another complication arises because of the effects of interstellar extinction. Our abilityto observe Galactic structure to great distances is severely limited at visual wavelengths.Unless we are making observations in relatively unobscured directions such as Baade’swindow, we are restricted to seeing stars out to a few thousand parsecs from the Sun. Oneimportant exception to this constraint (to be discussed in more detail below) is the 21-cm-wavelength band of H I; virtually the entire Galaxy is optically thin to 21-cm radiation,making that wavelength band a valuable tool for studying Galactic structure.Because of the distance limitation at optical wavelengths, Oort derived a set of ap-proximate equations forvrandvtthat are valid only in the region near the Sun. Despitethis restriction, these alternative formulae are still able to provide a surprising amount ofinformation about the large-scale structure of the Galaxy.We make the assumption here that/Omegaϵ(R)is a smoothly varying function ofRso that theTaylor expansion of/Omegaϵ(R)about/Omegaϵ0(R0)is given by/Omegaϵ(R)=/Omegaϵ0(R0)+d/OmegaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0(R−R0)+···.Thus, to ﬁrst order, thedifferencebetween/Omegaϵand/Omegaϵ0is/Omegaϵ−/Omegaϵ0≃d/OmegaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0(R−R0),and theapproximate valueof/Omegaϵis/Omegaϵ≃/Omegaϵ0.If we also make use of the identity/Omegaϵ=/Thetaϵ/R, Eqs. ( 37) and ( 38) become (after somerearrangement)vr≃/bracketleftBiggd/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0−/Thetaϵ0R0/bracketrightBigg(R−R0)sinℓ,vt≃/bracketleftBiggd/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0−/Thetaϵ0R0/bracketrightBigg(R−R0)cosℓ−/Omegaϵ0d.From Fig. 22 it is clear thatR0=dcosℓ+Rcosβ≃dcosℓ+R,The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1066>>>

the latter result being due to the small-angle approximation cosβ≃1, sinced≪R0impliesthatβ≪1 radian. Finally, using the appropriate trigonometric identities and deﬁning theOort constantsA≡−12/bracketleftBiggd/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0−/Thetaϵ0R0/bracketrightBigg,B≡−12/bracketleftBiggd/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0+/Thetaϵ0R0/bracketrightBigg,(39)(40)we havevr≃Adsin 2ℓ,(41)vt≃Adcos 2ℓ+Bd.(42)To understand the functional dependence of the Oort formulae on Galactic longitude,consider the orbits of nearby stars shown in Fig. 23(a). For stars in the directionsℓ=0◦andℓ=180◦, the lines of sight are perpendicular to their motions relative to the LSR. Asa result, the radial velocity must be zero. Forℓ=90◦or 270◦, the stars being observed arein essentially the same circular orbit as the Sun and are moving with the same speed, soagainvr=0 km s−1. At intermediate angles the situation is somewhat more complicated,however. For instance, if we assume that in the neighborhood of the Sun,/Omegaϵ(R)is monoton-ically decreasing outward, then atℓ=45◦, the star being observed is closer to the Galacticcenter and is “outrunning” the Sun; hence a positive radial velocity would be measured.Forℓ=135◦, the Sun is “overtaking” the star and a negative radial velocity results. Atℓ=225◦, the Sun is moving away from the star, producing a positive radial velocity, and atℓ=315◦, the star is gaining on the Sun, causing the observed radial velocity to be negative.of thevrandvtcurves (Eqs. 41 and 42, respectively) giveA, and the vertical offsetinvtgivesB.It is now possible to derive several important relationships between the Oort constantsAandB, and thelocalparameters of Galactic rotation,R0,/Thetaϵ0,/Omegaϵ0=/Thetaϵ0/R0, and(d/Thetaϵ/dR)R0.For instance, from Eqs. (39) and (40), we immediately ﬁnd that/Omegaϵ0=A−B,(43)d/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0=−(A+B).(44)Yet another useful relation can be found by considering the largest radial velocity seenalong the line of sight at a constant Galactic longitudeℓ. Turning again to Fig. 22, thestar with the maximum observable radial velocity will be located at pointT, the positionThe Milky Way Galaxy
The overall result is the double sine function shown in Fig.  23(b). A similar analy-sis shows that the transverse-velocity curve is a double cosine function plus an ad-ditive constant. For a sample of stars, all with similar distances d, the amplitudes


<<<PAGE 1067>>>

315
18022513527090450
–3–2–1012Velocity (km s–1)
0 45 90 135 180 225 270 315 360Galactic longitude (deg)(a)
(b)FIGURE 23(a) The differential rotation of stars near the Sun is revealed through the dependenceof radial and transverse velocities on Galactic longitude. (b) Radial velocity is proportional to sin 2ℓ(solid line), and transverse velocity is a function of cos 2ℓ(dashed line). The curves depict starslocated 100 pc from the Sun withA=14.8 km s−1kpc−1andB=−12.4 km s−1kpc−1.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1068>>>

whereα=0◦. It is at thistangentpointthat the distance to the center of the Galaxy will bea minimum and/Thetaϵ(R)will be a maximum (if we can assume that/Thetaϵ(R)is monotonicallydecreasing from the center outward). Moreover, the orbital-velocity vector is directed alongthe line of sight at that position. This minimum distance from the center of the Galaxy isgiven byRmin=R0sinℓ,and the maximum radial velocity isvr,max=/Thetaϵ(Rmin)−/Thetaϵ0(R0)sinℓ.If we now restrict our observations to Galactic longitudes near but less than 90◦, or nearbut greater than 270◦(i.e., inside the solar circle), thend≪R0,R∼R0, and/Thetaϵ(R)can beexpressed in terms of a Taylor expansion about/Thetaϵ0:/Thetaϵ(Rmin)=/Thetaϵ0(R0)+d/ThetaϵdR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR0(Rmin−R0)+···.Substituting into the expression forvr,max, retaining ﬁrst-order terms, and making use ofEq. (39), we ﬁndvr,max≃2AR0(1−sinℓ).(45)One last relation, which we will not attempt to derive here but merely include for com-pleteness, associatesAandBwith the dispersions of peculiar velocities in theRandθdirections:−BA−B=σ2vσ2u.(46)Equations ( 43– 46) place additional constraints on the values ofR0and/Thetaϵ0beyondthe direct observations discussed above. In fact, becauseAandBprovide critical infor-mation about Galactic differential rotation in the solar neighborhood, considerable efforthas gone into determining these constants. Based on results from the Hipparcos astrometrymission, values ofA=14.8±0.8 km s−1kpc−1(47)B=−12.4±0.6 km s−1kpc−1(48)appear to be consistent with the available data, although there remains debate over the bestchoices forAandB.Hydrogen 21-cm Line as a Probe of Galactic StructureTo determine the large-scale velocity structure of the Galactic disk, we must return to themore general expressions forvrandvtthat do not rely on ﬁrst-order Taylor series expansions.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1069>>>

ABDC
–100 –50 0 50 100Radial velocity (km s–1)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Relative intensity/H5129dCBA
DR0RminGalacticcenterRotationLine of sightSolarcircle
Sun(a)(b)FIGURE 24(a) A typical 21-cm H I line proﬁle. (b) The line proﬁle is produced by observingseveral gas clouds along a particular line of sight. Because of differential Galactic rotation, each cloudhas a different radial velocity relative to the Sun.As has already been mentioned, 21-cm emission fromHIi sable to penetrate virtually theentire Galaxy, making it an indispensable tool in probing the structure of the Milky Way.By measuringvras a function ofℓ, the Galactic rotation curve can be determined fromEq. ( 37), provided that the distance of the emitting region from the Sun can be found.Figure 24(a) shows a typical intensity distribution for the 21-cm emission line ofH I along a particular line of sight. When a speciﬁc cloud is encountered along the lineof sight, the wavelength of the radiation from that cloud is Doppler shifted because of theeffects of differential Galactic rotation. Furthermore, the intensity of the radiation at a givenwavelength (or velocity) is proportional to the number of hydrogen atoms along the line ofsight in the cloud. The peaks of the line proﬁle shown in Fig. 24(a) correspond to theclouds shown in Fig. 24(b).The principal difﬁculty in using 21-cm radiation to determine/Omegaϵ(R), and hence/Thetaϵ(R),lies in measuringd. This problem can be overcome by selecting the largest radial veloc-ity measured along each line of sight, which must originate in the regionRminfrom theGalactic center, implying thatd=R0cosℓ. By measuringvr,maxfor 0◦<ℓ<90◦and270◦<ℓ<360◦, we can determine the rotation curve within the solar Galactocentric ra-dius. Unfortunately, this technique does not work for Galactic longitudes 90◦<ℓ<270◦because there is no unique orbit for which a maximum radial velocity can be observed. Themethod also tends to break down nearℓ=90◦andℓ=270◦becausevrbecomes ratherinsensitive to changes in distance from the Sun. For longitudes within approximately 20◦ofthe Galactic center, further problems develop; clouds that have markedly noncircular mo-tions exist in that region, perhaps because of the gravitational perturbations of the centralbar, so the assumptions underlying the preceding analysis are not valid.The Flat Rotation Curve and Evidence of Dark MatterTo measure/Thetaϵ(R)forR>R0, we must rely on objects available in the Galactic plane,such as Cepheids, for which we can directly obtain distances. These data suggest that theThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1070>>>

Radius (kpc)
CO, This paperH I, Burton and Gordon (1978)CO–H II Regions, Blitz, Fich, and Stark (1982)Burton and Gordon rotation curveRotation curve, this paper
150175200225250275300325Rotation speed (km s–1)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16FIGURE 25The rotation curve of the Milky Way Galaxy. The 1985 IAU standard values ofR0=8.5 kpc and/Thetaϵ0=220 km s−1have been assumed. (Figure adapted from Clemens,Ap.J.,295,422, 1985.)rotation curve of the Galaxy does not decrease signiﬁcantly with distance beyondR0andmay actually increase somewhat (meaning that for the Oort constants,A<−BnearR0).Combining all of the available data, a possible form for the rotation curve of the Galaxy isshown in Fig. 25.It came as a great surprise to astronomers to discover that the Galactic rotation curve isessentially constant beyondR0. According to Newtonian mechanics, if most of the masswere interior to the solar circle, the rotation curve should drop off as/Thetaϵ∝R−1/2, a behaviorThe data for the Milky Way are supported by observations of other spiral galaxies, suchas those obtained by Vera Rubin and her collaborators in the late 1970s. Figure 26shows a spectrograph slit superimposed on NGC 2998, a galaxy in the constellation of UrsaMajor, 96 Mpc from Earth. Below that image is a portion of the spectrum in a wavelengthregion near Hα. The left side of the slit recorded blueshifted light, and the light on the rightside was redshifted. The Doppler shifts were then translated into radial velocities, and acorresponding rotation curve was determined.Similar rotation curves have also been measured for a number of other spiral galaxies (seeFig. 27). With the exception of the innermost regions (to be discussed in Section 4 forthe Milky Way), there is a rapid rise in rotation speed with distance out to a few kiloparsecsfrom the center. This type of rotation is referred to asrigid-body rotationbecause when/Thetaϵ∝R,/Omegaϵ=/Thetaϵ/Ris a constant and all stars have the same orbital period about the GalacticThe Milky Way Galaxy
referred to as Keplerian motion. The fact that it does not implies that a signiﬁcant amount of mass exists in the Galaxy beyond R0. This result was particularly unexpected since most of the luminosity in the Galaxy is produced by matter residing inside the solar Galacto-centric radius.


<<<PAGE 1071>>>

460048005000Observed velocity(kilometers per second)100 80 60 40 20 0 20 4060 80 100Distance from center (arcseconds)4400100200300Orbitalvelocity(kilometersper second)Distance from center (kiloparsecs)01 0 2 0 3 00
FIGURE 26The rotation curve of NGC 2998 was measured using a slit spectrograph. The Hαwavelength region is shown. Note that overall, the entire galaxy is receding from us at a speed of4800 km s−1. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of Vera Rubin, 1983.)center, just as a rigid object would. Beyond a few kiloparsecs, nearlyﬂat rotation curvescontinue out to the edge of the measurements.Since Galactic rotation depends on the distribution of mass, a great deal can be learnedabout the matter in galaxies by studying these curves. For instance, rigid-body rotation nearthe Galactic center implies that the mass must be roughly spherically distributed and theThe Milky Way Galaxy
density nearly constant. On the other hand, ﬂat rotation curves suggest that the bulk of the mass in the outer portions of the Galaxy are spherically distributed with a density law that is proportional to r −2.


<<<PAGE 1072>>>

50100150200250300350Rotational velocity (km s–1)
0510152025Distance from nucleus (kpc)Sbc–Sc NGC 7664Sb NGC 2590Sa NGC 4594Sbc NGC 1620Sbc NGC 3145Sa NGC 4378Sab–SbNGC7217
FIGURE 27A series of rotation curves for spiral galaxies. (Figure adapted from Rubin, Ford,and Thonnard,Ap. J. Lett.,225, L107, 1978.)To see this, assume that/Thetaϵ(r)=V, whereVis a constant.9Then, from the equation forcentripetal force and Newton’s law of gravity, the force acting on a star of massmdue tothe massMrof the Galaxy interior to the star’s position atrismV2r=GMrmr2,if spherical symmetry is assumed. Solving forMr,Mr=V2rG,(49)and differentiating with respect to the radius of the distribution,dMrdr=V2G.If we now borrow the equation for mass conservation in a spherically symmetric systemfrom stellar structure theory, Eq. (10.7),dMrdr=4πr2ρ,9We are usingrfor a spherically symmetric mass distribution here, rather thanRfor cylindrical rotation in theGalactic plane. However, to obtain a rotation curve within the Galactic plane, we need only consider the specialcase ofr=R.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1073>>>

we see that the mass density in the outer regions of the Galaxy must vary asρ(r)=V24πGr2.(50)Thisr−2density dependence is very different from the form determined by star countsin the portion of the Galaxy beyond the solar Galactocentric radius. Recall from Eq. ( 14)that the number density of stars in the luminous stellar halo is believed to vary asr−3.5,amuch more rapid drop-off than is evident from the ﬂat rotation curve. It was this discrepancythat so surprised astronomers.As we mentioned at the end of Section 2, it appears that themajority of the mass in the Galaxy is in the form of nonluminous (dark) matter. Only throughits gravitational inﬂuence on the luminous component of our Galaxy and satellite galaxieslike the LMC and the SMC, and through gravitational lensing of light from backgroundsources, does the dark matter make its presence known.One modiﬁcation to Eq. ( 50) that has been made by many researchers is to force thedensity function to approach a constant value near the center, rather than diverge. Such amodel is also consistent with the observational evidence of rigid-body rotation. As a result,one commonly used density proﬁle for the Milky Way’s dark matter halo is assumed to beof the formρ(r)=ρ01+(r/a)2,(51)whereρ0andaare chosen as parametric ﬁts to the overall rotation curve. Note that forr≫a, ther−2dependence is obtained, andρ∼constant whenr≪a. A similar proﬁle isoften used for modeling other galaxies as well, with different choices forρ0anda.It is important to point out that Eq. ( 51) cannot be correct to arbitrarily large valuesofr. The reason for this is that the total amount of mass in the Galaxy would increasewithout bound sinceMr∝r. As a result, the density function for the dark matter halomust eventually terminate or at least decrease sufﬁciently rapidly that the mass integral/integraltext∞0ρ(r)4πr2drremains ﬁnite.An alternative form of the dark matter halo density distribution was proposed by JulioNavarro, Carlos Frenk, and Simon White in 1996. Using a commonly assumed form ofdark matter dynamics known ascold dark matter(CDM), Navarro, Frenk, and White rannumerical simulations of the formation of dark matter halos over a wide range of size andmass scales, ranging from dwarf galaxies to rich clusters of galaxies. Their simulationsrevealed that a “universal” proﬁle of the formρNFW(r)=ρ0(r/a)(1+r/a)2(52)was applicable over an enormous range with appropriate choices ofρ0anda(this is theproﬁle ﬁrst given by Eq. 15). The NFW density proﬁle behaves approximately like a1/r2proﬁle over much of the halo but is shallower (∼1/r) near the center and steeper(∼1/r3) near the edge of the halo. Even though the NFW proﬁle decreases more rapidlythan Eq. ( 51) with increasingr, it can be shown that the total mass contained within theThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1074>>>

A Component Model of the Milky Way GalaxyBased on the mass density functions from star counts and kinematics, astronomers havebeen able to construct approximate models of the overall rotation curve of the Galacticdisk. One such model is shown in Fig. 28. Note that the observational data show thatthe rotation curve is decreasing slightly in the solar neighborhood (R0); hence the negativevalue ford/Thetaϵ/dR=−(A+B)near the Sun. Although the model does not reproduce allof the ﬁne structure that is present in the velocity data (which may be due to local densityvariations in the thin disk, such as spiral arms), the overall correspondence between themodel and observations is quite good. Notice in particular the rigid-body rotation near thecenter, the local maximum due to the combined effects of the central bulge, the stellar haloand the dark matter halo, and the eventual ﬂat rotation at large values ofR.Some Methods for Determining DistancesBefore leaving the topic of Galactic kinematics, it is appropriate to discuss motion-basedmethods of determining distances within the Milky Way, the most important of which isthemoving cluster method. Since in a stellar cluster the stars are gravitationally bound toone another, they move through space collectively. By recording the changing positions ofmembers of the group over time due to the cluster’s bulk motion, it is possible to determinetheir directions of motion. After removing the effects of the Sun’s peculiar motion, tracing
Rotation curve fitSpheroidR0TotalCoronaDisk0100200Vrot (km s–1)
050001041.5 ¥ 104R (pc)FIGURE 28One model of the rotation curve of the Galaxy. The mass distribution of each Galac-tic component contributes to the overall velocity structure of the disk. The dots represent observationaldata. Note that the “spheroid” represents the bulge and stellar halo combined and the “corona” rep-resents the dark matter halo. (Figure adapted from Gilmore, King, and van der Kruit,TheMilkyWayas a Galaxy, University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA, 1990.)The Milky Way GalaxyNFW proﬁle is still not bound. In reality, other galaxies exist in our universe besides the Milky Way, and their mass density functions may overlap our own. As a result, although galaxies appear to be separate luminous objects, their dark matter halos may actually merge in intergalactic space.


<<<PAGE 1075>>>

246810121416182022242628+30
246810121416182022242628+30
94 92 90 88 86 84 82 80 78 76 74 72 70 68 66 64 62 60 58 56 546h16m08m6h00m52m44m36m28m20m12m04m5h56m48m40m32m24m16m08m4h00m52m44m36m/H9254
/H9251
FIGURE 29The apparent motion of the Hyades across the celestial sphere. (Figure adaptedfromElementaryAstronomyby Otto Struve, Beverly Lynds, and Helen Pillans. Copyright © 1959 byOxford University Press, Inc. Renewed 1987 by Beverly T. Lynds. Reprinted by permission of thepublisher.)these directional vectors through space gives the appearance that each star is moving toward(or coming from) a common point known as theconvergent point. This is simply the illusionthat parallel lines appear to converge at inﬁnity, a phenomenon familiar to anyone who haslooked down the length of a long, straight set of railroad tracks. A diagram of the motionof the Hyades galactic cluster, found in the constellation of Taurus, is shown in Fig. 29.From the geometry illustrated in Fig. 30, the angle between the cluster and the con-vergent point, as seen from the Sun, must be the same as the angle between the line ofsight to the cluster and its space velocity vector,v(this statement is valid only because theconvergent point is taken to be at inﬁnity). Now, decomposing the space velocity into itsperpendicular components, the radial velocity is given byvr=vcosφ, and the transversevelocity isvt=vsinφ. Combining yieldsvt=vrtanφ.Since the transverse velocity is observed as the proper motion,µ=vt/d, the distance tothe cluster can be determined from knowledge of the direction to the convergent pointφ,The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1076>>>

To convergent point at infinityvtvvr/H9278/H9278Stellar clusterdSunFIGURE 30The space motion of the cluster is directed toward the convergent point. Thisvelocity vector may be decoupled into its radial and transverse components.the average radial velocity of the cluster members, and the average of their proper motions.Solving ford, we getd=⟨vr⟩tanφ⟨µ⟩,(53)where standard SI units have been used ford,vr, andµ. Expressingd,vr, andµin themore commonly used units of pc, km s−1, and arcsec yr−1, respectively, Eq. ( 53) can bewritten asd(pc)=⟨vr⟩tanφ4.74⟨µ′′⟩.(54)This technique has been used to determine the distances to several clusters, includingthe Hyades with its approximately 200 members, the Ursa Major group (60 stars), and theScorpio–Centaurus group (100 stars); the most important of these is the Hyades.The distanceto the Hyades is found to be 46±2 pc, in excellent agreement with other determinationssuch as those made by trigonometric parallax (the Hipparcos space astrometry mission datayielded a value of 47 pc to the center of the Hyades).Once the distance to the Hyades was determined, the absolute magnitudes of its memberscould be found, providing an important calibration of its main sequence. By comparing theapparent magnitudes of other cluster H–R diagram main sequences to the Hyades, it is pos-sible to ﬁnd the distance moduli of those clusters, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 31.The Milky Way Galaxy
Assuming that the amount of interstellar extinction is known (from reddening data, for instance), the distances to those clusters can be determined. This distance technique is known as main-sequence ﬁtting and is similar to the method of spectroscopic par-allax. However, main-sequence ﬁtting is a more precise procedure because it relies on a large number of stars along the main sequence rather than on a single object, sig-niﬁcantly reducing statistical errors. Identifying RR Lyraes in clusters of known dis-tances then provides a means of determining the intrinsic luminosities of these stars more accurately. Once the luminosities of the RR Lyraes have been calibrated, they can be used to determine other distances, such as to globular clusters. Historically, the Hyades provided the foundation for virtually all distance estimates, both Galac-tic and extragalactic, beyond about 100 pc from Earth, although this is changing with 


<<<PAGE 1077>>>

OBAFGK MSpectral typeApparent magnitudeCluster (m)Hyades (M)m – M
FIGURE 31The distance modulus of a cluster can be determined by shifting the cluster’s mainsequence vertically in the H–R diagram until it coincides with the known absolute magnitude of theHyades’ main sequence.space astrometric missions such as the European Space Agency’s Hipparcos (1989–1993)and Gaia (launch 2011) missions, and NASA’s SIM Planet4uest (launch 2011).One last distance determination technique worth mentioning issecular parallax..2.8A Uy r−1; allowing the effect to build up for several years provides a signiﬁcantly largerbaseline than is available from Earth’s annual orbit about the Sun. This larger baseline canthen be used to determine an average distance to the group of stars. However, it is importantto remember that the measured solar motion does depend on the group of stars used as areference. We will not discuss the details of the method in this text.4THE GALACTIC CENTERObservations of the center of our Galaxy pose a particular challenge. This is because theabundance of gas and dust in the Galactic plane results in more than 30 magnitudes ofextinction at visible wavelengths. Located only 30 pc above the midplane and 8 kpc fromthe center, the line of sight from the Sun to the center traverses nearly the maximumpossible amount of interstellar material. It is interesting to note, however, that because thesolar peculiar velocity has an appreciable component perpendicular to the Galactic plane(w⊙=7.2 km s−1), the Sun will reach a height of approximately 85 pc above theplane in15 million years;this will place it above most of the obscuring material.The Milky Way Galaxy
The ability to measure distances directly from the motion of Earth around the Sun relies on the 2-AU diameter of Earth’s orbit. If the length of the baseline could be increased, it would be possible to extend the method to objects farther away. This is accomplished by using the peculiar motion of the Sun with  respect to a group of stars having similar properties, such as similar spectral types, distanc-es, and space motions. The overall solar motion of 13.4 km s−1 is equivalent to.


<<<PAGE 1078>>>

If humanity is still inhabiting Earth at that time, our descendants will enjoy a spectacularview of a dense stellar cluster near the center of our Galaxy.The Mass Distribution Near the Galactic CenterTo peer into the central regions of the Galaxy today, we are forced to make most of ourobservations in wavelengths longer than about 1µm (i.e., infrared, microwave, and radio),or in X-rays and gamma rays. Despite our difﬁculty of clearly seeing the center of theGalaxy in visible wavelengths, we have been able to construct an image of theGalacticnucleusthat depicts a history of violent events and exotic phenomena.One IR wavelength band commonly used for investigations of the core of our Galaxyis centered at 2.2µm, the so-calledKband. This wavelength band is employed becausethe large number of old Population I K and M giant stars (Te∼4000 K) that exist in thecentral region of the Galaxy are readily observable at 2.2µm. When we use theKband tostudy the brightness distribution of the central cluster and use an appropriate mass-to-lightratio (∼1M⊙/L⊙), it appears that the mass density of stars rises toward the center asr−1.8down to a radius of between 0.1 pc and 1 pc. This is roughly the type of distribution thatwould be expected on dynamical grounds (the central region of the Galaxy is interior to theregion of “rigid-body” rotation).Since these stars are very close together, particularly when compared with the distancebetween stars in the solar neighborhood, close encounters are fairly frequent, occurring onaverage once every 106years or so. Because of the gravitational perturbations producedby these close encounters, the constant exchange of mechanical energy between stars hasgenerated a nearlyisothermalvelocity distribution; in other words, the stars in the samplehave a velocity distribution just like the particles in an isothermal gas, meaning that thevelocity distribution is approximately Maxwellian. In a truly isothermalstellar gas, themass density distribution isr−2, close to ther−1.8variation that is observed. Recall thatthis is also the spherical density distribution required for ﬂat rotation curves [when all starshave the same orbital velocity andMr∝r; Eq. ( 49)].The observed density distribution from the isothermal stellar gas is inconsistent withmeasurements of the velocities of stars within 2 pc of the center, however. Kristen Sellgren,Martina T. McGinn, and their colleagues made one such set of observations in the late1980s using the 2.3-µm molecular absorption band of CO found in the spectra of the coolK and M giants. They found that although the velocity distribution is fairly isothermal fromseveral hundred parsecs down to a couple of parsecs from the center, velocities begin toincrease signiﬁcantly as the distance to the center continues to decrease. This suggests thateither the stellar density must rise substantially faster thanr−2toward the center (at leastas steeply asr−2.7) or there must be a great deal of mass occupying a very small volumenear the middle of the cluster.More recently, Rainer Schödel, Reinhard Genzel, and their research group were able tofollow the orbits of stars very close to the Galactic center. In particular, the star known asS2 has an orbital period of 15.2 yr, an orbital eccentricity ofe=0.87, and a perigalacticondistance of 1.8×1013m=120 AU (17 light-hours). This size is only a few times thesemimajor axis of Pluto’s orbit Figure 32 shows the orbit of S2 against the centralstellar cluster of the Galaxy.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1079>>>

FIGURE 32The orbit of S2 about the center of the Milky Way Galaxy. The center is designatedas Sgr A⋆. (Courtesy of Reinhard Genzel and Rainer Schödel.)Example 4.1.The semimajor axis of S2’s orbit isaS2=rp1−e=1.4×1014m.From Kepler’s third law, the mass interior to S2’s orbit must be aboutM=4π2a3S2GP2≃7×1036kg≃3.5×106M⊙.A more precise calculation givesM=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.Figure 33 shows estimates of the amount of mass interior torbased on measurementsof objects at varying distances from the center.The luminosity distribution of the stars near the center of the Galaxy peaks within afew arcseconds (∼0.1 pc) of an infrared object known asIRS 16(for infrared source).It was during a lunar occultation that IRS 16 was resolved into at least 15 very luminouspoint-like sources that are most likely individual stars. These sources appear to be hot starswith brightnesses in excess of 106L⊙. They may be O and B stars, but with luminositiesThe Milky Way Galaxy
that are much greater than expected for normal stars. Furthermore, their ultravio-let ﬂuxes are absorbed by the surrounding gas and dust and reradiated in the infrared. It has been suggested that these objects may be Wolf–Rayet stars, which are extremely rare in other parts of the Galaxy. Since Wolf–Rayets are massive stars, they must have evolved to their present states very rapidly. If these stars are in fact Wolf–Rayets, then


<<<PAGE 1080>>>

S-star orbits3.7 ¥ 106 M   point massplus visible star clusterGGGGDark cluster/H92670 = 1.7 ¥ 1018 M   pc–3/H9251 = 5R0 = 8 kpcVisible starcluster1062 ¥ 1065 ¥ 1061071011021031041052 ¥ 107Radius (light-hours)
Radius (pc)0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10Enclosed mass (solar masses)FIGURE 33The interior mass function for the central 10 pc of the Galaxy. Note that the curveis consistent with a mass distributionMr∝rbeyond about 5 pc but that interior to 2 pc the distri-bution levels off, approaching a constant nonzero value of 3.7×106M⊙. “Dark cluster” refers to ahypothetical object. Note that the predictions of a dark cluster model at the center of the Galaxy donot agree with the observational data. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of Reinhard Genzel and RainerSchödel. For a discussion of an earlier version of this diagram, see Schödel, et al.,Nature,419, 694,2002.)a burst of star formation must have occurred within the past 10 million years. However, anepisode of recent star formation seems to contradict the facts that the density of gas and dustis very low and that there is no evidence of ongoing star formation in that region today. Onthe other hand, in further support of the Wolf–Rayet idea is the presence of high-velocitygas near IRS 16 (∼700 km s−1), which some researchers suggest may have been ejected asa stellar wind by one of the stars. As an alternative explanation, other astronomers point outthat it is also possible that the high-velocity gas could simply be falling in toward the centerof the Galaxy rather than being ejected from it.10The velocity structure of the gas does notappear to be consistent with the acceleration expected of Wolf–Rayet winds with increasingdistance from the star; instead, the gas velocity appears to decrease with distance.IRS 16 does not appear to have sufﬁcient mass to account for the rise in orbital ve-locities near the center. It seems that whatever the origin of this extremely localized massdistribution, it must have an overall luminosity that remains below our threshold of de-tectability. One possibility is that the mass is composed of a very dense cluster of browndwarfs and/or more massive neutron stars. Even in the case of neutron stars, however,10Determining whether the gas is falling in toward the center of the Galaxy or being ejected from it requiresinformation about the orientation of the gas trajectories relative to the line of sight, something that is often difﬁcultto determine.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1081>>>

interactions with high-mass stars would eject the lower-mass neutron stars from the centerin less than 108years. This would have the additional effect that the most massive membersof the cluster would “sink” to the center of the Galaxy’s gravitational well, which is notobserved.Radio Sources in SagittariusIt was Karl Jansky (1905–1950) who, in the 1930s, ﬁrst discovered that a radio source waslocated in the direction of Sagittarius, but extensive observations of the radio Galaxy weredelayed until after World War II.11Since that time the Galactic center has been the site ofnumerous studies at radio wavelengths.Radio observations of H I clouds reveal anuclear diskof neutral gas occupying a regionbetween a few hundred parsecs and about 1 kpc from the center. The disk appears to be tiltedslightly with respect to the Galactic plane and contains clouds with signiﬁcant noncircularmotions. Observations of the nuclear disk are responsible for the mass estimates of theGalactic center beyond 100 pc that are shown in Fig. 33.Galactic lobesof ionized gas have also been observed within the central few hundredparsecs. Elongated, with dimensions of 10 pc by 200 pc, the lobes are oriented nearlyperpendicular to the Galactic plane and may represent material being ejected from thecenter. However, the data may also be consistent with infalling material.One of the more unusual features of the radio emission originating in the central regionof the Galaxy is the set of ﬁlaments that stretch for 20 pc from the center in a directionperpendicular to the Galactic plane and then make an almost right-angle turn; see Fig. 34.Even a casual inspection of this 20-cm radio structure, located nearℓ∼0.18◦, suggests thatmagnetic ﬁelds may be responsible for the unusual pattern. In fact, the radiation is linearly
FIGURE 34A view of the central 60 pc×60 pc of the Galaxy. This image was made using20-cm radiation produced by synchrotron radiation. Sgr A is the central, radio-bright region. (Figurefrom Yusef-Zadeh, Morris, and Chance,Nature,310, 557, 1984, and NRAO.)11Major advances in radio and microwave electronics that occurred during World War II helped to advance radioastronomy in the years that followed.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1082>>>

polarized and appears to be synchrotron emission. From the intensity of the radiation andthe amount of polarization, the strength of the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld in that region isprobably between 10−8and 10−6T, roughly two to four orders of magnitude weaker thanEarth’s magnetic ﬁeld.A similar feature has also been discovered south of the Galactic plane. Together, thesestructures seem to be part of a “halo” of streamers and ﬁlaments that may correspond to massoutﬂow from the center of the Galaxy. A satisfactory model of the source of the relativisticelectrons that are spiraling around the magnetic ﬁeld lines, or of the source of the ﬁeld itself,has not yet been developed.The inner 8 pc of the Galaxy contains the radio source designated asSagittarius A(Sgr A). With the increase in resolving power provided by the technique of very longbaseline interferometry and the use of telescopes such as the Very Large Array, it hasbecome possible to study the structure of the Sgr A complex down to angular resolutionsof 0.2 milliarcsecond, corresponding to linear dimensions of less than 2 AU.The largest feature of the complex is themolecular circumnuclear ring, a doughnut-shaped structure with an inner radius of 2 pc and an outer radius of 8 pc that is inclined some20◦with respect to the Galactic plane. The inner edge of the ring exhibits some warping,and the ring thickness increases from 0.5 pc at its inner edge to 2 pc at a Galactocentricdistance of 7 pc. This molecular ring has been observed at various wavelengths associatedwith several atoms and molecules, including H I, H2, C II, O I, OH, CO, HCN, and CS. Thering is rotating about the Galactic center at a speed of approximately 110 km s−1, a valuethat is nearly independent of radius. From the collisional excitation of the molecules andthe intensity of the emission, the estimated mass of the portion of the ring located between 2and 5 pc is 1×104M⊙to 3×104M⊙.It is apparent that the ring is unlike any other molecular region known to exist in ourGalaxy. For instance, the temperatures of individual molecular clouds that exist throughoutmuch of the ring increase from less than 300 K near 4.5 pc to more than 400 K near theinner edge. At the same time, the number density of hydrogen molecules increases from1.5×1010m−3to 5×1010m−3over the same distance. These values should be comparedwith those of more typical molecular clouds, such as the giant molecular clouds discussedin Section 12.1. In GMCs that are located several kiloparsecs from the center of the Galaxy,T∼15 K andnH2∼108m−3.The circumnuclear ring also shows evidence that some violent event occurred near theGalactic center in the relatively recent past. The inner edge of the ring is very sharp; the num-ber density of particles inside the central cavity is 10 to 100 times less than in the ringitself. Such a strong density discontinuity cannot be an equilibrium feature of the ringbecause the ring’s internal turbulence would destroy the discontinuity in less than 105years.Furthermore, the gas within the cavity is largely ionized while the gas in the ring is in theform of neutral atoms and molecules. It is estimated that the amount of energy required toclear out the cavity is on the order of 1044J, a value characteristic of a supernova explosion.The ring shows other evidence of some past violent episode as well. For instance, materialin the ring is very clumpy, a situation that cannot be maintained indeﬁnitely because of therelatively rapid smoothing effects of cloud–cloud collisions. Also, a study of the hydroxylmolecule (OH) in portions of the ring indicates that the temperature of nearly 2000 K isconsistent with strong shocks that rapidly heated the molecules to temperatures well aboveThe Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1083>>>

the values seen elsewhere in the ring. Furthermore, OH radicals can be produced whenwater molecules (H2O) are torn apart by energetic events such as shocks.Besides the circumnuclear ring, several other components have also been discoveredwithin the Sgr A complex.Sgr A Eastis a nonthermal source with a shell-like appearance(a “nonthermal” source is one thatdoes notemit its electromagnetic radiation in the formof a blackbody spectrum; one type of nonthermal emission is synchrotron radiation). It isgenerally accepted that Sgr A East is a young supernova remnant that may be between 100and 5000 years old.Sgr A West, which is located 1.5′from the center of Sgr A East, is anunusual H II region (a thermal source) that looks very much like a “mini-spiral.” Finally,Sgr A⋆(pronounced “Sagittarius A star”) is a strong, unresolved radio point source that islocated near the center of Sgr A West. A radio image of Sgr A West and Sgr A⋆is shown inFig. 35(a).The location of the Sgr A complex corresponds very closely with the brightness peakof the central stellar cluster, suggesting strongly that this region marks the center of theGalaxy. In fact, one component of IRS 16 (named IRS 16 Center) is only about 1′′west ofSgr A⋆. If the two objects are the same distance from Earth and not simply aligned along theline of sight, then their angular separation translates into a linear separation of only 0.04 pc.For reasons we will soon discuss more fully, it now appears that Sgr A⋆is the actual centerof the Milky Way.Although Sgr A West appears superﬁcially to be much like the large-scale spiral patternseen in the disk of the Milky Way, it is fundamentally very different. The western arc isjust the ionized inner edge of the circumnebular ring, which is rotating about the center at
EasternarmNorthernarmBarWesternarc0.5 pc–2900'00''30''–2859'00''
17h42m31s29s27sRight ascensionDeclination
(a)(b)FIGURE 35(a) A VLA 6-cm image of the inner 40′′of the Galaxy, showing the Sgr A Westmini-spiral. Sgr A⋆(a radio point source) is the bright oval at the center of the image. (Figure fromLo,Science,233, 1394, 1986.) (b) An intensity contour map of the Sgr A West region. Radial-velocitymeasurements of the gas are also indicated on the map (in units of km s−1). (Figure from Genzel andTownes,Annu.Rev.Astron.Astrophys.,25, 377, 1987. Reproduced with permission from theAnnualReview ofAstronomy andAstrophysics, V olume 25, ©1987 by Annual Reviews Inc.)The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1084>>>

110 km s−1. The velocities recorded on the map in Fig. 35(b) are the measured radialvelocities. Portions of the arc that are moving nearly along the line of sight record the largestradial velocities (positive or negative), and the parts of the arc that are moving perpendicularto the line of sight have no radial-velocity components.The other components of Sgr A West appear to be ionized ﬁlaments of matter that maybe both rotating about and falling in toward the central “bar” and the vicinity near Sgr A⋆.These features may also be associated with a central magnetic ﬁeld that has an estimatedstrength of 30 nT.As was seen for the stellar velocities, the velocities of the ionized gas within the cavityincrease dramatically toward the center, from 110 km s−1at the inner edge of the circum-nebular ring to 700 km s−1at 0.1 pc.Example 4.2.The motion of gas in the central regions of the Galaxy can be used toestimate the amount of mass interior to the location of the gas. A gas cloud 0.3 pc fromthe center has a measured velocity of 260 km s−1. If the cloud is in orbit about the center,Eq. (49) givesMr=v2rG=4.7×106M⊙.An X-Ray Source in Sgr ATo within the positional error bars, the radio Sgr A West region (including Sgr A⋆) alsocoincides with a small continuous X-ray source.Although the estimates are highly uncertaindue to extensive absorption along the line of sight, the X-ray source appears to have acharacteristic temperature ofT∼108K and luminosities of 1028W in the 2–6 keV energyband (“soft” X-rays) and 2×1031W between 10 keV and 10 MeV (“hard” X-rays). Becausethe X-ray source is also highly variable, it must be composed of one or a few objects whosediameters are less than about 0.1 pc. The upper limit on the linear size is derived from theminimum amount of time required for information to travel across the object, assumingthat the information travels at the speed of light. If one side of the source begins changingbrightness, the opposite side can learn about the change and begin contributing to it onlyafter a time/Deltaϵt≥d/c, wheredis the diameter; measuring/Deltaϵtplaces the upper limit of0.1 pc ond.The Supermassive Black Hole in Sgr A⋆As we saw in Example 4.1, it has been possible to follow the orbits of individual starsto within about 120 AU of Sgr A⋆, providing us with critical data for accurately calculatingthe mass in the innermost region of the Galactic center. It has also been possible to place anupper limit of less than 2 AU on the size of Sgr A⋆. From these data, it appears that Sgr A⋆can only be asupermassive black holewith a mass ofMSgr A⋆=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1085>>>

This implies that the Schwarzschild radius of the black hole isRSgr A⋆=2GMbhc2=0.08 AU=16 R⊙,which remains below the roughly 2-AU resolution limit of current observations.Producing the infrared radiation detected from the ring and maintaining the degree ofionization seen inside the cavity require an ultraviolet luminosity of 107L⊙with an effectiveblackbody temperature of 35,000 K; the temperature is deduced from the strengths of the IRemission lines of S IV , O III, and Ar III. The gas absorbs some of the UV radiation, ionizingit and producing the unusual H II region, Sgr A West. The dust absorbs the remainder ofthe UV photons and reradiates the light at IR wavelengths.Could a supermassive black hole be responsible for the luminosity? Observations of thenumber density of particles and the velocity structure inside the cavity of the circumnuclearring suggest that matter is accreting onto the Galactic center at a rate of˙M=10−3to10−2M⊙yr−1. This matter must release gravitational potential energy as its distance fromthe center decreases.It is possible to make a rough estimate of the luminosity that could be produced by anaccreting supermassive black hole in Sgr A⋆. If we consider a Newtonian view of energyreleased when a particle of massMspirals in through an accretion disk from an initialradius ofrito a ﬁnal radius ofrf, then according to the virial theorem, the amount ofenergy radiated should be one-half the change in potential energy, orE=12/parenleftbiggGMbhMrf−GMbhMri/parenrightbigg,whereMbhis the mass of the black hole. Assuming thatri≫rfandrf=RS(the Schwarz-schild radius), thenE=12GMbhMRS.Taking the luminosity asL=dE/dtand the mass accretion rate as˙M=dM/dt, andsubstituting the expression for the Schwarzschild radius, we haveL=14˙Mc2,(55)a result that is independent of both the mass and the radius of the black hole. Now, theminimum mass-accretion rate required to generate 107L⊙is˙M=4Lc2=1.7×1017kg s−1=2.7×10−6M⊙yr−1.The observed accretion rate of 10−3to 10−2M⊙yr−1is more than sufﬁcient to producethe luminosity seen in Sgr A West and Sgr A⋆. Curiously, high-resolution observations ofthe Sgr A⋆region alone suggests an upper limit of luminosity from Sgr A⋆of less than3×104L⊙.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1086>>>

Assuming that there is a supermassive black hole at the center of Sgr A⋆and that itis actually at the center of our Galaxy’s gravitational well, then it should remain nearlyFurthermore, relative to other objects in the Galactic center, Sgr A⋆has moved at mosta small fraction of its diameter over a period of more than a decade, a rate that is muchslower than for any other object in the region. Given the gravitational tugs that it certainlyreceives from stars and large clouds in that region, this extremely sluggish motion impliesthat Sgr A⋆is very massive.Very high-resolution VLA maps at 2 cm reveal what appear to be large clouds of ionizedgas only 0.06 pc from Sgr A⋆. From the orientation of the clouds, it appears that they wereejected from the center in opposite directions. There is also evidence of a trail of hot, ionizedgas coming from IRS 7, a red supergiant star less than 0.3 pc from the center. The directionof the stream points away from Sgr A⋆, suggesting that a strong wind or perhaps intenseUV radiation from the center is blowing the material away from the star.As has already been mentioned, although the Galactic center appears relatively quiettoday, it must have experienced rather violent episodes in the recent past. One possiblemechanism that could produce these periodic events would be the tidal disruption of apassing star and the subsequent infall of matter. As the matter falls toward the supermassiveblack hole in the center, it collects onto an accretion disk, releasing a tremendous amountof gravitational potential energy accompanied by a dramatic increase in luminosityThe entire episode may last for only a few years, but if such events occurredon the order of every 104to 105years, enough energy would be released to keep the centralcavity ionized and the circumnuclear disk turbulent.Sgr A⋆is not entirely inactive, however. From studies of the Galactic center using theChandra X-Ray Observatory and the XMM-Newton Observatory, it appears that ﬂares occuron average about once per day. Lasting for up to an hour or so, luminosities can reach peakvalues of 3.6×1028W, more than 160 times the quiescent X-ray level of Sgr A⋆.Many other galaxies (Andromeda, for example) appear to have supermassive blackHigh-Energy Emission Lines from Near the Galactic CenterBefore leaving the discussion of the Galactic center, it is worth mentioning the detection oftwo signiﬁcant high-energy emission lines that originate in the region of the Sgr A complex.The ﬁrst of these results from an electron colliding with a positron, causing their mutualannihilation and the corresponding production of two photons, each of energy 511 keV .12Since it is believed that black holes can help produce positrons in the space surrounding12511 keV is the rest mass energy of an electron or a positron..The Milky Way Galaxymotionless. Studies that have attempted to measure the proper motion of Sgr   with respect to extremely distant extragalactic sources known as quasars indicate that to within the uncertainties in the measurements, Sgr   reﬂects only the peculiar motion of the Sun, just what would be expected for an object at rest at the center of the Galaxy.A⋆A⋆
holes in their centers and yet are relatively quiet. On the other hand, other galaxies have extremely active nuclei. These active galactic nuclei probably derive their energies from central “engines” that are powered by supermassive black holes.


<<<PAGE 1087>>>

them, the presence of the 511-keV line seemed to support the existence of a black hole inSgr A⋆. However, the efﬁcient production of positrons in the numbers needed to explain theenormous ﬂux of 1044photons per second (L511∼5×104L⊙) requires a black hole smallerthan the one envisioned for the Galactic center (perhaps only a few hundred solar masses).This is because high accretion-disk temperatures are required for the production of theparticles, and the temperature of the disk increases with decreasing radius (see Eq. 18.19).Due to the poor angular resolution of the original detections, it was unclear whether SgrA⋆could properly be considered the source of the 511-keV photons. On October 13–14, 1990,the Soviet spacecraft GRANAT, with its higher-resolution imaging capability, discoveredthat the source of the 511-keV photons was not SgrA⋆but a previously known X-ray emitter,1E1740.7−2942, ﬁrst detected by the Einstein satellite in 1979.13Nicknamed “the Einsteinsource,” 1E1740.7−2942 is located some 45′from SgrA⋆, more than 300 pc from the center.With its accretion-disk plasma temperature of 109K and variable luminosity, the Einsteinsource appears to be a very strong candidate for a stellar black hole.The second high-energy emission line detected in the region of the Galactic center is the1.8-MeV line produced by the decay of2613Al to2612Mg. Since2613Al has a half-life of 716,000years and is produced only in relatively small amounts in supernovae, novae, and possiblyWolf–Rayet stars, the presence of an estimated∼5M⊙of the radioactive isotope seems tosuggest that a large number of supernovae have occurred in that region over the past 105to106years. The Galactic center is clearly an extremely dynamic environment.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralHenbest, Nigel, and Couper, Heather,TheGuidetotheGalaxy, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1994.Mateo, Mario, “Searching for Dark Matter,”Sky and Telescope, January, 1994.Oort, Jan, “Exploring the Nuclei of Galaxies, Including Our Own,”Mercury, March/April,1992.Trimble, Virginia, and Parker, Samantha, “Meet the MilkyWay,”SkyandTelescope, January,1995.Waller, William H., “Redesigning the Milky Way,”Sky and Telescope, September, 2004.TechnicalBenjamin, R. A., et al., “First GLIMPSE Results on the Stellar Structure of the Galaxy,”TheAstrophysical Journal,630, L149, 2005.Bertin, Giuseppe,Dynamics of Galaxies, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.Binney, James, and Merriﬁeld, Michael,Galactic Astronomy, Princeton University Press,Princeton, 1998.13The source gets its name from its right ascension and declination.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1088>>>

Binney, James, and Tremaine, Scott,GalacticDynamics, Princeton University Press, Prince-ton, 1987.Eisenhauer, F., et al., “A Geometric Determination of the Distance to the Galactic Center,”TheAstrophysical Journal,597, L121, 2003.Freeman, Ken, and Bland-Hawthorn, Joss, “The New Galaxy: Signatures of Its Formation,”Annual Review ofAstronomy andAstrophysics,40, 487, 2002.Gilmore, Gerard, King, Ivan R., and van der Kruit, Pieter C.,The Milky Way as a Galaxy,University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA, 1990.Ibata, Rodrigo A., Gilmore, Gerard, and Irwin, Michael J., “Sagittarius: The Nearest DwarfGalaxy,”Monthly Notices of the RoyalAstronomical Society,277, 781, 1995.Kuijken, Konrad, and Tremaine, Scott, “On the Ellipticity of the Galactic Disk,”The As-trophysical Journal,421, 178, 1994.Majewski, S. R., “Galactic Structure Surveys and the Evolution of the Milky Way,”AnnualReview ofAstronomy andAstrophysics,31, 1993.Navarro, Julio F., Frenk, Carlos F., and White, Simon, D. M., “The Structure of Cold DarkMatter Halos,”TheAstrophysical Journal,462, 563, 1996.Reid, Mark, “The Distance to the Center of the Galaxy,”AnnualReviewofAstronomyandAstrophysics,31, 345, 1993.Reid, Mark, “High-Velocity White Dwarfs and Galactic Structure,”Annual Review of As-tronomy andAstrophysics,43, 247, 2005.Schödel, R., et al., “A Star in a 15.2-year Orbit around the Supermassive Black Hole at theCentre of the Milky Way,”Nature,419, 694, 2002.Sparke, Linda S., and Gallagher, John S.,GalaxiesintheUniverse:AnIntroduction, Cam-bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.The Milky Way Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1089>>>



<<<PAGE 1090>>>

1Approximately how many times has the Sun circled the center of the Galaxy since the star’sformation?2 (a)What fraction of the totalB-band luminosity of the Galaxy is produced by each of thestellar components? Refer to Table 1.The Milky Way Galaxy
From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.24PROBLEM SETTABLE1Approximate Values for Various Parameters Associated with the Components of theMilky Way Galaxy. Deﬁnitions and details are discussed in the text.DisksNeutral ThinThickGasDiskDiskM(1010M⊙)0.5a60.2 to 0.4LB(1010L⊙)b—1.80.02M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)— 3 —Radius (kpc)252525Forme−z/hze−z/hze−z/hzScale height (kpc)<0.10.351σw(km s−1)51635[Fe/H]>+0.1−0.5 to+0.3−2.2 to−0.5Age (Gyr)/lessorsimilar108c10dSpheroidsCentral Stellar Dark-MatterBulgeeHaloHaloM(1010M⊙)10.3190+360−170fLB(1010L⊙)b0.30.10M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)3∼1—Radius (kpc)4>100>230Formboxy with barr−3.5(r/a)−1(1+r/a)−2Scale height (kpc) 0.1 to 0.5g3170σw(km s−1) 55 to 130h95—[Fe/H]−2 to 0.5<−5.4 to−0.5—Age (Gyr)<0.2 to 10 11 to 13∼13.5aMdust/Mgas≃0.007.bThe total luminosity of the Galaxy isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙,Lbol,tot=3.6×1010L⊙(∼30% in IR).cSome open clusters associated with the thin disk may exceed 10 Gyr.dMajor star formation in the thick disk may have occurred 7–8 Gyr ago.eThe mass of the black hole in Sgr A⋆isMbh=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.fM=5.4+0.2−3.6×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the center.gBulge scale heights depend on age of stars: 100 pc for young stars, 500 pc for old stars.hDispersions increase from 55 km s−1at 5 pc to 130 km s−1at 200 pc.,

<<<PAGE 1091>>>

3The globular cluster IAU C0923−545 has an integrated apparent visual magnitude ofV=+13.0 and an integrated absolute visual magnitude ofMV=−4.15. It is located 9.0 kpc fromEarth and is 11.9 kpc from the Galactic center, just 0.5 kpc south of the Galactic midplane.(a)Estimate the amount of interstellar extinction between IAU C0923−545 and Earth.(b)What is the amount of interstellar extinction per kiloparsec?4Using the differential star count formula for an inﬁnite universe of constant stellar numberdensity and no interstellar extinction (Eq. 5), show that the amount of light arriving at Earthfrom a cone of solid angle/Omegaϵdiverges exponentially as the length of the cone increases withoutbound (or, equivalently, asmapproaches inﬁnity). Assume that all stars in the ﬁeld have thesame absolute magnitudeM.
5 (a)From Eq. ( 5), derive an expression for log10AM(m)as a function ofmfor stars ofthe same absolute magnitude and M–K spectral classiﬁcation, assuming a constant stellarnumber density.AM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)=dNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)dm=ln 105/OmegaϵnM(M, S)103(m−M+5)/5=3l n1 05NM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m).(5)AM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)=dNM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m)dm=ln 105/OmegaϵnM(M, S)103(m−M+5)/5=3l n1 05NM(M, S, /Omegaϵ, m).(5)
(b)If observations are made in apparent magnitude bins separated by one (i.e.,δm=1),calculate/Deltaϵlog10AM(m)≡log10AM(m+1)−log10AM(m).(c)If the results of observations show that/Deltaϵlog10AM(m)is always less than the result foundin part (b), what can you conclude about the distribution of stars in the region underinvestigation? [Recall that Eq. ( 5) applies to the case of an inﬁnite universe of constantstellar number density and no interstellar extinction.]6 (a)Plot log10AMas a function ofVfor the hypothetical data given in Table 2. Assumethat all stars included in the differential star counts are main-sequence A stars of absolutevisual magnitudeMV=2.The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set(b)What is the amount of interstellar extinction per kiloparsec?


<<<PAGE 1092>>>

(b)Assuming a constant density of stars out to at leastV=11, how much interstellar extinctionis present to that limit (express your answer in magnitudes)?Hint:Consider the slope ofthe curve. You may also ﬁnd the results of Problem 5 helpful.(c)What is the distance to the stars corresponding toV=11?(d)If the solid angle over which the data were collected is 0.75 square degrees, or 2.3×10−4sr,estimate the number densitynM(M, S)of A stars out toV=11.(e)Give two possible explanations for the change in slope betweenV=11 andV=15.7 (a)Assume that a cloud of gas and dust is encountered along the line of sight for the data givenin Table 2 and plotted in the table in Problem 6. Assume also that the stellar numberHint:How would the graph change ifthe cloud were not present? The cloud’s presence may be revealed through reddening.(b)If the density of gas and dust in the cloud leads to an extinction rate of 10 mag kpc−1, whatis the length of the cloud along the line of sight?TABLE 2Hypothetical Differential Star Count Data.Vlog10AMVlog10AM4−2.3112 2.245−1.7113 2.596−1.1114 2.947−0.5115 3.2980.0916 3.8990.6917 4.4910 1.2918 5.0911 1.8919 5.69
Graphs of log10AMvs.mthat demonstrate changes in slope and then resume theoriginal slope at larger values ofmare referred to Wolf diagrams, after Maximilian Wolf(1863–1932), who ﬁrst used them to explore the properties of interstellar clouds.density found in Problem 6 is constant along the entire line of sight. Estimate the amountof extinction (in magnitudes) that is due to the cloud.
(b)Prove that forz≫z0,L(R, z)≃4L0e−R/hRe−2z/z0and soz0=2zthinis the effective scale height of the luminosity density function.9 (a)From the data given in Table 1, and, using a typical value for the temperature ofhydrogen in the interstellar medium of 15 K, estimate the average thermal energy densityof hydrogen gas in the disk of the Galaxy. For this problem, assume that the disk has aradius of 8 kpc and a height of 160 pc.8 (a)Plot the old thin disk’s luminosity density (Eq. 10) as a function ofzforR=8 kpc.L(R, z)=L0e−R/hRsech2(z/z0),The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set
(10)


<<<PAGE 1093>>>

TABLE1Approximate Values for Various Parameters Associated with the Components of theMilky Way Galaxy. Deﬁnitions and details are discussed in the text.DisksNeutral ThinThickGasDiskDiskM(1010M⊙)0.5a60.2 to 0.4LB(1010L⊙)b—1.80.02M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)— 3 —Radius (kpc)252525Forme−z/hze−z/hze−z/hzScale height (kpc)<0.10.351σw(km s−1)51635[Fe/H]>+0.1−0.5 to+0.3−2.2 to−0.5Age (Gyr)/lessorsimilar108c10dSpheroidsCentral Stellar Dark-MatterBulgeeHaloHaloM(1010M⊙)10.3190+360−170fLB(1010L⊙)b0.30.10M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)3∼1—Radius (kpc)4>100>230Formboxy with barr−3.5(r/a)−1(1+r/a)−2Scale height (kpc) 0.1 to 0.5g3170σw(km s−1) 55 to 130h95—[Fe/H]−2 to 0.5<−5.4 to−0.5—Age (Gyr)<0.2 to 10 11 to 13∼13.5aMdust/Mgas≃0.007.bThe total luminosity of the Galaxy isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙,Lbol,tot=3.6×1010L⊙(∼30% in IR).cSome open clusters associated with the thin disk may exceed 10 Gyr.dMajor star formation in the thick disk may have occurred 7–8 Gyr ago.eThe mass of the black hole in Sgr A⋆isMbh=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.fM=5.4+0.2−3.6×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the center.gBulge scale heights depend on age of stars: 100 pc for young stars, 500 pc for old stars.hDispersions increase from 55 km s−1at 5 pc to 130 km s−1at 200 pc.(b)Using the below equation, estimate the energy density of the magnetic ﬁeld in the spiral
10What are the J2000.0 Galactic coordinates of Sgr A⋆?um=B22µ0.arms. Compare your answer with the thermal energy density of the gas. W ould you expectthe magnetic ﬁeld to play a signiﬁcant role in the structure of the Galaxy? Why or why not?The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1094>>>

11Use Eqs. ( 16– 18) to determine the Galactic coordinates of the following objects. (Youmay wish to refer to Fig. 18 to verify your answers.)(a)The north celestial pole(b)The vernal equinox(c)Deneb(seeAppendi)12 (a)Estimate the height (z) above or below the Galactic plane for both M13 (ℓ=59.0◦,b=40.9◦) and the Orion nebula (ℓ=209.0◦,b=−19.4◦). M13 and the Orion Nebula are7 kpc and 450 pc from Earth, respectively.(b)To which components of the Galaxy do these objects probably belong? Explain youranswers.13 (a)Consider a sample of stars that lie in the Galactic plane and are distributed in a circle aboutthe LSR, as shown in Fig. 36. For the purpose of this problem, assume also that thesestars are at rest with respect to the LSR (of course, this could not actually occur in such aBAHDEFGC
SunFIGURE 36A set of stars distributed in a circle about the LSR. The circle is assumed to be inthe Galactic plane, and the stars are at rest with respect to the LSR. The solar motion is in the directionof StarA.sinb=sinδNGPsinδ+cosδNGPcosδcos(α−αNGP)cosbsin(ℓNCP−ℓ)=cosδsin(α−αNGP)cosbcos(ℓNCP−ℓ)=cosδNGPsinδ−sinδNGPcosδcos(α−αNGP).
dynamic system). With the Sun located at the position of the LSR and the solar motion inthe direction of StarAas indicated, sketch the velocity vectors associated with the apparentmotion of each star, as seen from the Sun. Label the apex and antapex on your diagram.(b)Sketch the radial-velocity and transverse-velocity components of each star’s apparentmotion on the diagram used in part (a).(c)Describe how you might locate the apex of the solar motion given the radial-velocity dataof a large sample of stars in the solar neighborhood.(d)How would you identify the solar apex from proper motion data of stars in the solarneighborhood?(16)(17)(18)The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set:x The Brightest Stars


<<<PAGE 1095>>>

14Figure 37 illustrates older data derived from a kinematic study of the Milky Way. From thedata presented, what was the estimate ofv⊙in the early 1960s?
15 (a)Assuming (incorrectly) that the high-velocity stars known to Oort in 1927 are near theescape speed from the Galaxy, estimate the mass of the Milky Way. For simplicity, takethe directions of the velocity vectors to be radially away from the Galactic center andassume that all of the mass is spherically distributed and is interior toR0. (This calculationis meant only to be an order-of-magnitude estimate.) Compare your answer with the massestimate given in Example 3.1. in h  (b)Repeat your calculation using the extremely high-velocity stars discussed in section 3(c)Comment on the difﬁculty of determining the true mass of the Galaxy on the basis ofobservations of stars in the solar neighborhood.16Starting with Eqs. ( 37) and ( 38), derive Eqs. ( 41) and ( 42), showing each stepexplicitly.
17Referring to Eq. ( 42) and Fig. 23, explain the functional dependence of transverse ve-locity on Galactic longitude for stars near the Sun.vr=(/Omegaϵ−/Omegaϵ0)R0sinℓ,vt=(/Omegaϵ−/Omegaϵ0)R0cosℓ−/Omegaϵd.vr≃Adsin 2ℓ,vt≃Adcos 2ℓ+Bd.“Te          M i l k y         W a y            G a l a x y .”of What could account for the extra mass compared to youranswer in part (a)?h “Te         Milky        Way           Galaxy.”0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500–40–30–20–100KDvL (km s-1)
/H9268u2 (km2 s–2)FIGURE 37Each point represents a different sample of objects, including for instance super-giants, carbon stars, white dwarfs, Cepheids, and planetary nebulae. (Data from Delhaye,GalacticStructure, Blaauw and Schmidt (eds.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1965.)
(37)(38)(41)(42)The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1096>>>

315º
180º225º135º270º90º45º0º
–3–2–1012Velocity (km s–1)
0 45 90 135 180 225 270 315 360Galactic longitude (deg)(a)
(b)FIGURE23(a) The differential rotation of stars near the Sun is revealed through the dependenceof radial and transverse velocities on Galactic longitude. (b) Radial velocity is proportional to sin 2ℓ(solid line), and transverse velocity is a function of cos 2ℓ(dashed line). The curves depict starslocated 100 pc from the Sun withA=14.8 km s−1kpc−1andB=−12.4 km s−1kpc−1.18 (a)BeginningwithKepler’sthirdlaw,deriveanexpressionfor/Thetaϵ(R),assumingthat the Sun travels in a Keplerian orbit about the center of the Galaxy.(b)From your result in part (a), derive analytic expressions for the Oort constantsAandB.(c)Determine numerical values forAandBin the solar neighborhood, assumingR0=8 kpcand/Thetaϵ0=220 km s−1. Express your answers in units of km s−1kpc−1.see belowP2=4π2G(m1+m2)a3.The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set
()


<<<PAGE 1097>>>

19 (a)Estimated/Thetaϵ/dRin the solar neighborhood, assuming that the Oort constantsAandBare+14.8 and−12.4k ms−1kpc, respectively. What does this say about the variation of/ThetaϵwithRin the region near the Sun?(b)IfAandBwere+13 and−13 km s−1kpc, respectively, what would the value ofd/Thetaϵ/dRbe? What would this say about the shape of the rotation curve in the solar neighborhood?20 (a)Show that rigid-body rotation near the Galactic center is consistent with a sphericallysymmetric mass distribution of constant density.(b)Is the distribution of mass in the dark matter halo (Eq. 51) consistent with rigid-bodyrotation near the Galactic center? Why or why not?21Using the result of the “back-of-the-envelope” calculation for the density of dark matter(Eq. 50), estimate the mass density of dark matter in the solar neighborhood. Expressyour answer in units of kg m−3,M⊙pc−3, and M⊙AU−3. How does your answer comparewith the stellar mass density in the solar neighborhood?22 (a)Assuming that Eq. ( 51) is valid for any arbitrary distance from the center of the Galaxy,show that the amount of dark matter interior to a radiusris given by the expression(b)If 5.4×1011M⊙of dark matter is located within 50 kpc of the Galactic center, determineρ0in units of M⊙kpc−1. Repeat your calculation if 1.9×1012M⊙is located within 230 kpcof the Galactic center. Assume thata=2.8 kpc.23Using Eq. (52) for the density proﬁle of the dark matter halo, show that(a)ρNFW∝r−1forr≪aandρNFW∝r−3forr≫a.(b)the integral of the mass fromr=0 tor→∞is inﬁnite.24Using data provided in the text for the mass of the dark matter halo interior to 50 kpc andinterior to 230 kpc, estimate the values for the constantsρ0andain the NFW version of thedark matter halo density proﬁle (Eq. 52).Hint:You may need to use a numerical methodto solve fora.25 (a)From the information given in Table 1 and in the text, determine the approximatemass-to-light ratio of the Galaxy interior to a radius of 25 kpc from the center.(d)Do your answers in part (c) agree with the measured values for the Milky Way Galaxy?Why or why not?
ρ(r)=ρ01+(r/a)2,ρ(r)=V24πGr2.ρ(r)=ρ01+(r/a)2,
ρNFW(r)=ρ0(r/a)(1+r/a)2ρNFW(r)=ρ0(r/a)(1+r/a)2Mr=4πρ0a2/bracketleftBigr−atan−1/parenleftBigra/parenrightBig/bracketrightBig.(51)(50)(51)
(52)The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1098>>>

26Ther−2dependence of Coulomb’s electrostatic force law allows the construction of Gauss’slaw for electric ﬁelds, which has the form/contintegraldisplayE·dA=Qinϵ0,TABLE1Approximate Values for Various Parameters Associated with the Components of theMilky Way Galaxy. Deﬁnitions and details are discussed in the text.DisksNeutral ThinThickGasDiskDiskM(1010M⊙)0.5a60.2 to 0.4LB(1010L⊙)b—1.80.02M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)— 3 —Radius (kpc)252525Forme−z/hze−z/hze−z/hzScale height (kpc)<0.10.351σw(km s−1)51635[Fe/H]>+0.1−0.5 to+0.3−2.2 to−0.5Age (Gyr)/lessorsimilar108c10dSpheroidsCentral Stellar Dark-MatterBulgeeHaloHaloM(1010M⊙)10.3190+360−170fLB(1010L⊙)b0.30.10M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)3∼1—Radius (kpc)4>100>230Formboxy with barr−3.5(r/a)−1(1+r/a)−2Scale height (kpc) 0.1 to 0.5g3170σw(km s−1) 55 to 130h95—[Fe/H]−2 to 0.5<−5.4 to−0.5—Age (Gyr)<0.2 to 10 11 to 13∼13.5aMdust/Mgas≃0.007.bThe total luminosity of the Galaxy isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙,Lbol,tot=3.6×1010L⊙(∼30% in IR).cSome open clusters associated with the thin disk may exceed 10 Gyr.dMajor star formation in the thick disk may have occurred 7–8 Gyr ago.eThe mass of the black hole in Sgr A⋆isMbh=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.fM=5.4+0.2−3.6×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the center.gBulge scale heights depend on age of stars: 100 pc for young stars, 500 pc for old stars.hDispersions increase from 55 km s−1at 5 pc to 130 km s−1at 200 pc.(b)Repeat your calculation for a radius of 100 kpc. What can you conclude about the effectthat dark matter might have on the average mass-to-light ratio of the universe?The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1099>>>

where the integral is taken over a closed surface that bounds the enclosed charge,Qin. BecauseNewton’s gravitational force law also varies asr−2, it is possible to derive a gravitational“Gauss’s law.” The form of this gravitational version is/contintegraldisplayg·dA=−4πGMin,(56)where the integral is over a closed surface that bounds the massMin, andgis the local ac-celeration of gravity at the position ofdA. The differential area vector (dA) is assumed to benormal to the surface everywhere and is directed outward, away from the enclosed volume.Show that if a spherical gravitational Gaussian surface is employed that is centered on andsurrounds a spherically symmetric mass distribution, Eq. ( 56) can be used to solve forg.The result is the usual gravitationalacceleration vector around a spherically symmetric mass.27We learned in Sections 2 and 3 ofthat the Sun is currently located 30 pcnorthmidplane and moving away from it with a velocityw⊙=7.2k ms−1. Thezgravitational accelerationvector is directed toward the midplane, so the Sun’speculiar velocity inthezdirection must be decreasing. Eventually the direction of motion willreverse and theSun will pass through the midplane heading in the opposite direction.At thatof thezcomponent of the gravitational acceleration vector will also reverse,causingthe Sun to move northward again.This oscillatory behavior above and belowmidplane hasa well-deﬁned period and amplitude that we will estimate in this problem.Assume that the disk of the Milky Way has a radius that is much larger than its thickness.In this case, as long as we conﬁne ourselves to regions near the midplane, the disk appearsto be inﬁnite in thez=0 plane. Consequently, the gravitational acceleration vector is alwaysoriented in the±zdirection.Wewillneglecttheradialaccelerationcomponentinthisproblem.(a)By constructing an appropriate Gaussian surface and using Eq. ( 56), derive an expres-sion for the gravitational acceleration vector at a heightzabove the midplane, assumingthat the Sun always remains inside the disk of constant densityρ.(b)Using Newton’s second law, show that the motion of the Sun in thezdirection can bedescribed by a differential equation of the formd2zdt2+kz=0.Expresskin terms ofρandG. This is just the familiar equation for simple harmonicmotion.(c)Find general expressions forzandwas functions of time.(d)If the total mass density in the solar neighborhood (including stars, gas, dust, and darkmatter) is 0.15 M⊙pc−3, estimate the oscillation period.(e)By combining the current determinations ofz⊙andw⊙, estimate the amplitude of the solaroscillation and compare your answer with the vertical scale height of the thin disk.(f)Approximately how many vertical oscillations does the Sun execute during one orbitalperiod around the Galactic center?28Show thatd=⟨vr⟩tanφ⟨µ⟩,leads to Eq. (54) with the appropriate change in units.“”ultimatelythe directiontimecomponentof theof the Galacticthe
d(pc)=⟨vr⟩tanφ4.74⟨µ′′⟩.The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set
The MilkyWay Galaxy


<<<PAGE 1100>>>

29Refer to the data in Appendix: The Brightest Stars, for this problem.(a)What angle does Altair’s space motion vector make with its radial-velocity vector?(b)Find Altair’s transverse velocity and space motion relative to the Sun.30Using Newtonian gravity, estimate the amount of energy required to move 107M⊙from aposition just above the event horizon of the supermassive black hole at the center of theGalaxy to 3 kpc, the present location of the expanding arm. Compare your answer to theamount of energy liberated in a typical Type II supernova.31If the accretion rate at the Galactic center is 10−3M⊙yr−1and if it has remained constant overthe past 5 billion years, how much mass has fallen into the center over that period of time?Compare your answer with the estimated mass of a possible supermassive black hole residingin the center of our Galaxy.32 (a)Compute the lowest possible density of Sgr A⋆based on the data obtained from the orbitof S2. Assume a spherically symmetric mass distribution.(b)Assuming a mass of 3.7×106M⊙and a radius of 1 AU (roughly the current limit ofresolution of the center of the Milky Way), estimate the density of Sgr A⋆. Express youranswer in kg m−3,M⊙AU−3, and M⊙pc−3.33Using the data found in the text, calculate the speed of S2 when it is closest to Sgr A⋆.34Using Newtonian gravity, estimate the Roche limit of a supermassive black hole of mass3.7×106M⊙(assume thata1M⊙main-sequence star is tidally disrupted). How does youranswer compare with the black hole’s Schwarzschild radius?Hint:Begin with the substituting the appropriate average densities and radii.35Estimate the Eddington luminosity of a black hole with the mass of Sgr A⋆. What is the ratioof the upper limit of the bolometric luminosity of Sgr A⋆to its Eddington luminosity?36In this problem you will construct a crude model for the mass distribution and velocity curve inthe inner 1 kpc of the Galaxy. Assume that a point (a black hole) of massM0=3.7×106M⊙is located at the center of the Galaxy and that the remainder of the mass has an isothermaldensity distribution that varies asr−2.(a)Show that if the mass distribution is spherically symmetric, the mass interior to a radiusrcan be expressed as a function of the formMr=kr+M0,wherekis a constant to be determined.(b)Assuming perfectly circular motion and Newtonian gravity, show that the orbital velocitycurve is given byv=/bracketleftbiggG/parenleftbiggk+M0r/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg1/2.(c)If the orbital velocity is 110 km s−1at 2 pc, determine a value fork.(d)Plot log10Mras a function of log10rover the range 0.01 pc<r<1 kpc. ExpressMrinsolar units andrin parsecs. Your graph should be qualitatively similar to the observationaldata depicted in Fig. 33.equation below r<fR/parenleftbiggρpρm/parenrightbigg1/3Rp,The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1101>>>

S-star orbits3.7 ¥ 106 M   point massplus visible star clusterGGGGDark cluster/H92670 = 1.7 ¥ 1018 M   pc–3/H9251 = 5R0 = 8 kpcVisible starcluster1062 ¥ 1065 ¥ 1061071011021031041052 ¥ 107Radius (light-hours)
Radius (pc)0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10Enclosed mass (solar masses)FIGURE33The interior mass function for the central 10 pc of the Galaxy. Note that the curveis consistent with a mass distributionMr∝rbeyond about 5 pc but that interior to 2 pc the distri-bution levels off, approaching a constant nonzero value of 3.7×106M⊙. “Dark cluster” refers to ahypothetical object. Note that the predictions of a dark cluster model at the center of the Galaxy donot agree with the observational data. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of Reinhard Genzel and RainerSchödel. For a discussion of an earlier version of this diagram, see Schödel, et al.,Nature,419, 694,2002.)(e)Plotvas a function of log10rover the range 0.01 pc<r<1 kpc. Expressvin km s−1andrin parsecs. At what radius does the contribution of the central point mass begin tobecome signiﬁcant?The MilkyWay Galaxy: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1102>>>

Galactic Evolution1Interactions of Galaxies2The Formation of Galaxies1INTERACTIONS OF GALAXIESWith the exquisite vision of the heavens provided by modern ground-based and space-basedobservatories, it has become increasingly apparent that galaxies are not “island universes”;they do not evolve in isolation.Evidence of Interactions
Interactions tend to increase the velocity dispersions of stars in the galaxies involved,possibly destroying disk structures in late-type galaxies and causing the galaxies to relaxto early-typer1/4proﬁles.A VLA radio survey of the H I layer of galactic disks found that at least 50% of all diskgalaxies display warped disks. Also, more than half of all elliptical galaxies harbor discreteshells of stars.1Some disk warping may be due to tidal interactions with smaller satellitegalaxies, and, as we shall see, shells in ellipticals are signatures of mergers.galaxies is largely responsible for removing the gas from the individual galaxies that makeup the cluster, while still leaving the gas trapped in the cluster’s overall gravitational well.1See Binney (1992) and Barnes and Hernquist (1992) for further details on these statistics.From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.26,Nearly all galaxies belong to clusters, and the galaxies take up a larger fraction of the cluster’s volume than do the stars in a stellar cluster.We also know that the spac-ing between galaxies is typically only 100 times larger than the size of the galaxies themselves. Densely populated clusters, such as the Coma cluster (Figs.  1 and  2), have a higher proportion of early-type galaxies (ellipticals) in their centers than they do in their outer, less dense regions. The central regions of these rich, regularly shaped clusters also have a higher proportion of early-type galaxies than the centers of less populated, amorphous-shaped irregular clusters, such as the Hercules cluster (Fig.  3). These observations seem to correlate with the increased probability of inter-actions and/or mergers between galaxies in regions of higher galaxy number density.Observations also suggest that hot, X-ray-emitting gas occupies much of the space between the galaxies in rich clusters and has a mass equal to or exceeding the mass of all of the cluster’s stars. It seems that the gravitational inﬂuence of interacting


<<<PAGE 1103>>>

FIGURE 1The center of the Coma cluster. The width of this view is about 18 arcmin. (Courtesyof National Optical Astronomy Observatories.)
13.513.012.51820222426283032343638
Right ascension (hr)Declination (deg)
FIGURE 2The Coma cluster of galaxies, showing the ellipticals (ﬁlled circles) and spirals (opencircles). Note that the scale is much larger than the width of the image in Fig. 1.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1104>>>

FIGURE 3The Hercules cluster of galaxies. (Courtesy of National Optical Astronomy Obser-vatories.)Although only a small fraction of the galaxies’ gas is removed in a direct collision, mergersmay initiate a burst of star formation that produces stellar mass loss and supernovae, leadingto a galactic superwind capable of liberating a large amount of gas.today between galaxies are simply a natural extension of their formative years. Figure 4shows one of many examples of galactic interactions. In this section, we will examine suchobvious examples, as well as more subtle phenomena.Dynamical FrictionWhat happens when galaxies collide? Given that stars are generally spread very far apartin galaxies, the chance of even a single stellar collision is quite small.Instead, interactions between stars will be gravitational in nature. To see this, imagine thatan object (a globular cluster or small galaxy) of massMis moving through an inﬁnite col-lection of stars, gas clouds, and dark matter with a constant mass density,ρ. We will assumethat the mass of each object in the background “sea” of material is much less thanM,s oMcontinues moving in a straight line instead of being deﬂected. In the absence of colli-sions, it might be thought thatMwould move unimpeded. However, asMmoves forward,the other objects are gravitationally pulled toward its path, with the closest ones feelingthe largest force. As shown in Fig. 5, this produces a region of enhanced density alongthe path, with a high-density “wake” trailingM. The result, known asdynamical friction,is a net gravitational force onMthat opposes its motion. Kinetic energy is transferred fromMto the surrounding material asM’s speed is reduced.Galactic Evolution
This evidence suggests that interactions between galaxies play an important role in their evolution. In the hierarchical “bottom-up” scenario of galaxy formation to be described in the next section, large galaxies are thought to be formed by merg-ers and the gravitational capture of smaller entities. In this view, the interactions seen


<<<PAGE 1105>>>

FIGURE 4The plumes on the opposite sides of NGC 520 are evidence of a tidal interaction,possibly ending in the merger of the two colliding disk galaxies. Note the diagonally oriented dustlane. (Courtesy of Gemini Observatory/AURA.)
0.050.020.01 0.005 0.002–20 –10 0 10 20z201001020
R
FIGURE 5The fractional enhancement in the density of stars caused by the motion of a massMin the positivezdirection. (Figure adapted from Mulder,Astron. Astrophys.,117, 9, 1983.)Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1106>>>

The derivation of an expression for dynamical friction is beyond the scope of this text,but it is easy to see that the physical quantities involved are the mass,M, and speed,vM,of the massive object, and the mass density of the surrounding material,ρ. As a result,the expression for the force must containGM,vM, andρonly.2It is left as a problem toshow that there is only one combination of these variables that has the units of force, so theexpression for the force of dynamical friction,fd, must look likefd≃CG2M2ρv2M,(1)whereCis dimensionless. Here,Cis not a constant, but a function that depends on howvMcompares with the velocity dispersion,σ, of the surrounding medium. ForvM∼3σ,typical values ofCare 23 for the LMC, 76 for globular clusters, and 160 for ellipticals.3Through a careful examination of Eq. ( 1), it is possible to see why the various termsenter as they do. Clearly the dynamical friction must be proportional to the mass densityof stars. Assuming that the relative numbers of objects of various masses do not change,doublingρmeans doubling the total number of objects, which would in turn double thegravitational force onM. The massMitself is squared; one power comes from its role inproducing the high-density wake that trails behind it, and the other from the gravitationalforce onMproduced by the enhanced density. Finally, consider the velocity-squared termin the denominator. IfMmoves twice as fast, it will spend only half as much time neara given object, and so the impulse/integraltextFdt=/Delta1pgiven to that object is only half as great.Consequently, the density enhancement develops only half as rapidly, andMwill be twiceas far away by the time the enhancement arises. Thus thev2Min the denominator comesfrom the inverse-square law of gravity. This last point means that slow encounters are muchmore effective at decreasing the speed of an intruding mass.To get an estimate of the timescale associated with the effects of dynamical frictionacting on a galaxy’s globular clusters, recall that ﬂat rotation curves imply that the densityof the dark matter halo may be approximated most simply by,ρ(r)=v2M4πGr2.Inserting this expression into Eq. ( 1), we ﬁnd that the dynamical friction acting on acluster isfd=CG2M2ρ(r)v2M=CGM24πr2.If the cluster’s orbit is circular and of radiusr, its orbital angular momentum is justL=MvMr. Since dynamical friction acts tangentially to the orbit and opposes the cluster’s2Because the only time thatMarises is in connection with Newton’s law of gravity, the combinationGMwill beinseparable in any derivation.3You may refer to Binney and Tremaine (1987) for a detailed discussion of dynamical friction.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1107>>>

motion, a torque of magnitudeτ=rfdis exerted on the cluster. The torque in turn reducesthe cluster’s angular momentum according todLdt=τ.Recalling that a ﬂat rotation curve implies that the orbital speedvMis essentially constant,differentiating the angular momentum and substituting for the torque giveMvMdrdt=−rCGM24πr2.Integrating the last equation leads to an expression describing the time required for theglobular cluster to spiral into the center of the host galaxy from an initial radiusri, or/integraldisplay0rird r=−CGM4πvM/integraldisplaytc0dt.Solving for the cluster lifetime,tc, yieldstc=2πvMr2iCGM.(2)Equation ( 2) can be inverted to ﬁnd the most distant cluster that could have beencaptured within the estimated age of the galaxy:rmax=/radicalBiggtmaxCGM2πvM(3)Example 1.1.Consider a globular cluster that orbits the Andromeda galaxy (M31).Assume that the cluster’s mass isM=5×106M⊙and its velocity isvM=250 km s−1,typical of the rotation curve in the outer part of the galaxy. If the age of M31 is approximately13 Gyr, then Eq. ( 3) implies thatrmax=3.7 kpc. This means that globular clusters of5×106M⊙that were originally within approximately 4 kpc of the center of Andromedawould have spiraled into its nucleus by now.According to Eq. ( 3),rmax∝M1/2, implying that clusters with masses greater than5×106M⊙could have been gathered from greater distances. This may help to explainwhy there are no very massive globular clusters remaining around M31 today.This is a fate that has already befallen the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal galaxy, the remnantof the dwarf galaxy in Canis Major, and possibly a progenitor dwarf galaxy ofωCentauri. Infact, any giant galaxy will probably devour numerous satellite galaxies during its lifetime.Galactic Evolution
Not only are globular clusters affected by dynamical friction, but satellite  g a l a x i e s  a r e  a s  w e l l .  A  s t r e a m  o f  m a t e r i a l  h a s  b e e n  t i d a l l y  s t r i p p e d  f r o m  t h e  M a g -ellanic Clouds. In fact, it appears that dynamical friction will ultimately cause the Magellanic Clouds to merge with the Milky Way some 14 billion years in the future.


<<<PAGE 1108>>>

The process of satellite accretion has a variety of possible consequences. For instance,the gravitational torques involved in the merger of a satellite galaxy in a retrograde orbitmay produce the counter-rotating cores that are observed in some elliptical galaxiesRapid EncountersWe now turn to another type of encounter, one that occurs so rapidly between two galaxiesthat their stars do not have time to respond. Even in the special case where the two systemspass through one another, there is no signiﬁcant dynamical friction because there is noappreciable density enhancement. In thisimpulse approximation, the stars barely have timeto alter their positions. As a result, the internal potential energy,U, of each galaxy isunchanged by the collision. However, the gravitational work that each galaxy performs onthe other has increased the internal kinetic energies of both galaxies in a random way. Thisinternal kinetic energy comes at the expense of the overall kinetic energies of the galaxies’motions with respect to one another. The amount of internal energy gained by the galaxiesdepends on the nearness of the approach of the galaxies involved, with the energy decliningrapidly for more distant encounters. (Roughly, the energy gained is inversely proportionalto the fourth power of the distance of closest approach of the galaxies.)Suppose that one of the galaxies gains some internal kinetic energy during the interaction.To determine how it will respond, assume that the galaxy was initially in equilibrium,meaning that it satisﬁed the virial theorem prior to the encounter,and its initial kinetic, potential, and total energies were related by 2Ki=−Ui=−2Ei.Imagine that during the encounter, the galaxy’s internal kinetic energy increased fromKitoKi+/Delta1K. Because its potential energy has remained essentially constant, the galaxy’stotal energy has increased toEf=Ei+/Delta1K. As a result, the galaxy has been thrown outof virial equilibrium. When equilibrium is ﬁnally reestablished (after a timescale of a feworbital periods), the ﬁnal kinetic energy must, according to the virial theorem, beKf=−Ef=−(Ei+/Delta1K)=Ki−/Delta1K.Thus, as equilibrium is regained, the internal kinetic energy of the galaxy actuallydecreasesby 2/Delta1Kfrom the value it had just after the collision.How does the galaxy accomplish this reduction? One way to regain equilibrium is toconvert the excess kinetic energy into an increased (less negative) gravitational potentialenergy. The galaxy expands slightly as the separation between its masses increases. Anotherway of reducing the kinetic energy is for the most energetic components to carry it out awayfrom the galaxy in the form of a stream of stars and gas. This evaporation cools the galaxyand moves it toward a new equilibrium. In fact, both of these processes may occur, and whichone dominates is determined by the speciﬁc circumstances of the collision. For instance,a high-speed, nearly head-on collision may produce aring galaxy, such as the Cartwheelshown in Fig. 6. A numerical computer simulation and interpretation of this interactionare left as an exercise.Galactic Evolution.In a disk galaxy, merg ers may excite global modes of oscillation. Mergers are also  capable of producing the sort of featureless disks that are characteristic of Ir (amor-phous) galaxies. The importance of mergers in the evolution of galaxies will be  explored in Section 2.


<<<PAGE 1109>>>

FIGURE 6An HST image of the ring galaxy known as the Cartwheel (A0035−335). Thediameter of the ring is about 46 kpc. As the ring expands at 89 km s−1, it triggers bursts of starformation. It is not clear which of the two galaxies at right may have been the intruder. [Courtesy ofKirk Borne (STScI), and NASA.]If two galaxies are gravitationally bound to one another, they will eventually merge,given enough time. Because of their extended mass distributions, galaxies do not follow thesame trajectories they would if they were point masses; some orbital energy is diverted intoincreasing the galaxies’ internal energy, and the orbit shrinks a bit. Tidal forces may alsodissipate the orbital energy by pulling stars and gas out of one or both galaxies, a processknown astidal stripping. This is probably the cause of the Magellanic Stream.An instructive way of thinking about this loss of galactic material involves using theidea of gravitational equipotential surfacesAlthough the ﬁgure is for point masses in a circular orbit, it contains valuable insights forthe present case of extended galaxies in noncircular orbits. In particular, it is useful to talkabout thetidal radii,ℓ1andℓ2, of the galaxies. They are the distances from the center ofeach galaxy to the inner Lagrangian point,L1, given by (approximately, in this noncircularthe gravitational potential well. (This is analogous to a star overﬂowing its Roche lobeAs a result, the density of galactic material undergoes a sharpdeclinebeyond the tidal radius.Polar-ring galaxiesanddust-lane ellipticalsare normal galaxies that are orbited byrings of gas, dust, and stars that were stripped from other galaxies as they passed by ormerged. Polar rings typically contain 109M⊙or more of gas and are found only aroundelliptical or S0 galaxies. It is estimated that some 5% of all S0 galaxies have or have had aGalactic Evolution
.
.)case). As the two galaxies move about one another, the shape of the equipotential surfaces and the values of the tidal radii are constantly changing. If stars or clouds of gas extend beyond a galaxy’s tidal radius, they have a tendency to escape from


<<<PAGE 1110>>>

polar ring. Figure 7 shows the polar-ring galaxy NGC 4650A, an S0 galaxy with a ringthat is nearly perpendicular to its long axis (inclined just 7◦).Because the rings respond to the gravitational ﬁeld of the galaxies, astronomers usethem as probes of the three-dimensional distribution of matter, both luminous and dark,in their host galaxies. The results of studying several polar-ring galaxies show that theyare surrounded by spherical dark halos. An example of a well-known dust-lane elliptical isCentaurus A (NGC 5128), shown in Fig. 8. Cen A is also a powerful radio sourceAn extreme case of a gaseous ring (no stars) is the one that encircles the central twogalaxies of the M96 group in the constellation Leo, as shown in Fig. 9. The gas is in an
FIGURE 7The polar-ring galaxy NGC 4650A. [Courtesy of J. Gallagher (University ofWisconsin–Madison) and the Hubble Heritage Team (AURA/STScI/NASA).]
FIGURE 8Centaurus A (NGC 5128) is a dust-lane elliptical galaxy. (Courtesy of NOAO CerroTololo Interamerican Observatory.)Galactic Evolution
.


<<<PAGE 1111>>>

1200'1230'1300'1330'Declination (1950)
10h48m10h46m10h44mRight ascension (1950)HPBWM96M105NGC3384
FIGURE 921-cm radio contours showing the ring of neutral hydrogen around the galaxiesM105 (a giant elliptical) and NGC 3384 (an S0) in the M96 group. Note that the ring is more than 1◦wide on the sky. (Figure adapted from Schneider,Warped Disks and Inclined Rings around Galaxies,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991.)elliptical orbit around the two galaxies; the eccentricity of the orbit ise=0.402, and thecross (“+”) in the ﬁgure marks the location of the orbit’s focus.n elliptical orbit is the result of an inverse-square force law, which means that the gasring in the M96 group must liebeyondany dark-matter halos surrounding the two galaxies.The semimajor axis of the orbit isa=101 kpc, so the maximum extent of any dark halomust be given by,rp=a(1−e)=60 kpc,the perigalacticon distance. Note, however, that this calculation must be viewed cautiouslybecause the ring is merely a locus of gas and may not in fact coincide with the orbit followedby a single particle.Modeling Interactions withN-Body SimulationsThe merger of two galaxies is a complicated affair. If the relative speed of the galaxiesis substantially greater than the velocity dispersions of their stars, the collision will notresult in a merger. Conversely, if the relative speed of the collision is less than the velocitydispersion of the stars in one of the galaxies, a merger is inevitable. The situation is partic-ularly complicated when the relative velocity of the galaxies is comparable to the velocitydispersion of stars in one of the galaxies. This situation is best studied today by numericalexperiments involvingN-body simulations, like the ones that were used to investigate theGalactic Evolution
A


<<<PAGE 1112>>>

bar instability in a disk of stars. In these computations, Newton’s second lawis used tofollow the motions of the stars through a sequence of time intervals.4One of the ﬁrst such efforts was made in 1972 by Alar and Juri Toomre. Each galaxyconsisted of a massive nucleus surrounded by concentric rings of disk stars. To simplifythe calculations, the stars in the disk were allowed to feel the gravitational pull of thegalactic nuclei, but not of each other. With their program, the Toomre brothers succeededin demonstrating how interactions could explain the appearance of galaxies such as M51(the Whirlpool), which has a bridge of stars and gas that appears to extend to its neighborin Fig. 11. It is remarkable that the rapid advances in computing power since the early1970s now allow a program similar to the Toomres’ to be run on a personal computer.In general, only close, slow encounters produce bridges and tails. The effect is mostpronounced when the orbital angular speed of one of the galaxies matches the angularspeed of some of the stars in the other galaxy’s disk. The resulting orbital resonance, whichacts on both the near and far sides of the disk, allows the tidal forces to be especiallyeffective. Two bulges tend to develop on opposite sides of one (or both) of the galaxies,similar to Earth’s tidal bulges. Tidal stripping then pulls out streams of stars and gas asthe two galaxies pirouette around one another. When conditions are right, the stars and gastorn from the near side will form an apparent bridge, while, because of angular momentumconservation, the material stripped from the far side moves off to form a curving tail.Modern computer codes include the effects of dark matter and the gravitational inter-actions (self-gravity) of individual stars and gas clouds. Figures 12 and 13 show theresults of one such calculation that has reproduced the appearance of the tidal-tail galaxiesNGC 4038 and NGC 4039. These codes have also been used to simulate the merger of adisk galaxy (with a central bulge and halo) and a satellite galaxy with 10% of the mass ofthe primary. The presence of a dark-matter halo signiﬁcantly decreases the timescale of amerger because it allows the galaxies to interact over much larger distances. The satelliteis devoured and absorbed in only two revolutions of the disk galaxy.and vary little in age, while the outer population has a wider age spread. The inner clustersalso tend to have a preferential direction for their orbits around the Galaxy, while the outerclusters have randomly oriented orbits. Again, it appears likely that these outer clustersformed elsewhere and were captured later by the Milky Way. In fact, some researchers4In 1941, Holmberg used ananalog computerto investigate the tidal interactions of galaxies. He made “galaxies”out of light bulbs and used the inverse-square law of light to mimic the same behavior for gravity. With the aid ofa light meter, he was able to analyze the gravitational inﬂuence of one model galaxy on another.Galactic Evolution
galaxy NGC 5195. Fig.  10 suggests how this system could have been produced. Also note the development of the grand-design spiral arms that are so prominent in M51. In addition, the Toomres were successful in reproducing the appearance of  tidal-tail galaxies, such as the pair NGC 4038 and NGC 4039 (the “Antennae”) shown
It is worth recalling that roughly one-half of the stars in the Milky Way’s outer stellar halo move in retrograde orbits, which is probably a consequence of tid-al stripping and/or mergers of other dwarf galaxies. There are two different spatial distributions of globular clusters around the Milky Way. The inner clusters are old


<<<PAGE 1113>>>

2211005195Spin
PeriSpin5194–1
0
1
2NWNSunFIGURE 10The Toomres’ computer simulation of the interaction between M51 (NGC 5194)and NGC 5195. Note from the side view that the “bridge” does not actually connect the two galaxies.You may also note the resulting warped disk. [Figure adapted from Toomre,The Large Scale Structureof the Universe, Longair and Einasto (eds.), Reidel, Dordrecht, 1978.]have suggested that the young globular clusters, Palomar 12 and Ruprecht 106, were tidallystripped from the Large Magellanic Cloud.Finally, if a satellite galaxy is moving at an angle with respect to the plane of the disk, themerger can result in a warped disk that persists for 3 to 5 billion years. More than 50% ofgalactic disks (including the Milky Way’s) display a warp in their gas distributions (althoughsome stars may participate in the warp as well), and most of these galaxies do not appearto have nearby companions. The absence of a companion might argue in favor of a merger,under the assumption that the companion was enveloped by the primary galaxy. However,most disks show no explicit evidence that a merger has occurred. It has also been shownthat warped disks can arise simply as a consequence of the triaxial nature of the surroundingdark halos. The importance of the role of mergers or close encounters in producing warpeddisks has yet to be determined.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1114>>>

FIGURE 11The Antennae galaxies, NGC 4038 and NGC 4039, and their tidal tails. [Courtesyof Brad Whitmore (STScI) and NASA.]zxy
periFIGURE 12The orbital geometry used to calculate the formation of the tidal-tail galaxies shownin Fig. 11. The disks are shown in their initial positions. Each disk is initially inclined by 60◦tothe orbital plane, and a dashed line indicates the intersection of each disk with the orbital plane. Thepositions of closest approach are identiﬁed (“peri”). The viewing direction for Fig. 13 is indicatedas along the positivey-axis. (Figure adapted from Barnes,Ap. J.,331, 699, 1988.)Starburst GalaxiesIn 1972 Richard Larson and Beatrice Tinsley found that strongly interacting galaxies tendto be bluer than isolated ones of the same type. They attributed the excess blue light tohot newborn stars and argued that tidal interactions have induced vigorous bursts of starGalactic Evolution
formation in these galaxies. The increased luminosity is difﬁcult to detect because, like all star formation, it is shrouded in thick clouds of gas and dust. The light emitted by the young stars at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths is absorbed and then reradi-ated in the infrared. In 1983 the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) found that these

<<<PAGE 1115>>>

–0.400.4z–1.2 –0.8 –0.4 0 0.4 0.8 1.2xFIGURE 13The result of Joshua Barnes’s simulation of the formation of the tidal-tail galaxiesNGC 4038 and NGC 4039.Adistance of 1 on thex- andz-axes corresponds to 40 kpc. (Figure adaptedfrom Barnes,Ap. J.,331, 699, 1988.)starburst galaxiesare extremely bright at infrared wavelengths, pouring out up to 98% oftheir energy in this portion of the spectrum. (In comparison, the Milky Way emits 30% ofits luminosity in the infrared, and M31 only a few percent.) Most of the star formation isconﬁned to within about one kiloparsec or so of the galaxy’s center, where radio telescopeshave detected vast clouds containing some 109to 1012M⊙of hydrogen gas that serves asfuel. Between 10 and 300 M⊙of gas is converted into stars each year in a starburst galaxy,while only two or three stars are formed annually in the Milky Way. The clouds typicallycontain sufﬁcient hydrogen to support this rate of star formation for about 108to 109years,although a given burst may last for only 20 million years or so.The observational evidence also shows that starbursts do not occur exclusively in thenuclei of interacting galaxies. Although this is often the case, many disk-wide starburstsare also known. In this case, the problem is how star formation can be triggered nearlysimultaneously over such a wide area.Since hydrogen clouds were initially distributed throughout the galactic disk, one puzzlefacing astronomers is how a violent interaction with another galaxy could have removedmore than 90% of the clouds’ angular momentum, allowing the gas to become concentratedin the galactic center. An answer may be provided by numerical simulations of collidinggalaxies. These studies indicate that the gas and stars react differently to the impact of anintruding galaxy, with the gas tending to move out in front of the stars as they orbit thegalactic center. The stars’ gravity then pulls back on the gas, and the resulting torque on thegas reduces its angular momentum, causing it to plunge toward the galactic center. As thetwo galaxies begin to merge, more angular momentum is lost. Shock fronts then compressthe gas, and a burst of star formation begins.Figure 14 shows the starburst galaxy M82/NGC 3034, about 3.2 Mpc awayFrom its unusual appearance, astronomers once thought that this galaxy wasexploding. The current interpretation is that between 107and 108years ago, the inner 400 pcof M82 began a tremendous episode of star formation that is still continuing. The centerof M82 contains a wealth of OB stars and supernova remnants that have expelled moreGalactic Evolution
.


<<<PAGE 1116>>>

FIGURE 14The starburst galaxy M82 (NGC 3034). This composite image was obtained bythe Subaru Telescope’s FOCAS instrument inB,V, and Hαwavelengths. [Courtesy of NationalAstronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ).]than 107M⊙of gas from the plane of the galaxy. All of this violent activity may have beentriggered by a tidal interaction with M81, a spiral galaxy that is now about 36 kpc awayfrom M82 (as projected on the plane of the sky) and linked to it by a gaseous bridge ofneutral hydrogen. In fact, the center of M81 is known to be a signiﬁcant source of X-rays,with an X-ray luminosity ofLX=1.6×1033W. This has been interpreted as implyingthat M81 has a central black hole that is being “fed” by infalling gas at the rate of 10−5to10−4M⊙yr−1. This gas infall may also be a consequence of the tidal interaction with M82.Mergers in Elliptical and cD GalaxiesThe importance of interactions in galactic evolution is most obvious for elliptical galaxies.The case is especially compelling for the cD galaxies typically found at the centers of rich,regular clusters. More than half of the known cD’s have multiple nuclei that move differentlythan the galaxy as a whole. Although the typical orbital speed of a star in a cD galaxy is∼300 km s−1, the multiple nuclei move with relative velocities of∼1000 km s−1. All ofthis is taken as evidence that cD galaxies are the products of galactic mergers that suppliedthe supernumerary nuclei and the expansive halo of stars. Their frequent occurrence at thebottom of a cluster’s gravitational potential well makes collisions and other close encountersall the more probable. Figure 15 is a remarkable photograph of three smaller galaxiespassing through a cD at the center of the cluster Abell 2199. (In this case their velocities areGalactic Evolution
so large that these galaxies will not be captured during this passage through the cD.) cD’s also have unusually high speciﬁc frequencies of globular clusters, suggesting that a large number of clusters have been captured throughout the evolution of a typical cD galaxy.Normal elliptical galaxies show evidence of interactions and mergers as well, particularly the boxy E’s. About 25% of all ellipticals have very different veloc-ity ﬁelds in their cores when compared with their outer regions. Observations

<<<PAGE 1117>>>

FIGURE 15The passage of three small galaxies through a giant elliptical in the clusterAbell 2199. (Courtesy of Whipple Observatory and Harvard CfA.)
FIGURE 16Faint concentric shells around the elliptical galaxy NGC 3923. (Figure from Malinand Carter,Nature,285, 643, 1980. Anglo-Australian Observatory photo by David Malin.)also reveal that 56% of all ellipticals have faint shells (as do 32% of all S0’s). As shown inFig. 16, otherwise normal ellipticals may have as many as twenty large concentric arcsof very low surface brightness, both outside and inside the galaxy. Numerical experimentsﬁnd that these shells may be the result of head-on (or nearly head-on) collisions with smallergalaxies that have only a few percent of the mass of the larger elliptical. In essence, thecaptured stars slosh back and forth in the elliptical’s gravitational well, like water rockingback and forth in a large bowl. Arcs are seen where the stars slow and reverse their courses.The natural spread in the stellar kinetic and potential energies creates the concentric arcs.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1118>>>

large ellipticals. Computer simulations bolster this view by showing thatr1/4brightnessproﬁles are normal outcomes of mergers. Calculations of mergers can also reproduce theobservations of distinctly different velocity ﬁelds inside and outside the galactic core.It is important to note, however, that dwarf ellipticals and dwarf spheroidals, the mostcommon types of elliptical galaxies, do not appear to result from mergers.Binary Supermassive Black HolesAn intriguing consequence of the merging of two large galaxies, whether they are ellipticalsor spirals, is the apparently inevitable formation of a binary system of supermassive blackholes. If each galaxy involved in the merger originally contained a supermassive black hole,the two black holes would migrate toward the center of the potential well of the combinedsystem as a direct result of dynamical friction. Depending on their trajectories, the two blackholes would probably enter into a well-separated binary system. One such system appearsto be NGC 6420, which has two very strong X-ray sources (believed to be supermassiveblack holes) that are currently separated by a distance of about 1 kpc (see Fig. 17).
FIGURE 17AChandra X-Ray Observatory image of two supermassive black holes near the cen-ter of the “butterﬂy-shaped” galaxy, NGC 6240. (Courtesy of NASA/CXC/MPE/S. Komossa, et al.)Galactic EvolutionFrom the evidence discussed here, it seems likely that many, and perhaps all, large elliptical galaxies are strongly inﬂuenced by mergers. Galaxy mergers seem to produce results that are strikingly similar to elliptical galaxies in many ways. Pho-tometry of the inner regions of cD galaxies and other obvious merger remnants con-ﬁrms that their surface brightness proﬁles follow the r  law that is obeyed by most1/4


<<<PAGE 1119>>>

As the two supermassive black holes orbit around one another, they will have a profoundand disturbing time-dependent gravitational inﬂuence on stars near the center of the mergedgalaxy. As with other three-body systems where one member is much less massive thanthe other two, it is probable that individual stars will be ejected from the central region ofthe galaxy. If the total mass of stars ejected in this way becomes comparable to the massof the black holes, enough angular momentum and energy will be carried away by thestars that the two black holes will spiral in toward one another. When the black holesbecome sufﬁciently close, they will produce large amounts of gravitational radiation thatwill further rob them of the energy and angular momentum needed to stay separatedTheﬁnal outcome of the process will be a merger of the two black holes, producing anevenlarger beast in the center of the merged galaxy.It has been suggested that such a mechanism is a probable route to growing the super-massive black holes that seem to be so prevalent in the centers of large galaxies.2THE FORMATION OF GALAXIESAs we have seen so far in our discussions of the Milky Way and other galaxies, galacticstructures are complex and varied. The luminous components of elliptical galaxies are dom-inated by spheroidal mass distributions that are primarily composed of old stars, while spiralgalaxies contain both relatively old spheroids and appreciable disks of younger generationsof stars, dust, and gas. Important differences even exist within the designations of early-and late-type galaxies, such as the degree of diskiness or boxiness of normal ellipticals, theexistence of dwarf spheroidals, and the relative dominance of the bulges and disks of spirals,to name a few. Furthermore, the presence of large quantities of dark matter, accounting for90% or more of the mass in many galaxies, also plays a critical role in determining theiroverall structures.The Eggen, Lynden–Bell, Sandage Collapse ModelIt was in 1962 that Olin J. Eggen (1919–1998), Donald Lynden-Bell, and Allan R. Sandagepresented an important early attempt at modeling the evolution of our Galaxy, often referredto as theELS collapse model. Their work was based on observed correlations between themetallicity of stars in the solar neighborhood, and their orbital eccentricities and orbitalangular momenta. Eggen, Lynden-Bell, and Sandage noted that the most metal-poor starstend to have the highest eccentricities, the largestwcomponents of their peculiar motionsTo explain the kinematic and chemical properties of stars in the solar neighborhood,ELS suggested that the Milky Way Galaxy formed from the rapid collapse of a large proto-Galactic nebula. The oldest halo stars formed early in the collapse process while still onnearly radial trajectories, resulting in their highly elliptical orbits above and below theGalactic plane.As a further consequence of their rapid formation, the model predicts that thehalo stars are naturally very metal-poor (Population II) since the interstellar medium had notGalactic Evolution
.
,and the lowest angular momenta about the rotation axis of the Galaxy. On the other hand, metal-rich stars tend to exist in nearly circular orbits and are conﬁned to regions near the plane of the Galaxy.


<<<PAGE 1120>>>

yet had time to become enriched by the by-products of stellar nucleosynthesis. However, asthe ﬁrst generations of massive stars generated heavier elements in their interiors, underwentsupernova explosions, and ejected metal-rich material back into the ISM, the ISM evolvedchemically over time.As the proto-Galactic cloud continued to fall inward, the model predicts that the rapidcollapse slowed when collisions between gas and dust particles became more frequent andthe kinetic energy of infall was dissipated (converted into the thermal energy of randomparticle motions). Furthermore, the presence of angular momentum in the original proto-Galactic nebula meant that the cloud began to rotate more quickly as the radius decreased.The combination of the increased dissipation and the increased angular speed led to thedevelopment of a disk of chemically enriched gas from which Population I stars continueto form today.Example 2.1.The time required for the free-fall collapse of the proto-Galactic cloudas envisioned by Eggen, Lynden-Bell, and Sandage can be estimatedAssume that the proto-Galactic cloud containedsome 5×1011M⊙, the estimated mass of the Milky Way Galaxywithin a nearly sphericalvolume of radius 50 kpc (which includes the dark matter haloIf we further assume that the mass was uniformly distributed over the sphere,then the initial density of the cloud wasρ0=3M4πr3=8×10−23kg m−3.Substituting intogivestff=/parenleftbigg3π321Gρ0/parenrightbigg1/2=200 Myr.Of course, if the nebula were initially somewhat centrally condensed, the inner portions ofthe Galaxy would collapse more rapidly than the outer, rareﬁed regions.This may explain the existence of the very old stellar population within the bulge. Thehigh metal abundance of bulge stars would arise if the ﬁrst, massive, short-lived stars couldquickly enrich the relatively dense ISM in that part of the Galaxy. Recall that the lifetimes ofthe most massive stars are on the order of one million years, much shorter than the estimatedfree-fall timescale.Problems with the ELS ModelAlthough the model does account for many of the basic features found in the structure ofthe Milky Way, thistop-downapproach involving the differentiation of a single, immenseproto-Galactic cloud does not explain several important aspects of our current understandingof the Galaxy’s morphology. For instance, given an initial rotation of the proto-Galacticcloud, essentially all halo stars and globular clusters should be moving in the same generaldirection, albeit with highly eccentric orbits about the Galactic center. However, astronomershave come to realize that approximately one-half of all outer-halo stars are in retrogradeGalactic Evolution
.).


<<<PAGE 1121>>>

stars and clusters seems to suggest that the early environment of the Galaxy was fairlyturbulent and clumpy.)A second problem with the standard ELS collapse model is the apparent age spreadamong the globular clusters and halo stars. If the approximately 2-billion-year variation in8 Gyr old, whereas the age of the thick disk may be 10 Gyr (both being signiﬁcantly youngerthan the halo).Yet another difﬁculty lies in the compositional variation found between globular clusters.The clusters located nearest the Galactic center are generally the most metal-rich and oldest,while the clusters in the outer halo exhibit a wider variation in metallicity and tend to beyounger. The clusters also seem to form two spatial distributions; one set is associated withthe spheroid, and the other may more properly be afﬁliated with the thick disk.The problems that have developed with the early ELS view of the formation of theMilky Way suggest that our understanding of its formation and subsequent evolution mustbe revised or is otherwise incomplete. Furthermore, the rich variety of galaxies, along withtheir ongoing dynamical evolution via mutual interactions and mergers, poses interestingchallenges to the development of an overall, coherent theory of galactic evolution.Althoughat the time this text was written, such a theory had not yet reached the same level ofmaturity that exists in our understanding of stellar evolution, important features have begunto emerge.The Stellar Birthrate FunctionAs we have seen in the ELS model, any theory of galaxy formation must be able to explainthe rate of formation of stars of various masses, as well as the chemical evolution of theinterstellar medium. Since the ISM is enriched by mass loss via stellar winds and supernovaeof various types, the theory must also incorporate the rates of stellar evolution and thechemical yields of stars.One problem immediately arises in this regard: Although astronomers have been ableto develop a reasonable description of the evolution of individual stars, our understandingof stellar birthrates is not yet complete. It is customary to express thestellar birthratefunction,B(M, t), in terms of thestar formation rate(SFR),ψ(t), and theinitial massfunction(IMF),ξ(M), in the formB(M, t) dM dt=ψ(t) ξ(M) dM dt,(4)whereMis the stellar mass andtis time.B(M, t)represents the number of stars per unitvolume (or per unit surface area in the case of the Galactic disk) with masses betweenMandM+dMthat are formed out of the ISM during the time interval betweentandt+dt. The SFR describes the rate per unit volume at which mass in the ISM is beingGalactic Evolutionorbits and the net rotational velocity of the outer halo is roughly 0 km s−1. On the other hand, stars in the inner halo, along with the inner globular clusters, appear to  have  a small net rotational  velocity.  (Our  current  understanding  of  the  kinematics  of  haloages is real (the age range being perhaps 11 to 13 Gyr), then the collapse must have taken roughly an order of magnitude longer to complete than proposed by Eggen, Lynden-Bell, and Sandage. The model also does not readily explain the existence of a multicomponent disk having differing ages. The young disk is probably about


<<<PAGE 1122>>>

–7.7–7.6–7.5–7.4–7.3Log10 SFR
0 200 400 600 800 1000Time (Myr)FIGURE 18A model of the total star formation rate (in units of M⊙pc−2yr−1) for the disk ofthe Milky Way Galaxy as a function of time. (Figure adapted from Burkert, Truran, and Hensler,Ap.J.,391, 651, 1992.)converted into stars; the present value for the SFR within the Galactic disk is believed tobe 5.0±0.5M⊙pc−2Gyr−1, integrated over thezdirection (this corresponds to the twoTo understand the birthrates of stars and their ensuing contribution to the chemicalevolution of the ISM, different researchers have made various assumptions about the SFR.For instance, some astronomers have assumed that the SFR is time-independent, whileothers have argued for an exponentially decreasing function with time, or perhaps one thatis proportional to some power of the surface mass density of the Galactic disk. One computersimulation of the evolution of the disk of our Galaxy, performed by Andreas Burkert, JamesW. Truran, and G. Hensler (1992), produced an SFR that reached a maximum value and thendecreased with time as the available gas and dust in the ISM was consumed (see Fig. 18).Other studies have considered the possibility that the SFR may be highly variable in bothspace and time. Such a situation could occur because of short-timescale starburst activity,for instance.The IMF is often modeled as a power-law ﬁt of the formξ(M)=dNdM=CM−(1+x),(5)wherexmay take on different values for various mass ranges andCis a normalizationconstant. The ﬁrst attempt to derive an IMF for the solar neighborhood was carried out byEdwin E. Salpeter in 1955, where he argued for a value ofx=1.35. According to morerecent determinations, it appears thatx=1.8 may be a better ﬁt for stars in the approximatemass range 7 M⊙to 35 M⊙(and perhaps down as low as 2 M⊙). For stars more massive thanabout 40 M⊙,x=4 may be required, implying that the production of massive stars dropsGalactic Evolution
to three stars formed per year that was mentioned previously). Finally, the IMF repre-sents the relative numbers of stars that form in each mass interval.


<<<PAGE 1123>>>

off very rapidly with increasing mass. For lower-mass stars,xis very difﬁcult to determinethrough observational studies. The complications arise because the IMF must be decoupledfrom thepresent-day mass functionand the SFR, which itself can be quite complicated.It has been suggested that the IMF may ﬂatten considerably at low masses. Unfortunately,an exact form of the IMF is not yet known, and it is not even clear whether the IMF varieswith time or location.The G-Dwarf ProblemAttempts to use the SFR and IMF to model the chemical evolution of the Galactic disk in thesolar neighborhood have resulted in predictions that do not always agree with observations.If we assume that the ﬁrst generation of stars was born without any metals (Z0=0; Popu-lation III) and the chemical evolution of the ISM occurs within aclosed box(meaning thatno gas or dust is allowed to enter or leave the system being modeled), then the calculationspredict too many stars of low metallicity when compared with observations. For instance,this simple model suggests that roughly one-half of the stars in the solar neighborhoodshould have values forZthat are less than one-quarter of the solar value (Z⊙≃0.02).However, only about 2% of the F and G main-sequence stars have such lowZvalues. Thisis known as theG-dwarf problem.One possible solution to the G-dwarf problem, referred to asprompt initial enhance-ment, is to assume that the disk of our Galaxy formed withZ0̸=0, which could occur ifheavy-element enrichment of the ISM resulted from rapidly evolving massive stars beforethe gas and dust settled into the disk. A second suggestion is that the disk accumulated massover a signiﬁcant period of time, perhaps even continuing to the present (in other words, theclosed-box assumption is invalid). In this scenario a substantial infall of metal-poor materialonto the Galactic disk has occurred since its initial formation; as the gas entered the system,it mixed with the metal-enriched ISM. Since a lower initial mass density would imply fewerstars formed during the early history of the disk, fewer metal-poor stars would be observedtoday. Yet another proposal argues that the IMF was different in the early history of theGalaxy, and a larger fraction of more massive stars were formed with correspondingly fewerlow-mass stars. Since massive stars are short-lived, this hypothesis would result in fewermetal-poor stars today.A Dissipative Collapse Modelcollapse can be described in terms of the time necessary for the nebula to cool signiﬁcantly.If thecooling timescale,tcool, is much less than the free-fall timescale, then the cloud will notbe pressure-supported and the collapse will be rapid (i.e., essentially in free-fall). However,if the cooling time exceeds the free-fall timescale, the gas cannot radiate its energy away fastenough to allow for a rapid collapse, and the gravitational potential energy that is releasedduring the collapse will heat the nebula adiabatically. This situation is yet another exampleof the virial theorem.Galactic Evolution
Another issue that must be addressed by a comprehensive theory of galactic evo-lution is the question of a free-fall collapse versus a slow, dissipative one. A free-fall collapse is governed by the free-fall timescale, sometimes alternatively referred to as the dynamical timescale (see Example  2.1). On the other hand, a dissipative


<<<PAGE 1124>>>

To estimate the cooling timescale, we must ﬁrst determine the characteristic amount ofthermal kinetic energy contained within each particle in the gas. According to the virialtheorem, if we assume that the gas is in quasistatic equilibrium, the average thermal kineticenergy of the gas must be related to its potential energy by,−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.If we further assume that the gas has a mean molecular weight ofµand containsNparticles,then the virial theorem gives−2N12µmH/angbracketleftbigv2/angbracketrightbig=−35GM2R,wherem=µmHis the average mass of a single particle,Ris the radius of the nebula,andM=NµmHis the nebula’s mass. In the last expression, we used a gravitationallybound, spherical mass distribution of constant density to estimate the potential energy ofσ=/parenleftbigg35GMR/parenrightbigg1/2.(6)Now we may determine a characteristic temperature of the gas, known as thevirialtemperature, by equating the typical kinetic energy of a gas particle to its thermal energy,or12µmHσ2=32kTvirial,which givesTvirial=µmHσ23k.(7)Finally, to estimate the cooling time we must determine the rate at which energy can beradiated away from the gas. This is done by expressing the cooling rate per unit volume asrcool=n2/Lambda1(T ),wherercoolhas units of energy per unit time per unit volume,nis the number density ofparticles in the gas, and/Lambda1(T )is a quantum mechanicalcooling function./Lambda1(T ), shown106K, the cooling is due to thermal bremsstrahlung and Compton scattering. Then2de-pendence in the expression forrcoolcan be understood in terms of the interactions betweenGalactic Evolution
in Fig. 19, includes the same physical processes of bound–bound, bound–free, free–free, and electron scattering. The two “bumps” in the curve just above 104 K  a n d  n e a r  1 05 K correspond to the ionization/ recombination temperatures of hydrogen and helium, respectively. Above aboutthe syste . Solving for the velocity dispersionσ=⟨v2⟩1/2givesm


<<<PAGE 1125>>>

110100L/(10–36 W m3)
104105106107108T (K)FIGURE 19The cooling function/Lambda1(T ). The solid line corresponds to a gas mixture of 90%hydrogen and 10% helium, by number. The dashed line is for solar abundances. (Figure adapted fromBinney and Tremaine,Galactic Dynamics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1987.)pairs of particles in the gas; collisions excite ions, atoms, or molecules, which then radiatethe energy away in the form of photons, cooling the gas.If all of the energy in the cloud is radiated away in a timetcool, thenrcoolVtcool=32NkTvirial,whereVis the volume of the cloud. Solving for the cooling time, we havetcool=32kTvirialn/Lambda1.(8)Example 2.2.Assume for simplicity that the proto-Galactic nebula discussed in Ex-ample 2.1 was initially composed of 90% hydrogen and 10% helium, by number (thiscorresponds toX≃0.7 andY≃0.3).5If we assume complete ionization, then themeanmolecular weight is given byµ≃0.6. Also, according to Eq. ( 6), theinitial velocity dispersion of the particles in the gas was approximatelyσ=160 km s−1.Then, substituting into Eq. ( 7), the virial temperature of the gas at the time of collapsewas roughlyTvirial≃6×105K.(At this temperature our assumption that the gas was completely ionized is certainly valid.)5Note that we are assuming here thatallof the mass is in the form of baryonic matter. This means that we areneglecting the inﬂuence of dark matter in this example.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1126>>>

The number density of particles in the gas is given byn=ρµmH=3M4πR3µmH∼5×104m−3.This value should be compared to the typical number densities found in Galactic molecularclouds today, which are on the order ofn∼108to 109m−3.Now, from Fig. 19,/Lambda1∼10−36Wm3and the cooling time for the cloud (Eq. 8)is found to betcool=8 Myr.Clearly, in this casetcool≪tff. Apparently the proto-Galactic nebula was capable ofradiating energy away at a rate sufﬁcient to allow for a free-fall collapse.It is instructive to consider the situation wheretcool>tff. In this case the nebula is unableto efﬁciently radiate away the gravitational potential energy that is released by the collapse.As a result, the cloud’s temperature would rise adiabatically as the cloud shrinks, resultingin an increasing internal pressure and a halt to the collapse. After the collapse has halted,the virial theorem governs the equilibrium conditions of the cloud. For the approximatevalues ofT∼106K andn∼5×104m−3characteristic of a protogalactic cloud at thetime of formation of the ﬁrst galaxies, the upper limit on the mass that can cool and collapseis on the order of 1012M⊙, with a corresponding radius of about 60 kpc. In regions of thecloud where the gas temperature had decreased to the level of hydrogen recombination,T∼104K, the mass limit becomes∼108M⊙. Thus the galaxies that are observed todaywould be expected to have masses in the range from 108M⊙to 1012M⊙. The lower limitcorresponds fairly well with the values of the smallest dwarf elliptical galaxies, and the upperlimit agrees with the values measured for the most massive giant spiral galaxies (Sa–Sc).Although some giant ellipticals and cD galaxies exceed 1012M⊙, they have certainly beenaffected signiﬁcantly by mergers throughout their histories and are not in virial equilibriumnear their outer edges.Although the proto-Galactic cloud was able to radiate away the initial release of grav-itational energy content from the system, shortly after the collapse began a new source ofenergy became available. The deaths of the ﬁrst generations of very massive stars meantthat supernova shock waves moved through the ISM at speeds on the order of 0.1c.A sthe expanding shells struck the gas, the gas was reheated to temperatures of a few millionkelvins, slowing the rate of collapse somewhat. However, calculations of the supernovaproduction rate that are based on estimates of the IMF seem to indicate that even this newsource of energy was unable to slow the collapse appreciably.The Hierarchical Merger ModelHow then can we explain the apparent age and metallicity differences among the globularclusters, as well as the existence of distinct components of varying ages within the disk ofour Galaxy (i.e., the thick disk and the younger thin disk)? The answer appears to be thatnot only did galaxy-building involve the top-down process originally envisioned by Eggen,Lynden-Bell, and Sandage, but it also incorporated abottom-uphierarchical process ofmergers.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1127>>>

With the realization in the 1970s and 1980s that mergers play an important role in galacticevolution, and because of observational and theoretical developments regarding the natureof the early universe, the hierarchical merger scenario has received a great deal of attention.Scientists now believe that shortly after the birth of the universe via the Big Bang, densityﬂuctuations existed in the overall distribution of matter.Our current understanding of thoseﬂuctuationssuggests that the most common density perturbations occurred on the smallestmass scales. Consequently, density ﬂuctuations involving 106to 108M⊙were much morecommon than those for 1012M⊙or more.First consider the formation of the Milky Way as an example of the hierarchical mergerprocess. As these 106to 108M⊙proto-Galactic fragments were gravitationally attractedto one another, they began to merge into a growing spheroidal mass distribution. Initially,many of the fragments evolved in virtual isolation, forming stars and, in some cases, globularclusters in their centers. As a result, they developed their own chemical histories and uniqueabundance signatures. In the inner regions of the growing spheroid, where the density ofmatter was greater, its rate of collapse and subsequent evolution would have been morerapid. This resulted in the production of the oldest stars that are observed today, togetherwith a greater degree of chemical enrichment (hence the old, metal-rich central bulge). Inthe rareﬁed outer regions of the Galaxy, chemical evolution and star formation would havebeen much slower.According to the hierarchical model, collisions and tidal interactions between mergingfragments disrupted the majority of the fragments and left exposed the globular cluster coresof others. Furthermore, in this model the disrupted systems would have led to the presentdistribution of the ﬁeld halo stars, while leaving the remaining globular clusters scatteredthroughout the spheroid. Those proto-Galactic fragments that were initially moving in aretrograde direction relative to the eventual orbital motion of the Galactic disk and innerhalo produced the net zero rotation of the outer halo that is observed today.Certainly the rate of collisions would have been greater near the center of the Galaxy,disrupting those proto-Galactic fragments ﬁrst and building the bulge more rapidly than thehalo. Consequently, according to this picture, the spheroidal component of the Galaxy canbe considered as forming from the inside out.The globular clusters still present in the Galaxy today probably total only some 10% of thenumber that originally formed from proto-Galactic fragments. The other 90% were disruptedby collisions and tidal interactions during the early merger process and by the subsequentongoing effects of dynamical friction. This may help to explain the relative uniformity inthe masses of globular clusters observed today (approximately 105to 106M⊙). Low-massglobular clusters would have had small gravitational binding energies, allowing them tobe disrupted comparatively easily and rapidly when the Galaxy was young. On the otherhand, recall from Eq. ( 1) that dynamical friction is strongly dependent on the mass ofthe cluster (fd∝M2) so that massive clusters would have spiraled rapidly into the innerregions of the Galaxy where stronger and more frequent interactions ultimately disruptedthem as well.It is important to note that because of their isolation in the outer reaches of the Galaxy andthe slower rate of evolution there, the proto-Galactic fragments in that region would haveevolved almost like individual dwarf galaxies for a time. In fact, the signiﬁcant number ofdSph galaxies still present in the Local Group are assumed to be surviving proto-GalacticGalactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1128>>>

fragments. In addition, there is clear evidence of ongoing mergers today, such as the dwarfspheroidal Sagittarius galaxy and the Magellanic Stream, indicating that the constructionof the Milky Way’s halo is still a work in progress.Formation of the Thick DiskAs the gas clouds of disrupted proto-Galactic fragments collided, the collapse becamelargely dissipative. This means that the gas began to settle slowly toward the central regionsof the Galaxy. However, because of the presence of some initial angular momentum inthe system, introduced through torques from other neighboring protogalactic clouds, thecollapsing material eventually became rotationally supported and settled into a disk aboutthe Galactic center. Of course, the already-formed halo stars did not participate in thecollapse to the disk, because their collisional cross sections were now too small to allowthem to interact appreciably, except through gravitational forces.One model of thick-disk formation suggests that the thick disk may have formed aroundthe Galactic midplane with a characteristic temperature ofT∼106K. By equating thekinetic energy of a typical particle in the gas to its gravitational potential energy above themidplane of the disk, the approximate scale height,h, of the disk of gas can be estimated.To determine the local acceleration of gravity,g, at a height,h, above the midplane,imagine that the disk has a mass density,ρ, given byρ(h)=ρ0e−z/h,whereρ0is the mass density in the Galactic midplane.Now, according to thegravitationalversion of “Gauss’s law”,/contintegraldisplayg·dA=−4πGMin,where the integral is over a closed surface that bounds the massMin, andgis the localacceleration of gravity at the position ofdA.I fhis much smaller than the diameter of thedisk, then for a Gaussian cylinder of height 2hand cross-sectional areaA, centered on themidplane (see Fig. 20),2Ag=4πGMin,whereMinis the amount of disk mass contained within the cylinder.Mincan be estimatedby integrating the mass density throughout the volume of the cylinder, orMin=2/integraldisplayh0ρ0e−z/hAdz=1.26ρ0Ah.Substituting into our previous expression, we have that the local acceleration of gravity ata height,h, is given byg(h)=2.53πG ρ0h.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1129>>>

Ahz = 0Galactic midplaneFieldof stars/H9267 = /H92670e-z/hhFIGURE 20A Gaussian cylinder located entirely within the ﬁeld of stars of the Galactic disk.Next, the gravitational potential energy of a particle of mass,m, at a height,h, above themidplane is given byU(h)=/integraldisplayh0mg(z) dz=1.26πGmρ0h2.Equating the potential energy to the average thermal kinetic energy of a particle,K=3kT/2, we ﬁnd thath(T )=/parenleftbigg3kT2.53πGmρ0/parenrightbigg1/2.(9)Example 2.3.If the gas in the proto-Galactic thick disk had a characteristic temperatureofT∼106K, and if we assume that the central mass density was comparable to the valuethat is estimated today for the solar neighborhood,ρ0≃0.15 M⊙pc−3=1.0×10−20kg m−3,thenh/parenleftbig106K/parenrightbig≃2.2 kpc,where we have used the mass of a hydrogen atom form. he measuredvalue for the scaleheight of the thick disk is approximately 1 kpc.In regions where the gas was locally more dense, it cooled more rapidly, sincetcool∝n−1(see Eq. 8). This was accomplished ﬁrst through thermal bremsstrahlung and Comptonscattering, and then, when the temperature reached∼104K, via the radiation emittedGalactic Evolution
T


<<<PAGE 1130>>>

by hydrogen atoms. This meant that once the hydrogen recombination temperature wasreached, H I clouds could form and begin producing stars. Within a few million years,the most massive stars underwent core-collapse supernova detonations and their shocksbegan to reheat the gas between the molecular clouds, maintaining the temperature of theintercloud gas at roughly 106K. At the same time, the production of iron in the supernovaeraised the metallicity from an initial value of[Fe/H]<−5.4 (perhaps originally enrichedsomewhat by the stars that formed in the proto-Galactic fragments) to[Fe/H]=−0.5.About 400 million years after the ﬁrst stars were created in the thick disk, star formationnearly ceased. In total, a few percent of the mass of the gas was converted into stars duringthis thick-disk-producing period of the Galaxy’s evolution.A modiﬁed version of the thick-disk formation model described above suggests thatthe infalling gas was initially much cooler. This meant that the gas (and dust) was ableto settle onto the midplane with a much smaller scale height, similar to today’s thin disk.Star formation was then able to proceed due to the greater local density of gas and dust.However, as a direct result of a signiﬁcant merger event with a proto-Galactic fragmentsome 10 Gyr ago, the disk was reheated by the energy of the interaction, causing it to puffup to its present 1-kpc scale height.Formation of the Thin DiskAfter the formation of the thick disk, cool molecular gas continued to settle onto the midplanewith a scale height of approximately 600 pc. During the next several billion years, starformation occurred in the thin disk.The process of maintaining the scale height was essentially a self-regulating one. If thedisk became thinner, its mass density would increase. This in turn would cause the SFR toincrease, producing more supernovae and reheating the disk’s intercloud gas component.The ensuing expansion of the disk would again decrease the SFR, yielding fewer super-novae, and the disk would cool and shrink. However, despite the self-regulating process,as the gas was depleted in the ISM the SFR decreased from about 0.04 M⊙pc−3Myr−1to 0.004 M⊙pc−3Myr−1. At the same time, the metallicity continued to rise, reaching avalue of approximately[Fe/H]=0.3. Because of the decrease in the SFR, the thicknessof the disk decreased to about 350 pc, the scale height of today’s thin disk. During thedevelopment of the thin disk, some 80% of the available gas was consumed in the form ofstars.Finally, as the remaining gas continued to cool, it settled into an inner, metal-rich andgas-rich component of the thin disk with a scale height of less than 100 pc. Today mostongoing star formation occurs in this young, inner portion of the thin disk, the componentin which the Sun resides.The Existence of Young Stars in the Central BulgeThe existence of young stars in the central bulge of our Galaxy can be understood in thecontext of the evolution just described by arguing for recent mergers with gas-rich satellitegalaxies. When those galaxies were disrupted by tidal interactions with the Milky Way,their gas settled into the disk and the center of the Galaxy, ultimately forming new stars. Italso appears that the Milky Way’s central bar plays a role in the migration of dust and gasinto the inner portion of the Galaxy by generating dynamical instabilities as it rotates.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1131>>>

Metallicity GradientsThe hierarchical merger scenario just outlined predicts that metallicity gradients ought toexist in galaxies that have undergone a dissipative collapse. If a galaxy is more metal-richin its center than it is near the outskirts of the system, then a color gradient should alsoexist. Because of the enhancement of opacity with metallicity,the galaxywould be redderin its center than it is farther out.Of course, the strength of the metallicity and color gradients can be diminished or evendestroyed by sufﬁciently frequent and energetic mergers with other galaxies. For instance,many starburst galaxies actually have inverted color gradients and appear bluer in theircenters. This is because of the large SFR that resulted from the sudden inﬂux of gas-richmaterial in the galactic center when another galaxy was disrupted, or from the effects oftidal torques that acted on the starburst galaxy itself, causing its own gas to spiral into thecenter. It is worth noting that weaker metallicity gradients are observed in boxy ellipticalsthan in disky ones, another possible indication that boxy E’s have undergone signiﬁcantmerger activity during their lifetimes.The Formation of Elliptical GalaxiesAlthough we do not yet understand all of the complex details of galactic evolution, the natureof the Hubble sequence may ultimately correspond to the mass of the individual galaxies,the efﬁciency with which the galaxies made stars, and the relative importance of free-fallcollapse, dissipative collapse, and mergers. As an example, it appears that many ellipticalsmay have formed the majority of their stars early in the galaxy-building process, before thegas had a chance to settle into a disk, whereas late-type galaxies took a more leisurely pace.You may also recall that current observations indicate that later Hubble types have a higherrelative abundance of gas and dust in their disks than galaxies of earlier Hubble typeHowever, as ﬁrst mentioned at the end of Section 1, other E’s probably formed fromthe collisions of already-existing spirals. The energy involved in the collision would destroythe disks of both galaxies and cause the merged system to relax to the characteristicr1/4distribution of an elliptical.AlthoughN-body simulations have been able to produce such a result (see Fig. 21),some questions remain. For instance, the large number of globular clusters in E’s relative tospirals present a serious difﬁculty in arguing that cataclysmic collisions are the cause of allthat many of the observed globular clusters are captured dwarf spheroidal galaxies, just asωCen appears to be in the Milky Way.From the discussion at the beginning of Section 1, recall that elliptical galaxies aremuch more abundant relative to spirals in the centers of dense, rich clusters of galaxies,whereas spirals dominate in less dense clusters and near the periphery of rich clusters. (Thismorphology–density relationwas ﬁrst reported by Alan Dressler in 1980.) This effect maybe partly explained by the increased likelihood of interactions in regions where galaxiesare more tightly packed, destroying spirals and forming ellipticals.Galactic Evolution
.
large elliptical galaxies. On the other hand, perhaps mergers can actually produce globular clusters by triggering star formation in clouds, in which case the larg-er speciﬁc frequency of globular clusters may not be a problem. It is also possible


<<<PAGE 1132>>>

012.024.0
36.048.060.0
72.084.096.0
108.0120.0132.0
FIGURE 21AnN-body simulation of the merger of two spiral galaxies. Each disk is representedby 16,384 particles, and each bulge contains 4096 particles. The result is an elliptical galaxy with anr1/4proﬁle. (Figure adapted from Hernquist,Ap. J.,409, 548, 1993.)However, a competing hypothesis has also been suggested—namely, that ellipticals tendto develop preferentially near the bottoms of deep gravitational potential wells, even in theabsence of interactions. Lower mass-density ﬂuctuations in the early universe may have re-sulted in spiral galaxies, and the smallest ﬂuctuations led to the formation of dwarf systems.If this is the case, then the large number of dSph’s and dE’s that exist has a natural expla-nation in the much larger number of smaller ﬂuctuations that formed in the early universe.This mechanism could help explain galactic morphology if the initial density ﬂuctuationsin the early universe were largest in what later became the centers of rich clusters. Becausethe gravitational potential well in those regions would have been deeper, the probability ofcollisions between protogalactic clouds should have been correspondingly greater as well.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1133>>>

Perhaps the frequency of collisions between protogalactic clouds is correlated with galaxymorphology.Galaxy Formation in the Early UniverseGiven the large number of fundamental problems that still remain in our development of acoherent theory of galaxy formation, it is fortunate that a means exists (at least in principle)for testing our ideas by observing galactic evolution through time. Because of the ﬁnitespeed of light, when astronomers look farther and farther out into space, we are literallylooking farther and farther back in time. For instance, galaxies that are 1 Mpc away emittedtheir light more than 3 million years ago. This means that the light we observe today comingfrom the galaxy is itself more than 3 million years old; we are “seeing” the galaxy 3 millionyears in the past.In 1978, Harvey Butcher and Augustus Oemler, Jr., noted that there appeared to be anoverabundance of blue galaxies in two distant clusters. They speculated that there may havebeen a signiﬁcant evolution in galaxies over time, leading to the types of objects we seecloser to us today. TheButcher–Oemler effect, as it is now called, suggests that galaxies inthe early universe were bluer on average than they are today, indicating an increased levelof star formation. The effect has been conﬁrmed in numerous recent studies.The morphology–density relation has also been shown to be time-dependent. As obser-vations probe earlier times (more distant galaxy clusters), elliptical, and lenticular galaxiesbecome less abundant relative to spiral galaxies, suggesting an evolution from later Hub-ble types to earlier types over time. This is just what would be expected if some earlierHubble-type galaxies form from the mergers of spirals. This is also consistent with theoverall picture of hierarchical galaxy building.In 2004, the Space Telescope Science Institute released the Hubble Ultra Deep Field(HUDF) image shown in Fig. 22. The HUDF image is actually a composite of twoimages, one taken by the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) and the other from theNear-Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS). The region of the skycontained in the HUDF image is only 3 arcmin on a side (about 1/10 the size of the fullmoon), centered on (α=3h32m40.0s,δ=−27◦48′00′′) in the constellation of Fornax. Theimage required a total exposure time of 11.3 days for ACS (obtained between September24, 2003, and January 16, 2004) and 4.5 days for NICMOS (over the period betweenSeptember 3, 2003, and November 27, 2003).The HUDF reveals some very distant galaxies as they existed just 400 Myr to 800 Myrafter the Big Bang.As is evident in the close-up of a portion of the HUDF shown in Fig. 23,the very distant galaxies appear quite different from the relatively nearby majestic spiralsand ellipticals that are seen in the present-day universe.Observations like these suggest that the abundance of strange-looking, remote, bluegalaxies seen in the early universe may be the building blocks of today’s Hubble sequenceof galaxies. They probably represent the proto-galactic fragments responsible for the hier-archical mergers that are still occuring today at a much diminished rate.Certainly a great dealGalactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1134>>>

FIGURE 22The Hubble Ultra Deep Field (HUDF), obtained by combining images from ACSand NICMOS onboard the HST. This HUDF image contains an estimated 10,000 galaxies coveringa region 3 arcmin square (about 1/10 the size of the full moon) in the constellation Fornax. Some ofthe galaxies in the HUDF are so far away that we are seeing them less than 1 Gyr after the Big Bang.[Courtesy of NASA, ESA, S. Beckwith (STScI) and the HUDF Team.]
FIGURE 23A close-up of a portion of the HUDF image shown in Fig. 22. Many of thegalaxies in this image are extremely distant—and therefore extremely young. [Courtesy of NASA,ESA, S. Beckwith (STScI) and the HUDF Team.]Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1135>>>

of work remains to be done before we can hope to fully understand the complex historiesof galaxies, but it appears that many of the basic ingredients of an evolution theory may bein place.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralBarnes, Joshua, Hernquist, Lars, and Schweizer, Francois, “Colliding Galaxies,”ScientiﬁcAmerican, August 1991.Bothun, Gregory D., “Beyond the Hubble Sequence,”Sky and Telescope, May, 2000.Chiappini, Cristina, “Tracing the Milky Way’s History,”Sky and Telescope, October, 2004.Dressler, Alan, “Observing Galaxies through Time,”Sky and Telescope, August 1991.Keel, William C., “Crashing Galaxies, Cosmic Fireworks,”Sky and Telescope, January,1989.Miller, M. Coleman, Reynolds, Christopher S., and Krishnamurthi, Anita, “SupermassiveBlack Holes: Shaping Their Surroundings,”Sky and Telescope, April, 2005.Schroeder, Michael C., and Comins, Neil F., “Galactic Collisions on Your Computer,”Astronomy, December, 1988.Silk, Joseph,The Big Bang, Third Edition, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 2001.Space Telescope Science Institute,http://www.stsci.edu.Toomre, Alar, and Toomre, Juri, “Violent Tides between Galaxies,”Scientiﬁc American,December, 1973.van den Bergh, Sidney, and Hesser, James E., “How the Milky Way Formed,”ScientiﬁcAmerican, January, 1993.TechnicalArp, H. C., “Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies,”The Astrophysical Journal Supplement,14,1 ,1966.Barnes, Joshua E., and Hernquist, Lars, “Computer Models of Colliding Galaxies,”PhysicsToday, March, 1993.Bender, Ralf, et al., “HST STIS Spectroscopy of the Triple Nucleus of M31: Two NestedDisks in Keplerian Rotation around a Supermassive Black Hole,”The AstrophysicalJournal,631, 280, 2005.Bertin, Giuseppe,Dynamics of Galaxies, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.Binney, James, “Warps,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,30, 51, 1992.Binney, James, and Merriﬁeld, Michael,Galactic Astronomy, Princeton University Press,Princeton, NJ, 1998.Binney, James, and Tremaine, Scott,Galactic Dynamics, Princeton University Press, Prince-ton, NJ, 1987.Burkert, A., Truran, J. W., and Hensler, G., “The Collapse of Our Galaxy and the Formationof the Galactic Disk,”The Astrophysical Journal,391, 651, 1992.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1136>>>

Butcher, Harvey, and Oemler, Augustus Jr., “The Evolution of Galaxies in Clusters. I. ISITPhotometry of Cl 0024+1654 and 3C 295,”The Astrophysical Journal,219, 18, 1978.Chabrier, Gilles, “Galactic Stellar and Substellar Initial Mass Function,”Publications ofthe Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc,115, 763, 2003.Dressler, Alan, “Galaxy Morphology in Rich Clusters: Implications for the Formation andEvolution of Galaxies,”The Astrophysical Journal,236, 351, 1980.Eggen, O. J., Lynden-Bell, D., and Sandage, A. R., “Evidence from the Motions of OldStars That the Galaxy Collapsed,”The Astrophysical Journal,136, 748, 1962.Elmegreen, Bruce G., and Scalo, John, “The Effects of Star Formation History on the InferredStellar Initial Mass Function,”The Astrophysical Journal,636, 149, 2006.Elmegreen, Debra Meloy,Galaxies and Galactic Structure, Prentice-Hall, Upper SaddleRiver, NJ, 1998.Kormendy, John, and Kennicutt, Robert C., Jr., “Secular Evolution and the Formation ofPseudobulges in Disk Galaxies,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,42,603, 2004.Larson, Richard B., “Galaxy Building,”Publications of the Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc,102, 709, 1990.Mo, H. J., Mao, Shude, and White, Simon D. M., “The Formation of Galactic Discs,”TheMonthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,295, 319, 1998.Silk, Joseph, “Formation and Evolution of Disk Galaxies,”Astrophysics and Space Science,284, 663, 2003.Spinrad, Hyron,Galaxy Formation and Evolution, Praxis Publishing Ltd., Chichester, 2005.Toomre, Alar, and Toomre, Juri, “Galactic Bridges and Tails,”The Astrophysical Journal,178, 623, 1972.Galactic Evolution


<<<PAGE 1137>>>



<<<PAGE 1138>>>

1 (a)4HEMASSDENSITYOFSTARSINTHENEIGHBORHOODOFTHE3UNISAPPROXIMATELY.-⊙PC−!SSUMINGTHATTHEMASSDENSITYISCONSTANTANDTHATALLOFTHESTARSAREMAINSEQUENCE-STARSESTIMATETHEFRACTIONOFTHE'ALACTICDISKSVOLUMETHATISOCCUPIEDBY STARS(b)3UPPOSE THAT AN INTRUDER STAR A MAINSEQUENCE - STAR	 TRAVELS PERPENDICULARLY THROUGHTHE 'ALACTIC DISK 7HAT ARE THE ODDS OF THE INTRUDER COLLIDING WITH ANOTHER STAR DURING ITSPASSAGE THROUGH THE DISK4AKE THE THICKNESS OF THE DISK TO BE APPROXIMATELY  KPC27RITE A GENERAL EXPRESSION FOR THE FORCE OF DYNAMICAL FRICTION ASfd≃C (GM)a(vM)bρc,WHERECISDIMENSIONLESSANDabANDcARECONSTANTS3ETUPASYSTEMOFTHREELINEAREQUATIONSFORab ANDcSUCH THATfdHAS UNITS OF FORCE 3OLVE THE SYSTEM AND SHOW THAT %Q  	 ISOBTAINED3Galactic Evolution
CLUSTERS COULD HAVE SPIRALED INTO THE NUCLEUS DUE TO DYNAMICAL FRICTION 5SE ×-⊙FORTHE CLUSTERS MASS #OMPARE YOUR ANSWER WITH THE SIZE OF THE -ILKY7AYS CENTRAL BULGE4 (a)4HE ,ARGE -AGELLANIC #LOUD WHICH HAS A MASS OF ABOUT ×-⊙ ORBITS THE -ILKY7AY AT A DISTANCE OF  KPC !SSUMING THAT THE -ILKY 7AYS DARKMATTER HALO AND mATROTATIONCURVEEXTENDOUTTOTHE,-#ESTIMATEHOWMUCHTIMEITWILLTAKEFORTHE,-#TOSPIRAL INTO THE -ILKY7AY TAKEC=	 .OTE THAT THE 3MALL -AGELLANIC #LOUD MAY BEGRAVITATIONALLYBOUNDTOTHE,-#BUTITSMASSISANORDEROFMAGNITUDESMALLERTHEREFORETHE 3-# WILL BE NEGLECTED IN THIS PROBLEM	(b)#OMPARE THIS ROUGH ESTIMATE WITH THE VALUE QUOTED IN THE TEXT FOR THE MERGER TIME OFTHE ,-# WHICH WAS BASED ON A DETAILED COMPUTER SIMULATION OF THE ,-#S DYNAMICALINTERACTION WITH OUR 'ALAXY	55SE THE BELOW EQUATIONANDTHEINFORMATIONIN0ROBLEMTOESTIMATETHETIDALRADIUSOFTHEHALO TO BE .×-⊙(OW DOES YOUR ANSWER COMPARE WITH THE SIZE OFTHE ,-#WHICHHASANANGULARDIAMETEROF′ℓ=a⎡bracketleftbigg.+.LOG⎡parenleftbiggMM⎡parenrightbigg⎡bracketrightbigg.64HE 3MALL -AGELLANIC #LOUD IS  KPC AWAY AND HAS ONETENTH THE MASS OF THE ,-# SEE0ROBLEM 	4HE3-#HASANANGULARDIAMETEROF′ANDITSANGULARSEPARATIONFROMTHE,-# IS ◦(a)7HAT IS THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE ,-# AND THE 3-#(b))GNORINGTHEINmUENCEOFTHE-ILKY7AYESTIMATETHEPRESENTTIDALRADIIOFBOTHTHE,-#AND THE 3-# DUE TO THE OTHERFrom Chapter 26 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.PROBLEM SET
fd≃CG2M2ρv2M,(1)
,ARGE -AGELLANIC#LOUDASITORBITSTHE-ILKY7AY4AKETHEMASSOFTHE-ILKY7AYSDARKMATTERUse the age of the Milky Way’s oldest globular clusters and the orbital veloc-ity of the local standard of rest to estimate the greatest distance from which globular


<<<PAGE 1139>>>

74HE GASEOUS RING ORBITING THE CENTRAL GALAXIES OF THE - GROUP HAS AN ORBITAL PERIOD OF.×YEARS(a)7HAT IS THE COMBINED MASS IN -⊙	 OF THE TWO GALAXIES(b)4HE COMBINED VISUAL LUMINOSITY OF THE CENTRAL GALAXIES - AND .'#  ISLV=.×,⊙FROM3CHNEIDERAp. J.343	7HATISTHEMASSTOLIGHTRATIOFORTHE PAIR83UPPOSETHATTHEORIGINALDENSITYDISTRIBUTIONOFTHEPROTO'ALACTICNEBULAENVISIONEDBY%GGEN,YNDEN"ELL AND 3ANDAGE HAD A RADIAL FUNCTIONAL DEPENDENCE SIMILAR TO THE DARKMATTER HALO"EGINNING DIRECTLY WITH THE RADIAL EQUATION OFMOTIONdrdt=−GMrr,SHOW THAT THE FREEFALL TIME WOULD BE PROPORTIONAL TO RADIUSHints:-ULTIPLY BOTH SIDES OF THE EQUATION BYv=dr/dtAND USE THE RELATIONv/parenleftbiggdvdt/parenrightbigg=dvdt.
9OU MAY ALSO lND THE FOLLOWING DElNITE INTEGRAL HELPFUL/integraldisplaydu/radicalBigLN/parenleftbigu/parenrightbig=√π.9 (a)!SSUME AN INITIAL MASS FUNCTION OF THE FORM GIVEN IN %Q  	 )Fx=. CALCULATE THERATIOOFTHENUMBEROFSTARSTHATAREFORMEDINTHEMASSRANGEBETWEEN-⊙AND-⊙TOTHOSE FORMED WITH MASSES BETWEEN  -⊙AND  -⊙(b)"EGINNINGWITHTHEINITIALMASSFUNCTIONANDUSINGTHEMASSnLUMINOSITYRELATIONFORMAINSEQUENCESTARSDERIVEANEXPRESSIONFORTHENUMBEROFMAINSEQUENCESTARSFORMEDPERUNITLUMINOSITYINTERVALdN/dL(c))Fx=. ANDα= CALCULATE THE RATIO OF THE NUMBER OF STARS THAT ARE FORMED WITHMAINSEQUENCE LUMINOSITIES BETWEEN  ,⊙AND  ,⊙TO THE NUMBER OF THOSE FORMED WITHLUMINOSITIES BETWEEN  ,⊙AND  ,⊙(d)#OMPAREYOURANSWERSINPARTSA	ANDC	ANDEXPLAINTHERESULTSINTERMSOFTHEPHYSICALCHARACTERISTICS OF STARS ALONG THE MAIN SEQUENCE105SE THE VALUE FOR THE STAR FORMATION RATE GIVEN BELOWTO ESTIMATE THE NUMBER OF STARSCURRENTLYBEINGFORMEDPERYEARINTHE-ILKY7AY'ALAXY#OMPAREYOURANSWERTOTHEVALUEQUOTEDINTHETEXT#LEARLYDESCRIBETHEASSUMPTIONSIFANY	THATYOUMADEINARRIVINGATYOURESTIMATEξ(M)=dNdM=CM−(+x)
.±.-⊙PC−'YR−(c)4HE -AGELLANIC #LOUDS ARE IN ECCENTRIC ORBITS AROUND ONE ANOTHER AND DURING THE LASTFEW HUNDRED MILLION YEARS THEY HAVE BEEN MOVING APART WITH AN AVERAGE SPEED OF ABOUT KM S− (OW RECENTLY DID THE ,-# EXTEND BEYOND ITS TIDAL RADIUS (OW RECENTLYDID THE 3-# EXTEND BEYOND ITS TIDAL RADIUS !SSUMING THAT THE -AGELLANIC 3TREAM WASFORMEDBYTIDALSTRIPPINGWHENTHE,-#AND3-#WERECLOSETOEACHOTHERWHENWOULDYOU ESTIMATE THAT THE -AGELLANIC 3TREAM WAS FORMED Note:&OLLOWING THIS MUTUAL TIDALSTRIPPING THE GAS WAS PULLED FROM THE ,-#3-# SYSTEM BY OUR 'ALAXY	Galactic Evolution: Problem Set
LL⊙=/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbiggα()5


<<<PAGE 1140>>>

12 (a)"YEQUATINGTHECOOLINGTIMESCALETOTHEFREEFALLTIMESCALESHOWTHATTHEMAXIMUMMASSOF A PROTOGALACTIC NEBULA IS GIVEN BYM=/Lambda1GµmHR.(b)%STIMATETHEMAXIMUMMASSOFAPROTOGALACTICNEBULATHATCANUNDERGOAFREEFALLCOLLAPSEIFR= KPC!SSUME THAT/Lambda1≃−7M13 (a)-ISAGIANTELLIPTICALGALAXYNEARTHECENTEROFTHE6IRGOCLUSTEROFGALAXIES)TISESTIMATEDTHAT ITS MASS IS APPROXIMATELY ×-⊙WITHIN A RADIUS OF  KPC (OW LONG WOULDITTAKEFORASTARNEARTHEOUTEREDGEOFTHEGALAXYTOORBITTHECENTERONCE#OMPAREYOURANSWER TO THE APPROXIMATE AGE OF OUR 'ALAXY(b)"ASED ON YOUR RESULT FROM PART A	 AND ASSUMING THAT - HAS BEEN CAPTURING SMALLERSATELLITEGALAXIESUPUNTILTHEPRESENTTIMEWOULDYOUEXPECTTHEOUTERPORTIONSOF-TOBE IN VIRIAL EQUILIBRIUM7HY OR WHY NOT14 (a)&ROMTHEDATAGIVENIN0ROBLEM CALCULATETHEVELOCITYOFASTARNEARTHEOUTEREDGEOF THE GALAXY THAT MAY BE FOLLOWING A CIRCULAR ORBIT(b)!SSUMINGTHATTHEVELOCITYYOUFOUNDINPARTA	ISCHARACTERISTICOFTHEVELOCITYDISPERSIONOF MATERIAL NEAR THE OUTER EDGE OF THE GALAXY ESTIMATE THE VIRIAL TEMPERATURE OF -(b)!SSUMING THAT THE LEAST MASSIVE GALAXIES COULD HAVE FORMED OUT OF A GAS WITH AN INITIALTEMPERATURENEARTHEIONIZATIONTEMPERATUREOFHYDROGENESTIMATETHELOWERMASSCUTOFF(c)"YUSINGTHE*EANSLENGTHEQUATION BELOW	ESTIMATETHERADIUSOFTHELARGESTGALAXIESTHATAREIN VIRIAL EQUILIBRIUM AND COMPARE YOUR ANSWER TO THE APPROXIMATE SIZE OF OUR 'ALAXYRJ≃/parenleftbiggkTπGµmHρ/parenrightbigg/
(c)7HAT IS THE CHARACTERISTIC COOLING TIME FOR - 5SE/Lambda1≃−7M(d))F THE MASS IN THE OUTER PORTIONS OF - WERE TO UNDERGO A RADIAL FREEFALL COLLAPSEESTIMATE THE FREEFALL TIMESCALE FOR SUCH A COLLAPSE AND COMPARE YOUR ANSWER WITH THECOOLING TIMESCALE15%STIMATETHESCALEHEIGHTASSOCIATEDWITHA'ALACTICDISKHAVINGATEMPERATUREOF+7ITHWHICH COMPONENT OF OUR 'ALAXY MIGHT SUCH A DISK CORRESPOND TODAY16)THASBEENPOINTEDOUTMANYTIMESTHATGIVENTHECURRENTRATEOFSTARFORMATIONTHEDISKOFOUR'ALAXYWILLBEDEPLETEDOFINTERSTELLARGASINTHERELATIVELYNEARFUTURE&ROMTHEDATAGIVENIN THE BELOW TABLE AND3ECTION OF  'ALACTIC %VOLUTIONS ESTIMATEHOWMUCHLONGERTHE-ILKY7AYNEWSTARSWITHOUTANAPPRECIABLEINFALLOFNEWMATERIAL(OWMIGHTTHEPERIODOFSTARFORMATIONBE PROLONGED“”CANEFFECTIVELYCREATEMJ≃/parenleftbiggkTGµmH/parenrightbigg//parenleftbiggπρ/parenrightbigg/Galactic Evolution: Problem Set11 (a)5SINGTHE*EANSMASSEQUATION BELOW	ESTIMATETHEUPPERMASSLIMITOFGALAXIESTHATAREIN VIRIAL EQUILIBRIUM 5SE THE VIRIAL TEMPERATURE AND THE NUMBER DENSITY DETERMINED IN%XAMPLE  IN  'ALACTIC %VOLUTION“”


<<<PAGE 1141>>>

TABLEApproximate Values for Various Parameters Associated with the Components of theMilky Way Galaxy. Deﬁnitions and details are discussed in the text.DisksNeutral ThinThickGasDiskDiskM(1010M⊙)0.5a60.2 to 0.4LB(1010L⊙)b—1.80.02M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)— 3 —Radius (kpc)252525Forme−z/hze−z/hze−z/hzScale height (kpc)<0.10.351σw(km s−1)51635[Fe/H]>+0.1−0.5 to+0.3−2.2 to−0.5Age (Gyr)/lessorsimilar108c10dSpheroidsCentral Stellar Dark-MatterBulgeeHaloHaloM(1010M⊙)10.3190+360−170fLB(1010L⊙)b0.30.10M/LB(M⊙/L⊙)3∼1—Radius (kpc)4>100>230Formboxy with barr−3.5(r/a)−1(1+r/a)−2Scale height (kpc) 0.1 to 0.5g3170σw(km s−1) 55 to 130h95—[Fe/H]−2 to 0.5<−5.4 to−0.5—Age (Gyr)<0.2 to 10 11 to 13∼13.5aMdust/Mgas≃0.007.bThe total luminosity of the Galaxy isLB,tot=2.3±0.6×1010L⊙,Lbol,tot=3.6×1010L⊙(∼30% in IR).cSome open clusters associated with the thin disk may exceed 10 Gyr.dMajor star formation in the thick disk may have occurred 7–8 Gyr ago.eThe mass of the black hole in Sgr A⋆isMbh=3.7±0.2×106M⊙.fM=5.4+0.2−3.6×1011M⊙within 50 kpc of the center.gBulge scale heights depend on age of stars: 100 pc for young stars, 500 pc for old stars.hDispersions increase from 55 km s−1at 5 pc to 130 km s−1at 200 pc.17 (a)&ROM THE DATA IN ESTIMATE THE ESCAPE SPEED FROM A DWARF ELLIPTICAL GALAXYTHE BELOW TABLETABLECharacteristic Data for Dwarf Elliptical, Dwarf Spheroidal, and Blue CompactDwarf Galaxies.dEdSph BCDMB−13 to−19−8 to−15−14 to−17M(M⊙)107–109107–108∼109Diameter (D25, kpc) 1–10 0.1–0.5<3⟨M/LB⟩(M⊙/L⊙)∼10 5–100 0.1–10⟨SN⟩4.8±1.0— —Galactic Evolution: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1142>>>

COMPUTER PROBLEMS18PROGRAMRINGSOFSTARSEACHANDLETTHEINTRUDERGALAXYHAVEONEFOURTHTHEMASSOFTHETARGETGALAXY 5SE(x, y, z)=(,−,)FOR THE INITIAL POSITION OF THE INTRUDER GALAXY AND USE(vx,vy,vz)=(,.,.)FOR ITS VELOCITY IN THE UNITS USED BY THE PROGRAM	 &OLLOW THEMOTION FOR  MILLION YEARS  TIME STEPS	(a)7HENDOESTHECALCULATEDAPPEARANCEOFTHETARGETANDHOSTGALAXIESRESEMBLE )NDICATE THE SIMULATION TIMES(b)7HAT HAPPENS TO THE SYSTEM NEAR THE END OF THIS TIME PERIOD(c)2ERUNTHEPROGRAMCHANGINGTHEINITIALxCOORDINATEFROMTO−ANDLEAVINGEVERYTHING ELSE THE SAME	 $ESCRIBE THE DIFFERENCE IN THE OUTCOMESTOREPRODUCETHEAPPEARANCEOFTHISSYSTEM5SE4HE BELOW FIGURE SHOWS THE7HIRLPOOLGALAXY -ANDITSCOMPANION .'#  5SE THE(b)#OMPARE YOUR ANSWER IN PART A	 WITH THE SPEED OF THE EJECTA FROM A TYPICAL 4YPE ))SUPERNOVA(c)#OMPARE YOUR ANSWER IN PART A	 WITH THE THERMAL VELOCITIES OF HYDROGEN IONS IN A GASHAVING A TEMPERATURE OF +(d)(OWMIGHTYOUEXPLAINTHEEVOLUTIONOFANCIENTGASPOORSYSTEMSSUCHASD%SANDD3PHSGalaxyTHE FIGURE
FIGUREThe Whirlpool galaxy, M51 (NGC 5194), is an Sbc(s)I–II grand-design spirallocated in the constellation Canes Venatici (the Hunting Dogs of Boötes, just below Ursa Major).Also visible is its companion NGC 5195, situated near the end of one of the spiral arms. (Image fromSandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington,D.C., 1994.)Galactic Evolution: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1143>>>

HAVE PRODUCED THIS RING GALAXY 5SE  RINGS OF  STARS EACH AND ASSUME THAT THE GALAXIESINVOLVED HAVE EQUAL MASSES(a)4RY AN EXACT HEADON COLLISION lRST ,ET(x, y, z)=(,,)FOR THE INITIAL POSITION OFTHE INTRUDER GALAXY AND LET(vx,vy,vz)=(,,−)FOR ITS VELOCITY IN THE UNITS USED BYTHE PROGRAM	 &OLLOW THE MOTION FOR  MILLION YEARS  TIME STEPS	 AND DESCRIBE WHATHAPPENS #OULD SUCH A PROCESS BE RESPONSIBLE FOR &IG (b)%XPLAIN HOW THE FORCE OF GRAVITY ALWAYS ACTING INWARD COULD HAVE CAUSED THE RINGS OFSTARS TOexpand(c))NVESTIGATE WHAT HAPPENS IF THE INITIAL VALUE OF THExCOORDINATE VARIES BETWEEN  AND WITHEVERYTHINGELSEUNCHANGED	7HICHVALUESROUGHLY	DOTHEBESTJOBOFREPRODUCINGTHE APPEARANCE OF A RING GALAXY WITH THE LEAST DISRUPTION OF THE TARGET GALAXY19WAS USED IN 0ROBLEM  TO REPRODUCE SOME THE FEATURES OF THE 7HIRLPOOL GALAXYSHOWNINTHE ABOVE FIGURE2UNTHEPROGRAMAGAINUSINGTHESAMEVALUESOFTHEMASSINITIALAND INITIAL VELOCITY OF THE INTRUDER GALAXY BUT USE ONLYtwoRINGS WITH  STARS EACH(a)#OMPARETHEINITIALSPEEDOFTHEINTRUDERGALAXYWITHTHEORBITALSPEEDSOFTHENEARBYSTARS$ESCRIBEINWORDS	HOWTHESPIRALPATTERNFORMS&OLLOWTHEMOTIONFORMILLIONYEARS TIME STEPS	(b)2ERUNTHEPROGRAMCHANGINGTHEINITIALxCOORDINATEFROMTO−ANDLEAVINGEVERYTHINGELSETHESAME	$ESCRIBEANDPHYSICALLYEXPLAINTHEDIFFERENCESBETWEENTHISANDTHEBEHAVIOR OF THE STARS IN PART A	20&IGURESHOWSTHE#ARTWHEELGALAXYTHERESULTOFAHIGHSPEEDHEADONCOLLISION5SETHEPROGRAMGalaxyTOINVESTIGATEHOWANEARLYHEADONCOLLISIONMAYGalaxyPOSITION
FIGURE6An HST image of the ring galaxy known as the Cartwheel (A0035−335). Thediameter of the ring is about 46 kpc. As the ring expands at 89 km s−1, it triggers bursts of starformation. It is not clear which of the two galaxies at right may have been the intruder. [Courtesy ofKirk Borne (STScI), and NASA.]Galactic Evolution: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1144>>>

&ROM #HAPTER   OF An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT ©BY 0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVEDThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1145>>>

The Structure of the Universe1The Extragalactic Distance Scale2The Expansion of the Universe3Clusters of Galaxies1THE EXTRAGALACTIC DISTANCE SCALE4HEDRAMAOFTHEHEAVENSUNFOLDSONATWODIMENSIONALSTAGE/BSERVATIONSREADILYSUPPLYTHE TWO COORDINATES RIGHT ASCENSION AND DECLINATION THAT SPECIFY AN OBJECTS POSITION ONTHE CELESTIAL SPHERE (OWEVER THE OBJECTS DISTANCE IS NOT SO EASILY OBTAINED!STRONOMERSTODAY USE MANY METHODS TO ESTIMATE THE DISTANCES OF REMOTE GALAXIES )N THIS SECTION WEWILL INTRODUCE A VARIETY OF TECHNIQUES SOME DEPEND ON THE PROPERTIES OF INDIVIDUAL STARSSOMEUSEOTHEROBJECTSGLOBULARCLUSTERSPLANETARYNEBULAESUPERNOVAE())REGIONS	ANDSOME RELY ON THE STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF WHOLE GALAXIES AND GALAXY CLUSTERS 4HE THIRDDIMENSION OF DISTANCE IS DOUBLY SIGNIlCANT BECAUSEWHEN ASTRONOMERS PEER DEEPERAND DEEPER INTO SPACE THEY ARE LOOKING BACK IN TIME ATINCREASINGLY ANCIENT LIGHT )TISVITALTOUNDERSTANDNOTONLYAGALAXYSPOSITIONINSPACEBUTITS DEPTH IN TIME AS WELLUnveiling the Third Dimension)N  THE METHOD OF TRIGONOMETRIC PARALLAX WAS USED TO MEASURE THEDISTANCETO 6ENUS THEREBY CALIBRATING THE SIZE OF +EPLERS 3OLAR 3YSTEM 7HEN &RIEDRICH7ILHELM "ESSEL MEASURED THE SUBTLE ANNUAL SHIFT IN THE POSITION OF THE STAR  #YGNI INHECOMBINEDTHEPARALLAXMETHODWITHHISKNOWLEDGEOFTHETRUESIZEOF%ARTHSORBITTODISCOVERTHAT#YGNIISTIMESFARTHERAWAYTHANTHE3UN4ODAYTHESURVEYORSMETHOD OF TRIGONOMETRIC PARALLAX CAN REACH OUT TO A KILOPARSEC OR SO7E HAVE ALSOSEEN HOWTHE MOVING CLUSTER METHOD MADE IT POSSIBLE TO DETERMINE THE DISTANCE OFTHE(YADES STAR CLUSTER &ROM THERE THE TECHNIQUE OF MAINSEQUENCE lTTINGCANBE USEDTOlNDTHEDISTANCES TOOPEN CLUSTERS OUT TO ABOUT KPCBY COMPARING THEIRMAINSEQUENCESONAN(n2DIAGRAMWITHTHATOFTHE(YADESCLUSTER4HEREPEATEDAPPLICATION4HE DISTANCES TO THE NEARER PLANETS CAN BE DETERMINED WITHIN A FEW KILOMETERS BY MEASURING THE ROUNDTRIP TIMETAKENBYRADARWAVESSENTFROM%ARTHANDREmECTEDBACKFROMTHEPLANETSSURFACE(OWEVERBECAUSETHESTRENGTHOFTHEREmECTEDWAVEDIMINISHESRAPIDLYAS/r	THISMETHODISLIMITEDTOWITHINABOUTALIGHTHOURORKM


<<<PAGE 1146>>>

OF A VARIETY OF METHODS USING THIS PATTERN OF CALIBRATION AND MEASUREMENT CONSTITUTES THESTEPS OF THEextragalactic distance scale ALSO REFERRED TO AS THEcosmological distanceladderThe Wilson–Bappu Effect3PECTROSCOPIC PARALLAXCAN IN PRINCIPLE PROVIDE RELIABLE DISTANCESTO REMOTE STARSOUT TO ABOUT  -PC AWAY ALTHOUGH IN PRACTICE IT IS EMPLOYED WITHIN A FEWHUNDRED KILOPARSECS FAR ENOUGH TO REACH THE -AGELLANIC #LOUDS 3OME STARS HAVE SPECIlCFEATURES IN THEIR SPECTRA THAT ALLOW THEIR ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDES AND HENCE THEIR DISTANCES TOBE CALCULATED &OR EXAMPLE THE + ABSORPTION LINE OF CALCIUM CAN BE QUITE BROAD REACHINGMAXIMUM STRENGTH AT SPECTRAL TYPE +)NLATETYPESTARSWITHCHROMOSPHERESTYPES' + AND -	 A NARROW EMISSION LINE IS SEEN CENTERED ON THE WIDE + ABSORPTION LINE4HEWIDTHOFTHISEMISSIONLINEISSTRONGLYCORRELATEDWITHASTARSABSOLUTEVISUALMAGNITUDE4HISWilson–Bappu effectDISCOVEREDINBY/LIN#7ILSON*Rn	AND-+6AINU "APPU n	 IS VALID FOR STARS OVER A RANGE OF  MAGNITUDESThe Cepheid Distance Scale&OR MORE DISTANT OBJECTS ASTRONOMERS TURN TO THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION FOR#EPHEIDSDISCOVERED BY (ENRIETTA ,EAVITT "EFORE THIS RELATION COULD BE USED IT HADTO BE CALIBRATED BY lNDING THE DISTANCE TO A CLASSICAL #EPHEID 5NFORTUNATELY THE NEARESTONE0OLARISWASTOOFARAWAY≈PC	FORTRIGONOMETRICPARALLAXTOBEUSEFUL)NHOWEVER %JNAR (ERTZSPRUNG USED THE 3UNS MOTION OFKMS−WITHRESPECTTO THE LOCALSTANDARD OF RESTTO PROVIDE A LONGER BASELINE FOR PARALLAX MEASUREMENTS )TWASTHISTECHNIQUEOFsecular parallaxTHATENABLEDHIMTODETERMINETHEAVERAGEDISTANCETO A CLASSICAL #EPHEID WITH A PERIOD OF  DAYS (ERTZSPRUNG THEN USED THIS INFORMATIONTO CALIBRATE THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION (ARLOW 3HAPLEY SOON CARRIED OUT A SIMILARPROCEDURE 3INCE THEN THE DISTANCES TO MORE #EPHEIDS HAVE BEEN MEASURED BY PARALLAXAND OTHER METHODS AND THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION HAS BECOME WELL ESTABLISHEDSTRONOMERSTODAYUSEAPERIODnLUMINOSITYnCOLORRELATIONSUCHASM⟨V⟩=−.LOGPd−.+.(B−V ),	IN THEVBAND TO ACCOUNT FOR THE lNITE WIDTH OF THE INSTABILITY STRIP ON THE (n2DIAGRAM;YOU SHOULD COMPARE THIS WITH THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION IN THEVBAND=(EREPdISTHEPULSATIONPERIODINUNITSOFDAYSANDB−VISTHECOLORINDEXFORCLASSICAL#EPHEIDSB−V≈. TO !FTER THE STARS ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDE HAS BEEN CALCULATED ITCANBECOMBINEDWITHTHESTARSAPPARENTMAGNITUDETOGIVEITSDISTANCEMODULUS#EPHEID VARIABLE STARS IMMEDIATELY PROVED THEIR VALUE AS STELLAR YARDSTICKS )T WAS IN THAT 3HAPLEY MEASURED THE DISTANCES TO 0OPULATION )) #EPHEIDS IN GLOBULAR CLUSTERSTHEREBYDETERMININGHISESTIMATESOFKPCFORTHEDIAMETEROFTHE'ALAXYANDKPCFORThe Structure of the Universe
!


<<<PAGE 1147>>>

THE DISTANCE OF THE 3UN FROM ITS CENTER4HEN IN  %DWIN (UBBLE DISCOVERED SEVERAL#EPHEIDSINTHE!NDROMEDAGALAXYANDANNOUNCEDTHATITWASKPCAWAY4HEMODERNVALUEISKPC	)TWAS(UBBLESSERIESOFOBSERVATIONSTHATESTABLISHED- AS AN EXTERNALGALAXY NOT A SMALLER NEBULA WITHIN THE BORDERS OF THE -ILKY7AY)T SHOULD BE NOTED THAT THE EXISTENCE OF A CORRELATION BETWEEN THE PERIOD OF A #EPHEIDSOSCILLATIONS AND ITS ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDE MEANT THAT THESE STARS COULD BE USED AS STANDARDCANDLES TO DETERMINE DISTANCES MANY YEARSbeforeTHE PHYSICAL PROCESSES THAT CAUSE THEPULSATIONS WERE UNDERSTOOD4HIS INVOLVES SOME RISK AND IN THIS CASE THERE IS A CAUTIONARYTALEWORTHTELLING!TTHETIMEITWASNOTKNOWNTHATthreeTYPESOFPULSATINGSTARSWEREBEINGUSEDTODETERMINETHESIZEOFTHE'ALAXYANDTHEDISTANCETO-&URTHERMOREALTHOUGHTHEEXISTENCEOFINTERSTELLARDUSTCLOUDSHADBEENESTABLISHEDBY%DWARD"ARNARDn	INTHEEARLYYEARSOFTHETWENTIETHCENTURYTHEEXISTENCEOFDIFFUSEINTERSTELLARDUSTANDGASCAPABLE OF EXTINGUISHING STARLIGHT HAD YET TO BE DEMONSTRATED ,EAVITTS VARIABLES IN THE-AGELLANIC #LOUDS WERE CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS 0OPULATION ) STARS	 WHILE THOSE OBSERVED INTHEGLOBULARCLUSTERSBY3HAPLEYWERE76IRGINISAND22,YRAESTARSBOTH0OPULATION))	4HE76IRGINIS STARS ARE ABOUT  MAGNITUDES FAINTER THAN CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS OF THE SAMEPERIODWHICHCORRESPONDSTOTHEIRBEINGLESSLUMINOUSBYAFACTOROF7HEN(ERTZSPRUNGAND LATER 3HAPLEY CALIBRATED THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION THEY USED NEARBY CLASSICAL#EPHEIDS BUT NEGLECTED THE EFFECT OF EXTINCTION .EITHER REALIZED THAT DUST IN THE 'ALACTICDISK DIMMED THESE STARS BY COINCIDENTALLY	 ABOUT  MAGNITUDES4HUS BY CHANCE THE RESULTING PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION WAS JUST ABOUT RIGHT WHENUSEDWITH76IRGINISSTARS(OWEVERITWOULDGIVEANUNDERLUMINOUSRESULTWITHCLASSICAL#EPHEIDS7HEN%DWIN(UBBLEUSEDTHISCALIBRATIONTOlNDTHEDISTANCESTO-ANDOTHERGALAXIES WHICH WERE OBSERVED OUT OF THE OBSCURING PLANE OF THE 'ALAXY	 THE APPARENTMAGNITUDESOFHIS#EPHEIDSWERECORRECTBUTHISESTIMATESOFTHEABSOLUTEMAGNITUDESWERETOOLARGE#ONSEQUENTLYTHEIRDISTANCEMODULIm−M	ANDTHEDISTANCESTHEMSELVESWEREUNDERESTIMATED 4HE STARS WERE THOUGHT TO BE DIMMER AND CLOSER RATHER THAN BRIGHTER ANDFARTHER AWAY AND SO THEIR PARENT GALAXIES WERE DETERMINED TO BE AT ROUGHLYhalfOF THEIRACTUAL DISTANCES ANDhalfTHEIR ACTUAL SIZES(ARLOW3HAPLEYFAREDNOBETTERWITHHISOBSERVATIONSOFTHEUNKNOWNTOHIM	76IRGINISSTARS IN THE GLOBULAR CLUSTERS !LTHOUGH HE UNWITTINGLY USED THE RIGHT VARIETY OF STAR FORTHE CALIBRATION OF THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION 3HAPLEYS OBSERVATIONS OF 7 6IRGINISSTARS WERE MADE IN SYSTEMS NEAR THE 'ALACTIC PLANE %XTINCTION DUE TO DUST WITHIN THE DISKDIMMEDTHESTARLIGHTANDINCREASEDTHESTARSAPPARENTMAGNITUDES"ECAUSETHEIMPORTANCEOF EXTINCTION WAS NOT YET RECOGNIZED 3HAPLEY INCORRECTLY ATTRIBUTED HIS STARSFAINTNESS TOTHEIR REMOTENESS!S A RESULT HIS DISTANCES TO THE GLOBULAR CLUSTERS WERE TOO GREAT AS WASTHE SIZE HE CALCULATED FOR THE 'ALAXY3OMETHINGWASOBVIOUSLYWRONG)TAPPEAREDTHATTHE-ILKY7AYWASMUCHLARGERTHANANY OF THE OTHER GALAXIES SURVEYED 4HIS IS JUST THE SORT OF ANTHROPOMORPHIC PREEMINENCETHATMAKESASTRONOMERSUNCOMFORTABLE2OBERT4RUMPLERSn	PROOFOFINTERSTELLAR3HAPLEYS VALUES FOR THE DIMENSIONS OF THE -ILKY 7AY HAVE SINCE BEEN REVISED SUBSTANTIALLY3HAPLEY USED CLUSTERS CONTAINING BOTH 7 6IRGINIS AND 22 ,YRAE STARS TO CALIBRATE A PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATIONFOR THE 22 ,YRAES (E THEN USED OBSERVATIONS OF 22 ,YRAE STARS IN THOSE CLUSTERS LACKING THE BRIGHTER76IRGINISVARIABLES AND SO THE ERROR WAS PROPAGATEDThe Structure of the Universe



<<<PAGE 1148>>>

EXTINCTIONINREMEDIEDPARTOFTHEPROBLEM4HERESTOFTHEPUZZLEWASSOLVEDINWHEN7ALTER"AADEANNOUNCEDTHATTHEREARETWOTYPESOF#EPHEIDSTHECLASSICAL#EPHEIDSANDTHEINTRINSICALLYFAINTER76IRGINISSTARS7ITHTHESECORRECTIONSTHEMEASUREDDISTANCESANDSIZESOFTHEOTHERGALAXIESDOUBLEDANDTHE-ILKY7AYWASREDUCEDTOBEINGABITSMALLERTHAN -)N THE EARLYS THE CALIBRATION OF THE PERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION WASCARRIEDOUT USINGDATA OBTAINED BY THE(IPPARCOS MISSION(IPPARCOS ASTRONOMERSMEASUREDTHE PARALLAX ANGLES OF  #EPHEIDS AND USED THE RESULTING DISTANCESTO DERIVETHEPERIODnLUMINOSITY RELATION4HIS REQUIRED THE COOPERATION OF AMATEURASTRONOMERSWHOSE CAREFULOBSERVATIONSOFLIGHTCURVES MADEIT POSSIBLETOMEASURE THEBRIGHTNESSOF THESE VARIABLES AT THE APPROPRIATE PHASES4HIS WAS THE lRST PERIODnLUMINOSITYRELATION TO BE OBTAINED FROM A DIRECT DISTANCE MEASUREMENT AND IT IS INTERESTING THAT THERESULT WAS NEARLY IDENTICAL TO AN EXPRESSION OBTAINED IN  BY !MERICAN ASTRONOMER!LLAN3ANDAGEANDHIS3WISSCOLLEAGUE'USTAV4AMMANN!LTHOUGHFURTHERADJUSTMENTSARESURETOFOLLOW#EPHEIDSCERTAINLYPROVIDEAlRMFOUNDATIONFORMEASURINGTHEDISTANCESTOOTHER GALAXIES)NTERSTELLAREXTINCTIONISSTILLTHELARGESTSOURCEOFERRORWHEN#EPHEIDSAREUSEDASSTANDARDCANDLESANDTHEREMAYALSOBEAWEAKDEPENDENCEONMETALLICITY4HEEXTINCTIONPROBLEM CAN BE REDUCED BY OBSERVING THESE STARS AT INFRARED WAVELENGTHS SINCE INFRARED LIGHTMORE READILY PENETRATES DUSTY REGIONS (OWEVER BECAUSE #EPHEIDS AREABOUT THREEMAGNITUDES DIMMER IN THE INFRARED ASTRONOMERS HAVE NOT STOPPED SEARCHING FORTHEM ATVISIBLE WAVELENGTHS4HE#EPHEIDBASEDDISTANCESTOGALAXIESWITHINTHE6IRGOCLUSTEROFGALAXIESRANGESFROM-PCTO-PC4HEVARIATIONINTHESEVALUESISPRIMARILYDUETOTHELARGESPATIALEXTENTOF THE6IRGO CLUSTER ALONG THE LINE OF SIGHT AND TO THE FACT THAT THE SPIRAL GALAXIES IN WHICHTHE #EPHEIDS ARE OBSERVED ARE FOUND PRIMARILY ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF THE CLUSTER AND NOT IN ITSCORE4O DATE THE MOST REMOTE CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS KNOWN ARE  -PC DISTANT AND RESIDE IN.'#ASPIRALGALAXYINTHEDIRECTIONOFTHECONSTELLATION,EO/VERALLTHEUNCERTAINTYIN THE DISTANCES OBTAINED USING CLASSICAL #EPHEIDS AS STANDARD CANDLES RANGES FROM  FORTHE ,-# TO PERHAPS  FOR MORE DISTANT GALAXIESSupernovae as Distance Indicators3UPERNOVAE CAN BE USED IN SEVERAL WAYS TO MEASURE EXTRAGALACTIC DISTANCES 3UPPOSE THEANGULAR EXTENTθ(t) OF A SUPERNOVAS PHOTOSPHERE IS OBSERVED 4HE ANGULAR VELOCITY OFTHEEXPANDINGGASESω=/Delta1θ//Delta1tCANBEFOUNDBYCOMPARINGTWOOBSERVATIONSSEPARATEDBY A TIME/Delta1t) FdIS THE DISTANCE TO THE SUPERNOVA THEN THE TRANSVERSE VELOCITY OF THEEXPANDINGPHOTOSPHEREISvθ=ωd!SSUMINGTHATTHEEXPANSIONISSPHERICALLYSYMMETRICTHISTRANSVERSEVELOCITYSHOULDBEEQUALTOTHEEJECTASRADIALVELOCITYvEJOBTAINEDFROMTHESUPERNOVAS $OPPLERSHIFTED SPECTRAL LINES4HEN THE DISTANCE TO THE SUPERNOVA ISd=vEJω."AADEHADDESCRIBED0OPULATION)AND))STARSINANDHADWONDEREDATTHETIMEWHETHERTHEREMIGHTBETWOCORRESPONDING VARIETIES OF #EPHEIDS3EE 2IESS ET AL 	 FOR DETAILS OF THE OBSERVATIONS OF THESE REMOTE #EPHEIDSThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1149>>>

-OST SUPERNOVAE ARE TOO DISTANT FOR THIS METHOD TO BE EMPLOYED SO ANOTHER STRATEGY ISADOPTED)TASSUMESTHATTHEEXPANDINGSHELLOFHOTGASESRADIATESASABLACKBODYTOAlRSTAPPROXIMATION	 4HEN THE SUPERNOVAS LUMINOSITY IS GIVEN BY THE 3TEFANn"OLTZMANN LAWL=πR(t)σTe,WHERER(t)ISTHERADIUSOFTHEEXPANDINGPHOTOSPHEREANDtISTHEAGEOFTHESUPERNOVA)FWEASSUMETHATTHEEJECTASRADIALVELOCITYHASREMAINEDNEARLYCONSTANTTHENR(t)=vEJt4HEEFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE OF THE PHOTOSPHERE COMES FROM THE CHARACTERISTICS OF ITS BLACKBODYSPECTRUM /NCE THE LUMINOSITY IS FOUND IT CAN BE CONVERTED TO AN ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDEAND THEN USEDTO lNDTHEDISTANCETOTHE SUPERNOVABYCOMPARINGITWITHTHE OBSERVEDAPPARENT MAGNITUDE /F COURSE THE PHOTOSPHERE OF THE EXPANDING SHELL OF A SUPERNOVA ISNEITHER PERFECTLY SPHERICAL NOR A PERFECT BLACKBODY $IFlCULTIES WITH ACCURATE VALUES FORINTERSTELLAREXTINCTIONPLAGUEBOTHMETHODSBUTTHEPROBLEMISMOREACUTEFORCORECOLLAPSESUPERNOVAE4YPES)B)CAND))	WHICHAREFOUNDNEARSITESOFRECENTSTARFORMATION4YPICALUNCERTAINTIES IN THE DISTANCES OBTAINED RANGE FROM  FOR -	 TO  FOR THE 6IRGOCLUSTER OF GALAXIES	Example 1.1.4WENTYlVE DAYS AFTER MAXIMUM LIGHT THE SPECTRUM OF AN hAVERAGEv4YPE)ASUPERNOVAISTHATOFABLACKBODYWITHANEFFECTIVETEMPERATUREOF±+4HE SPEED OF THE SHELLS PHOTOSPHERE OBTAINED FROM ITS $OPPLERSHIFTED ABSORPTION LINESIS ± KM S− )F THE RISE TIME TO MAXIMUM LIGHT IS ± DAYS THEN WHEN THEAVERAGE4YPE )A SUPERNOVA ISt= DAYS OLD ITS LUMINOSITY ISL≈π/parenleftbigvEJt/parenrightbigσTe=.×7.	TS ABSOLUTE BOLOMETRIC MAGNITUDE AT THIS TIME ISMBOL=M3UN−.LOG(L/L⊙)≈−..Type Ia Light Curves4HE MOST IMPORTANT WAY OF USING SUPERNOVAE TO MEASURE DISTANCE TAKES ADVANTAGE OF THESIMILARITY OF 4YPE )A LIGHT CURVES HESE SUPERNOVAE HAVE BLUEAND VISUAL ABSOLUTEMAGNITUDES OF⟨MB⟩≃⟨MV⟩≃−.±. AT MAXIMUM LIGHT )FTHE PEAK MAGNITUDEOF A4YPE )A CAN BE DETERMINED ITS DISTANCE MAY THEN BE DETERMINED-UCH EFFORT HAS BEEN DEVOTED TO IMPROVING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF 4YPE )A LIGHT CURVES&ORTUNATELYTHEREISAWELLDElNEDINVERSECORRELATIONBETWEENA4YPE)ASMAXIMUMBRIGHTNESS AND THE RATE OF DECLINEOF ITSLIGHT CURVE AND ASTRONOMERS HAVE LEARNEDHOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION TO MORE PRECISELY DETERMINE THE SUPERNOVAS INTRINSIC PEAKLUMINOSITY)N PRACTICE A SUPERNOVA IS OBSERVED OVER TIME AT SEVERAL WAVELENGTHS 4HEmulticolorlight curve shapes (MCLS) methodTHENCOMPARESTHESHAPEOFTHELIGHTCURVETOAFAMILYOF PARAMETERIZED TEMPLATE CURVES THAT ALLOWS THE ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDE OF THE SUPERNOVA ATMAXIMUM BRIGHTNESS TO BE DETERMINED EVEN IF THE SUPERNOVA WAS NOT CAUGHT AT ITS PEAKThe Structure of the Universe
)4


<<<PAGE 1150>>>

nnnnnnnnnnnn!BSOLUTE MAGNITUDE3CALED MAGNITUDEA
B
n$AYSFIGURE 1,OWREDSHIFT 4YPE )A TEMPLATE LIGHT CURVES A	 4HE LIGHT CURVES OF SEVERAL 4YPE )ASUPERNOVAE AS MEASURED B	 4HE LIGHT CURVES AFTER APPLYING THE TIME SCALE STRETCH FACTOR 4HE BLUEABSOLUTEMAGNITUDEISDISPLAYEDONTHEVERTICALAXIS&IGUREADAPTEDFROM0ERLMUTTERPhysics Today56 .O   	BRILLIANCE4HE-,#3METHODALSOALLOWSTHEREDDENINGANDDIMMINGEFFECTOFINTERSTELLARDUST TO BE DETECTED AND REMOVED!NOTHERAPPROACHISTHEstretch methodWHICHlTSTHEBANDVMAGNITUDELIGHTCURVESWITH A SINGLE TEMPLATE LIGHT CURVE THAT HAS BEEN STRETCHED OR COMPRESSED	 IN TIME SEE&IG 	 4HE PEAK MAGNITUDE IS THEN DETERMINED BY THE STRETCH FACTOR 4HESE TECHNIQUESALLOW ASTRONOMERS TO USE 4YPE )A SUPERNOVAE TO DETERMINE DISTANCES WITH AN UNCERTAINTYAPPROACHING JUST  CORRESPONDING TO AN UNCERTAINTY IN THE DISTANCE MODULUSm−MO F MAGNITUDEExample 1.2.4HE 4YPE )A SUPERNOVA 3. P IN THE GALAXY .'#  HAD ANAPPARENTBLUEMAGNITUDEOFB=.ATPEAKBRILLIANCE4HENWITHANEXTINCTIONOFMAGTO THAT GALAXY THE DISTANCE TO THE SUPERNOVA IS APPROXIMATELYd=(m−M−A+)/=. -PC.The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1151>>>

"ECAUSE 4YPE )A SUPERNOVAE ARE ABOUT  MAGNITUDES BRIGHTER THAN THE BRIGHTEST#EPHEID VARIABLES −. COMPARED TO−	 THIS METHOD IS CAPABLE OF REACHING OUT MORETHAN  TIMES FARTHER THAN WITH #EPHEIDS PROVIDING ESTIMATES TO TRULY COSMOLOGICAL DISTANCESEXCEEDING-PC3OPHISTICATEDSUPERNOVASEARCHPROGRAMSARECARRIEDOUTTHATMORE THAN COMPENSATE FOR THE UNLIKELY PROBABILITY OF DETECTING AN EXPLOSION IN A SPECIlCGALAXY BY SCANNING LARGE NUMBERS OF GALAXIES IN A WIDE lELD OF VIEW .EAR THE END OF THETWENTIETH CENTURY TWO TEAMS OF ASTRONOMERS MADE CAREFUL OBSERVATIONS OF HIGHREDSHIFT4YPE )A SUPERNOVAE AND DISCOVERED THAT THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE IS ACCELERATING4HE 3UPERNOVA!CCELERATION 0ROBE3.!0	 SPACECRAFT IS CURRENTLY BEINGDESIGNEDANDMAY BE LAUNCHED IN  )TS MISSIONWILL BE TO OBSERVE THOUSANDS OF DISTANT 4YPE )ASUPERNOVAE AND TO MAP SEVERAL PERCENT OFTHE SKY FOR GRAVITATIONAL LENSES EVERY YEARUsing Novae in Distance Determinations&ROM THE SIZES OF THEIR EXPANDING PHOTOSPHERES NOVAE CAN BE USED IN THE SAME MANNER ASSUPERNOVAETODERIVEDISTANCES)NADDITIONALTHOUGHTHEREISAWIDEVARIATIONINTHEABSOLUTEMAGNITUDES OF NOVAE AT PEAK LIGHT THERE IS A RELATION BETWEEN A NOVAS MAXIMUM VISUALMAGNITUDEMMAXV AND THE TIME IT TAKES FOR ITS VISIBLE LIGHT TO DECLINE BY TWO MAGNITUDES#ONSEQUENTLY NOVAE CAN ALSO SERVE AS STANDARD CANDLES4HEPHYSICALREASONWHYTHISRELATIONSHIPHOLDSFORNOVAEISTHATMOREMASSIVESMALLERWHITE DWARFS PRODUCE GREATER COMPRESSION AND HEATING OF THE ACCRETED GASES ON THEIR SURFACESANDSOARUNAWAYTHERMONUCLEARREACTIONMAYBEINITIATEDWITHASMALLERACCUMULATEDMASS4HE LESS MASSIVE SURFACE LAYERS ARE MORE READILY EJECTED AND SOTHENOVADECLINES MORE RAPIDLY 7RITING THE AVERAGE RATE OF DECLINE OVER THE lRST  MAG AS˙mIN MAG D−	 THIS RELATION CAN BE EXPRESSED ASMMAXV=−.−.LOG˙m	FOR'ALACTICNOVAEWITHANUNCERTAINTYOFABOUT±.MAG!FTERFADINGBYTWOMAGNITUDESTHE BRIGHTEST NOVAE ARE ABOUT AS LUMINOUS AS THE BRIGHTEST #EPHEIDS SO THESE TWO METHODSSPAN THE SAME REGION OF SPACE TO ABOUT  -PC JUST PAST THE6IRGO CLUSTER OF GALAXIES	Secondary Distance Indicators7ITH THE EXCEPTION OF TECHNIQUES ASSOCIATED WITH UNPREDICTABLE SUPERNOVAE IN ORDER FORASTRONOMERS TO REACH FARTHER INTO SPACE AND TO MORE REMOTE GALAXIESsecondaryMETHODSMUST BE USED TO MEASURE DISTANCE 5NLIKE THEprimaryMETHODS ALREADY DESCRIBED THESESECONDARY DISTANCE INDICATORS REQUIRE A GALAXY WITH AN ESTABLISHED DISTANCE FOR THEIR CALIBRATION /NE WAY OF SEEING FARTHER INVOLVES USING THE BRIGHTEST OBJECTS IN A GALAXY &OREXAMPLE THE THREE BRIGHTEST GIANT ( )) REGIONS IN A GALAXY HAVE BEEN USED TO PROVIDE ASTANDARDCANDLE4HESEREGIONSWHICHMAYCONTAINUPTO-⊙OFIONIZEDHYDROGENAREVISIBLE AT GREAT DISTANCES -EASUREMENTS OF THE ANGULAR SIZES OF THE ( )) REGIONS AND THEAPPARENT MAGNITUDE OF THE GALAXY CAN BE COMPARED WITH SIMILAR MEASUREMENTS FOR OTHER4YPE))SUPERNOVAEAREDIMMERTHAN4YPE)ASBYABOUTMAGANDTHEREFOREATBESTCANBESEENONLYABOUTAS FAR AWAY4HERE ARE SEVERAL VARIANTS OF THIS RELATION THAT USE THE TIME FOR THE NOVA TO DECLINE BY  MAG  MAG ETCThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1152>>>

GALAXIES WITH KNOWN DISTANCES4HIS MAKES IT POSSIBLE TO CALCULATE THE ( )) REGIONSLINEARSIZESINPARSECS	ALONGWITHTHEGALAXYSABSOLUTEMAGNITUDE(OWEVERSINCETHEDIAMETEROFAN())REGIONISDIFlCULTTODElNEUNAMBIGUOUSLYTHISPROCEDUREISRELATIVELYINSENSITIVETO DISTANCE AND MUST BE USED CAREFULLY4HE BRIGHTEST RED SUPERGIANTS SEEM TO HAVE ABOUT THE SAME ABSOLUTE VISUAL MAGNITUDEIN ALL GALAXIES AS SHOWN BY CAREFUL STUDIES OF THE BRIGHTEST GALACTIC STARS CARRIED OUT BY2OBERTA (UMPHREYS!PPARENTLY MASS LOSS REDUCES THE BRIGHTEST RED SUPERGIANTS TO ABOUTTHESAMEMAXIMUMMASSWHICHRESULTSINTHEIRHAVINGABOUTTHESAMELUMINOSITY3AMPLINGANUMBEROFGALAXIESREVEALEDTHEAVERAGEVISUALMAGNITUDEOFTHETHREEBRIGHTESTREDSTARSTOBEMV=−."ECAUSEINDIVIDUALSTARSMUSTBERESOLVEDINORDERFORTHISMETHODTOBEUSED ITS RANGE IS THE SAME AS FOR SPECTROSCOPIC PARALLAX ABOUT  -PCThe Globular Cluster Luminosity Function4HELIMITEDSAMPLINGINHERENTINTHESEMETHODShTHETHREEBRIGHTESTxv	CANLEADTOERRORS)T IS STATISTICALLY MORE SECURE TO TAKE AS COMPLETE AN INVENTORY AS POSSIBLE OF SOME CLASS OFOBJECTS ASSOCIATED WITH A GALAXY AND THEN DESCRIBE HOW THE OBJECTS VARY WITH MAGNITUDE&OR EXAMPLE &IG  SHOWS THEglobular cluster luminosity functionϕ(MB) FOR THEGLOBULAR CLUSTERS AROUND FOUR GIANT ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES IN THE 6IRGO CLUSTER )N THE lGUREϕ(MB)dMBIS THE NUMBER OF GLOBULAR CLUSTERS HAVING ABSOLUTE BLUE MAGNITUDES BETWEENMBANDMB+dMB 4HE DISTRIBUTION IS WELL DESCRIBED BY A 'AUSSIAN FUNCTION THE SOLID
,OG /H9278 MB	 PER MAGNITUDE6IRGO '#,&m/H9268
n n n n n!BSOLUTE MAGNITUDE MBFIGURE 24HELUMINOSITYFUNCTIONFORTHEGLOBULARCLUSTERSAROUNDFOURGIANTELLIPTICALGALAXIESINTHE6IRGOCLUSTER!BOUTCLUSTERSBRIGHTERTHANB=.WEREUSED!DISTANCEOF-PCWASADOPTEDFORTHE6IRGOCLUSTER;!DAPTEDFROMAlGURECOURTESYOF*ACOBY+0././!/	ASPROVIDEDBY (ARRIS -C-ASTER 5NIV	 FORPubl. Astron. Soc. Pac.104  =The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1153>>>

LINE IN THE lGURE	 THAT HAS A WELLDElNED PEAK AT Aturnover magnitudeOFM≃−..OTICETHATTHEVALUEOFMDEPENDSONTHEDISTANCETOTHE6IRGOCLUSTERUSEDINCALCULATINGTHE ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDES	4HE VALUE OF THE TURNOVER MAGNITUDE PROVIDES A STANDARD CANDLETHAT CAN BE USED TO lND THE DISTANCE TO THE GLOBULAR CLUSTERS SURROUNDING ANOTHER GALAXY4HE PROCEDURE IS TO MEASURE THE LUMINOSITY FUNCTION FOR THE GALAXY UNDER INVESTIGATIONAND TO COMPARE ITS APPARENT TURNOVER MAGNITUDEm WITHMFOR THE 6IRGO CLUSTER 4HEBEST RESULTS ARE ACHIEVED WITH GALAXIES HAVING LARGE NUMBERS OF GLOBULAR CLUSTERS SUCH ASGIANT ELLIPTICALS )T IS DESIRABLE THAT THE CALCULATEDϕ(mB)EXTEND WELLPAST THE TURNOVERPOINT ALTHOUGH THERE ARE LESS DESIRABLE	 WAYS OF lTTING JUST THE BRIGHTEREND OF THELUMINOSITY FUNCTION /VERALL THIS METHOD SHOULD YIELD A VALUE FOR A GALAXYSDISTANCEMODULUSTHATISUNCERTAINBYONLYABOUTMAGCORRESPONDINGTOANUNCERTAINTYINDISTANCEOFABOUT'LOBULARCLUSTERSAREVISIBLEFROMVASTDISTANCESANDINTHEFUTURETHIS TECHNIQUE MAY REACH OUT BEYOND THE6IRGO CLUSTER TO  -PC5NFORTUNATELYITISNOTYETCERTAINWHETHERTHEREISAuniversalGLOBULARCLUSTERLUMINOSITYFUNCTION THAT APPLIES TO ALL TYPES OF GALAXIES ALTHOUGH FOR NINE GALAXIES INCLUDING -AND THE -ILKY 7AY	 THE AVERAGE VALUE ISM=−.±. 4HE PHYSICAL BASIS FOR THISAPPARENT AGREEMENT IS UNCLEAR (OWEVER GLOBULAR CLUSTERS ARE ANCIENT COLLECTIONS OF STARSAND IT IS REASONABLE TO SUPPOSE THAT THE SUBSEQUENT EVOLUTION OF THE GALAXIES TO WHICH THEYARE ATTACHED MAY NOT HAVE SIGNIlCANTLY AFFECTED THE INDIVIDUAL CLUSTERSThe Planetary Nebula Luminosity Function!SIMILARSTATISTICALANALYSISCANBEPERFORMEDFORAGALAXYSPLANETARYNEBULAE&IGURE SHOWS THEplanetary nebula luminosity function (PNLF)FOR PLANETARY NEBULAE IN THE,EO ) GROUP OF GALAXIES AS A FUNCTION OF THEIR ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDES AT A WAVELENGTH OF
,EO GROUPCOMBINED
n n n n n n!BSOLUTE /H9261 MAGNITUDE,OG N 0.	
FIGURE 34HE PLANETARY NEBULA LUMINOSITY FUNCTION FOR THE ,EO ) GROUP OF GALAXIES &IGUREADAPTED FROM #IARDULLO *ACOBY AND &ORDAp. J.344  	The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1154>>>

0.,& DISTANCE -PC	,-#-.--.6IRGO.-&ORNAX
#EPHEID DISTANCE -PC	FIGURE 4! COMPARISON BETWEEN DISTANCES OBTAINED USING THE PLANETARY NEBULA LUMINOSITYFUNCTION AND #EPHEIDS &IGURE ADAPTED FROM *ACOBY h&UTURE $IRECTIONS FOR THE 0LANETARY .EBULA,UMINOSITY &UNCTIONv INHarmonizing Cosmic Distance Scales in a Post-Hipparcos EraASP Con-ference Series167  	NM 5SINGEXTRAGALACTICPLANETARYNEBULAEINTHISWAYISARELIABLEMETHODOFlNDINGTHEDISTANCESTOELLIPTICALGALAXIESWITHINABOUT-PC!SALARGERSAMPLEOFGALAXIESWASSTUDIEDTHEVALUEDETERMINEDFORTHECUTOFFDECREASEDFROMTHEONEDEPICTEDIN&IG TOM=−.4HISCANBEADOPTEDASASTANDARDCANDLEFORTHEBRIGHTESTPLANETARYNEBULA)FTHEPROMISEOFTHISMETHODISFULlLLEDITSHOULDREACHOUTTOADISTANCEOFSOME-PC&IGURE SHOWSTHEGOODAGREEMENTOBTAINEDBETWEENDISTANCESFROMTHEPLANETARYNEBULALUMINOSITY FUNCTION AND FROM #EPHEID VARIABLESThe Surface Brightness Fluctuation Method!STRONOMERSTURNTOTHEGLOBALPROPERTIESOFGALAXIESTOPROBEEVENFARTHERUPTO-PCORMORE/NEPROMISINGAPPROACHISTOTAKEADVANTAGEOFHOWADETECTORSUCHASA##$CAMERARECORDS THE APPEARANCE OF A GALAXY 3OME PIXELS WILL RECORD MORE STARS THAN OTHERS DUE TOSPATIAL mUCTUATIONS IN THE GALAXYS SURFACE BRIGHTNESS BUT THE OVERALL APPEARANCE SHOULDBECOMESMOOTHERWITHINCREASINGDISTANCE4HERESULTSOFASTATISTICALANALYSISDESCRIBETHEMAGNITUDE OF THE PIXELTOPIXEL VARIATION AND THIS IS CORRELATED WITH THE GALAXYS DISTANCE7ITHTHE(UBBLE3PACE4ELESCOPETHEsurface brightness ﬂuctuation methodCOULDREACHOUT TO  -PC BUT IT IS USUALLY APPLIED MORE LOCALLY4HISISAFORBIDDENLINEOFOXYGEN;/)))=4HEOBSERVATIONSAREMADETHROUGHAlLTERWITHABANDWIDTHOFABOUT NMThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1155>>>

The Tully–Fisher Relation4HE 4ULLYn&ISHER RELATION FOR SPIRAL GALAXIES ALSO PROVIDES A VALUABLETOOLFORDETERMININGEXTRAGALACTICDISTANCESHISISARELATIONBETWEEN THE LUMINOSITY OF A SPIRAL GALAXY AND ITSMAXIMUM ROTATION VELOCITY &OR THE SAKEIMPORTANT TECHNIQUEExample 1.3.&OR THE GALAXY - THE QUANTITYWiR= KM S−HE INFRARED ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDE ISMH=−.(LOGWiR−.)−.=−..4HE APPARENTHMAGNITUDE OF - ISH=. ALREADY CORRECTED FOR EXTINCTION	 AND SOACCORDING TO THE4ULLYn&ISHER RELATION THE DISTANCE TO - ISd=(H−MH+)/=. -PC.4HE APPEAL OF THE 4ULLYn&ISHER METHOD OF DISTANCE DETERMINATION LIES IN ITS ACCURACYTYPICALLY±. MAG IN THE INFRARED ALTHOUGH FOR CAREFULLY SELECTED TARGETS THE UNCERTAINTYMAYBEREDUCEDTO±.MAG	ANDITSGREATRANGEASFARAS-PC	&URTHERMORENEARBYSPIRALS WHOSE DISTANCES HAVE BEEN ACCURATELY MEASURED BY #EPHEIDS CAN BE USED FOR ITSCALIBRATION4HE4ULLYn&ISHER METHOD HAS BEEN APPLIED TO  SPIRAL GALAXIES BELONGING TOTHE 6IRGO #LUSTER 4HE RESULTS HAVE PRODUCED A THREEDIMENSIONAL MAP OF THE CLUSTER ANDTHEY SHOW THAT THE6IRGO #LUSTER IS EXTENDED ALONG THE LINE OF SIGHT BY ABOUT FOUR TIMES ITSDIAMETERONTHESKY4HE4ULLYn&ISHERMETHODISALSOBEINGUSEDTOSTUDYTHE#OMACLUSTEROF GALAXIES ABOUT  -PC AWAY AND HAS BEEN APPLIED TO DISTANCES WELL BEYOND THAT )T ISONE OF THE MOST WIDELY USED METHODS OF MEASURING EXTRAGALACTIC DISTANCESTheD–σRelation4HE ANALOGOUS CORRELATION FOR ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES THE &ABERn*ACKSON RELATION L∝σr	SHOWS CONSIDERABLE SCATTER-ORE RECENTLY AN IMPROVEMENT HAS APPEAREDTHED–σrelationT H A TR E L A T E ST H EV E L O C I T YD I S P E R S I O NT OT H ED I A M E T E R D OF AN ELLIPTICALGALAXY-OREPRECISELYDISTHEGALAXYSANGULARDIAMETEROUTTOASURFACEBRIGHTNESSLEVELOF .BMAG ARCSEC−" E C A U S E T H E S U R F A C E B R I G H T N E S S I S I N D E P E N D E N T O F T H EGALAXYSDISTANCEDIS INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO THE GALAXYS DISTANCEd)FTHEGALAXY WERE TWICEASFARAWAY ITSANGULAR DIAMETERWOULD BE HALFASLARGE )NTHISWAYDPROVIDESAstandard rulerRATHERTHANASTANDARDCANDLE4HEREISATIGHTERRELATIONSHIP BETWEENσANDDTHAN THERE IS BETWEENσANDL SEE &IG !N EMPIRICAL RELATIONBETWEENLOGDANDLOGσFORTHEGALAXIESINACLUSTERALLATABOUTTHESAMEDISTANCE	ISLOGD=.LOGσ+C,	!CTUALLY THIS IS JUST ANOTHER REPRESENTATION OF THEfundamental plane SINCE IT RELATESRADIUS SURFACE BRIGHTNESSAND VELOCITY DISPERSION4HISSTATEMENTISTECHNICALLYTRUEONLYIFTHEGALAXYISCLOSERTHANACOSMOLOGICALDISTANCEOFROUGHLY-PCAT WHICH POINT SPACETIME CURVATURE EFFECTS BECOME SIGNIlCANTThe Structure of the Universe44

OF COMPLETENESS WE INCLUDE AN EXAMPLE OF THIS


<<<PAGE 1156>>>

   ,OG Dn
,OG /H9268#####OMA
66IRGO6FIGURE 5! LOGARITHMIC PLOT OF DIAMETERSDIN ARCSECONDS	 AND VELOCITY DISPERSIONSσINKMS−	FORGALAXIESINTHE6IRGOAND#OMACLUSTERS&IGUREADAPTEDFROM$RESSLERETALAp. J.313 	WHERE THE VALUE OF THE CONSTANTCDEPENDS ON THE DISTANCE TO THE CLUSTER OF GALAXIES 5NFORTUNATELY THERE ARE NO BRIGHT ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES AVAILABLE FOR THE ACCURATE CALIBRATION OFTHISDnσMETHOD BY PRIMARY DISTANCE INDICATORS SUCH AS #EPHEIDS (OWEVER BECAUSE THESLOPES OF THE LINES IN THE lGURE ARE VERY NEARLY THE SAME THE VERTICAL DISTANCE BETWEEN THELINES FOR TWO DIFFERENT CLUSTERS ISLOGD−LOGD=C−C.4HEN BECAUSEDIS INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO A GALAXYS DISTANCEd THErelativeDISTANCESBETWEEN THE TWO CLUSTERS CAN BE FOUND BY USINGdd=DD=C−C.	Example 1.4.)N%Q 	THEVALUEOFCFORTHE6IRGOCLUSTERIS−.ANDFORTHE#OMACLUSTERITIS−.4HUSTHERATIOOFTHEDISTANCEOFTHE#OMACLUSTEROFGALAXIESTOTHAT OF THE6IRGO CLUSTER ISd#OMAd6IRGO=C6IRGO−C#OMA=..4HE #OMA CLUSTER IS MORE THAN  TIMES FARTHER AWAY THAN THE6IRGO CLUSTERThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1157>>>

4HEDnσRELATION IS A POWERFUL TOOL FOR STUDYING THE DISTRIBUTION OF GROUPS OF GALAXIESIN SPACE "ECAUSE OF THE INHERENT BRIGHTNESS OF GIANT ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES THIS TECHNIQUE HASTHE POTENTIAL OF EXCEEDING THE RANGE OF THE4ULLYn&ISHER RELATIONThe Brightest Galaxies in Clusters*UST AS THE BRIGHTEST GIANT ( )) REGIONS OR THE BRIGHTEST RED SUPERGIANTS HAVE BEEN USED TODETERMINE THE DISTANCE TO INDIVIDUAL GALAXIES THE BRIGHTEST GALAXY IN A CLUSTER OFGALAXIES CANBE USED TO OBTAIN THE CLUSTERS DISTANCE &IGURE  SHOWS A COMPOSITEGALAXY LUMINOSITYFUNCTION4HE SHARP DECLINE IN THE FUNCTION AT THEBRIGHTEND SMALLM	S H O W ST H A TT H EA B S O L U T EM A G N I T U D E O FT H EB R I G H T E S TG A L A X YC A NB EDETERMINEDWITHSOMEACCURACY4HEAVERAGEVALUEOFTHEABSOLUTEVISUALMAGNITUDEFORTHEBRIGHTEST GALAXY IN TEN NEARBY CLUSTERS ISMV=−.±. 4HIS IS  MAGNITUDESBRIGHTER THAN A 4YPE )A SUPERNOVA AT PEAK BRILLIANCE SO IN PRINCIPLE THIS METHOD SHOULDREACH FOUR TIMES FARTHER THAN WITH SUPERNOVAE TO OVER  -PC4HE LIGHT RECEIVED FROMSUCH A DISTANCE IS TRULY ANCIENT HAVING TRAVELED THROUGH SPACE FOR  BILLION YEARS4HE DANGER IN USING THIS METHOD TO LOOK OUT TO SUCH GREAT DISTANCES IS THATGALAXIES ANDCLUSTERS OF GALAXIES BOTH EVOLVE &OR INSTANCE THE BRIGHTEST
#OMPOSITE CLUSTER GALAXYLUMINOSITY DISTRIBUTIONC$ GALAXIES INCLUDED"EST FIT.UMBER
n n n n!BSOLUTE MAGNITUDE MJ 	,UMINOSITY /H5112/H5112
	       
FIGURE 6!COMPOSITELUMINOSITYFUNCTIONFORTHEGALAXIESINSEVERALCLUSTERS&IGUREADAPTEDFROM 3CHECHTERAp. J.203  	The Structure of the Universe
GALAXY


<<<PAGE 1158>>>

IN A CONTEMPORARY CLUSTER MAYNOT HAVEEXISTEDINITSPRESENTFORMBILLIONSOF YEARSAGO HE GIANT C$ GALAXIES OFTEN FOUND AT THE CENTERS OFRICH CLUSTERS ARE PROBABLY THERESULTOF GALACTIC MERGERS4HEREFOREUSING A GENERAL GALAXYLUMINOSITYFUNCTIONCALIBRATEDWITH NEARBY CLUSTERS MAY NOT BE APPROPRIATE FOR VERY DISTANTAND CONSEQUENTLY YOUNGERAPPEARING CLUSTERSA Summary of Distance Indicators"Y NOW IT SHOULD BE CLEAR THAT THE EXTRAGALACTIC DISTANCE SCALE IS NOT A SIMPLE LADDERWITH JUST ONE SEQUENCE OF STEPS POSSIBLE FOR MEASURING THE GREATEST DISTANCES $IFFERENTASTRONOMERSUSEDIFFERENTTECHNIQUESANDCHOOSEDIFFERENTCALIBRATIONS4HEREAREVARIATIONSWITHEVERYMETHODANDTHERELATIONSDESCRIBEDABOVEARECHOSENONLYTOBEREPRESENTATIVE!S A SUMMARY 4ABLE  LISTS THE DISTANCE TO THE 6IRGO CLUSTER OF GALAXIES AS DETERMINEDBY MANY OF THESE METHODS )T ALSO SHOWS THE UNCERTAINTY IN MAGNITUDES	 ASSOCIATED WITHEACH OF THESE TECHNIQUES /VERALL THE DISTANCES LISTED ARE IN GOOD AGREEMENT AND WE WILLADOPT  -PC AS THE DISTANCE TO THE 6IRGO CLUSTER 4HESE METHODS ARESUFlCIENTLYACCURATE TO DETERMINE THE FEATURES OF OUR CORNER OF THEUNIVERSEOUTTOADISTANCEOF AFEW HUNDRED -PCTABLE 1$ISTANCE )NDICATORS !DAPTED FROM *ACOBY ET ALPubl. Astron. Soc. Pac.104 	5NCERTAINTY FOR $ISTANCE TO3INGLE 'ALAXY 6IRGO #LUSTER 2ANGE-ETHODMAG	 -PC	 -PC	#EPHEIDS − .OVAE .±. 0LANETARY NEBULALUMINOSITY FUNCTION  .±. 'LOBULAR CLUSTERLUMINOSITY FUNCTION  .±. 3URFACE BRIGHTNESSmUCTUATIONS .±. 4ULLYn&ISHER RELATION  .±.>DnσRELATION .±.>4YPE )A SUPERNOVAE  .±.>The Structure of the Universe4


<<<PAGE 1159>>>

2THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE)N THE lRST DECADE OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY EVEN BEFORE THE EXTRAGALACTIC NATURE OF SPIRALNEBULAE WAS UNDERSTOOD ASTRONOMERS BEGAN MAKING SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATIONS OF THE RADIALVELOCITIES OF GALAXIES BY MEASURING THEIR $OPPLERSHIFTED SPECTRAL LINES )T WAS HOPED THATIF THE MOTIONS OF THESE OBJECTS WERE FOUND TO BE RANDOM THEN THE 3UNS MOTION IN THE-ILKY 7AY SHOULD BE RELATED TO THE VECTOR SUM OF THE RADIAL VELOCITIES OF THE NEBULAE)T WAS 6 - 3LIPHER WORKING AT ,OWELL /BSERVATORY WHO lRST DISCOVERED THAT THIS PLANWAS DOOMED TO FAILURE 4HE VELOCITIES OF THE NEBULAE WEREnotRANDOM )NSTEAD MOST OFTHE SPECTRA SHOWED REDSHIFTED SPECTRAL LINES 3LIPHER ANNOUNCED IN  THAT MOST OF THEGALAXIESHEHADSURVEYEDWERERAPIDLYMOVINGawayFROM%ARTHALTHOUGH!NDROMEDASBLUESHIFTEDSPECTRUMSHOWEDITWASAPPROACHING%ARTHATNEARLYKMS−)TWASQUICKLYREALIZEDTHATTHESEGALAXIESNOTONLYWEREMOVINGAWAYFROM%ARTHBUTWEREMOVINGAWAYFROM EACH OTHER AS WELL!STRONOMERS BEGAN TO TALK ABOUT THESE GALACTIC MOTIONS IN TERMSOF AN EXPANSION -EANWHILE 3LIPHER CONTINUED HIS MEASUREMENTS OF RADIAL VELOCITIES "YHEHADEXAMINEDGALAXIESANDCONlRMEDTHATSPECTRASHOWINGREDSHIFTEDLINESWEREMUCH MORE COMMON THAN THOSE EXHIBITING BLUESHIFTS 3LIPHER CONCLUDED THAT NEARLY EVERYGALAXY HE EXAMINED WAS RAPIDLY RECEDING FROM %ARTHHubble’s Law of Universal ExpansionWASALSOTHEYEARTHAT(UBBLEDISCOVERED#EPHEIDVARIABLESTARSIN-THEREBYESTABLISHING THAT THE!NDROMEDA hNEBULAv WAS IN FACT AN EXTERNAL GALAXY (UBBLE CONTINUED HISSEARCHFOR#EPHEIDSDETERMININGTHEDISTANCESTOGALAXIES(ECOMBINEDHISRESULTSWITH3LIPHERSVELOCITIESANDDISCOVEREDTHATAGALAXYSRECESSIONALVELOCITYvWASPROPORTIONALTO ITS DISTANCEd )N  (UBBLE PRESENTED HIS RESULTS IN A PAPER h! 2ELATION BETWEEN$ISTANCEAND2ADIAL6ELOCITYAMONG%XTRA'ALACTIC.EBULAEvATAMEETINGOFTHE.ATIONAL!CADEMY OF 3CIENCES4HIS RELATIONv=Hd,	ISTODAYCALLEDHubble’s lawANDHISTHEHubble constant5SUALLYvISGIVENINKMS−ANDdIN -PC SOHHAS UNITS OF KM S−-PC−(UBBLE REALIZED THAT HE HAD DISCOVERED AN EXCEPTIONALLY POWERFUL WAY OF lNDING DISTANCES TO REMOTE GALAXIES SIMPLY BY MEASURING THEIR REDSHIFTS (IS EARLY RESULTS SHOW ASTRAIGHTLINEDRAWNTHROUGHASCATTERINGOFPOINTSONAGRAPHOFVELOCITYVERSUSDISTANCESEE&IG (UBBLECONTINUEDTOCOMPILEDISTANCESANDREDSHIFTSTOSTRENGTHENTHISRELATIONSHIPWITHMUCH OF THE WORK DONE BY HIS ASSISTANT -ILTON (UMASON n	 (UMASON LITERALLYWORKEDHISWAYUPTOTHETOPATTHE-T7ILSON/BSERVATORY(ESTARTEDOUTASAMULEPACKERWHENTHEOBSERVATORYWASBEINGCONSTRUCTEDANDSERVEDASARESTAURANTBUSBOYJANITORANDNIGHT ASSISTANT AT -T7ILSON!FTER (UMASON GOT PERMISSION TO DO SOME OBSERVING ON THEThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1160>>>

FIGURE 7(UBBLESVELOCITYnDISTANCERELATION4HETWOLINESUSEDIFFERENTCORRECTIONSFORTHE3UNSMOTION4HEVERTICALUNITSSHOULDBEKMS−	&IGUREFROM(UBBLERealm of the Nebulae9ALE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS .EW (AVEN #4 ©	SMALLERTELESCOPES(UBBLEWASSOIMPRESSEDWITHTHERESULTSTHAT(UMASONENDEDUPASHISASSISTANT(UMASONEXPOSEDANDMEASUREDMOSTOFTHEPHOTOGRAPHICPLATESHIMSELFANDBY THE DISTANCES AND VELOCITIES OF  GALAXIES HAD BEEN OBTAINED 4HE EXPANSION OF THEUNIVERSE BECAME AN OBSERVATIONAL FACT OF LIFE &IGURE  SHOWS THE REDSHIFT OF THE ( AND+ LINES OF #A )) FOR lVE GALAXIES)NTERESTINGLY THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSAL EXPANSION WAS SIMULTANEOUSLY BEING DEVELOPEDBY THEORISTS )N  7ILLEM DE 3ITTER n	 A $UTCH ASTRONOMER USED %INSTEINSTHEORYOFGENERALRELATIVITYTODESCRIBEAUNIVERSETHATWASEXPANDING !LTHOUGHDE3ITTERSSOLUTIONOF%INSTEINSEQUATIONSDESCRIBEDANEMPTYUNIVERSEDEVOIDOFMATTERITDIDPREDICTA REDSHIFT THAT INCREASED WITH THE DISTANCE FROM THE LIGHTS ORIGIN (UBBLE WAS AWARE OF DE3ITTERSWORKANDINHISPAPERSTATEDTHATITShOUTSTANDINGFEATURE...ISTHEPOSSIBILITYTHAT THE VELOCITYnDISTANCE RELATION MAY REPRESENT THE DE 3ITTER EFFECTv /THER THEORISTS LATERFOUND ADDITIONAL SOLUTIONS THAT ALSO INDICATED A UNIVERSAL EXPANSION BUT ASTRONOMERS WEREUNAWARE OF THEIR RESULTS UNTIL  %INSTEIN HIMSELF INITIALLY FAVORED A STATIC UNIVERSE THATWASNEITHEREXPANDINGNORCONTRACTING(OWEVERTHEOBSERVATIONSOF(UBBLEAND(UMASONFORCED %INSTEIN TO ABANDON THIS VIEW IN  &IGURE  SHOWS %INSTEIN AND (UBBLE ATTHE -T7ILSON /BSERVATORYThe Expansion of Space and the Hubble Flow4OUNDERSTANDWHAThTHEEXPANSIONOFTHEUNIVERSEvREALLYMEANSSUPPOSETHAT%ARTHWERETO EXPAND DOUBLING IN SIZE DURING AN HOURS TIME &IGURE  SHOWS THE EFFECT ON THE$URING A TOUR OF THE OBSERVATORY %LSA %INSTEIN WAS TOLD HOW THE TELESCOPE WAS USED TO EXPLORE THE STRUCTURE OFTHE UNIVERSE 3HE REPLIED h7ELL WELL MY HUSBAND DOES THAT ON THE BACK OF AN OLD ENVELOPEvThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1161>>>

#LUSTER GALAXY IN6IRGO
#ORONA "OREALIS"OOTES5RSA -AJOR2ADIAL VELOCITIES IN KM Sn(YDRA$ISTANCE IN-PChnhnhnhnhnFIGURE 84HE APPEARANCE AND REDSHIFTS OF THE ( AND + LINES OF CALCIUM FOR lVE GALAXIES#OURTESY OF 0ALOMAR#ALTECH	5NITED 3TATES WITH TWO MAPS ALIGNED FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF 3ALT ,AKE #ITY )NITIALLY9ELLOWSTONE .ATIONAL 0ARK IS  KM FROM 3ALT ,AKE #ITY!LBUQUERQUE IS  KM AWAYAND-INNEAPOLISISATKM!NHOURLATER9ELLOWSTONEISKMAWAY!LBUQUERQUEISATKMAND-INNEAPOLISISATKMSOA3ALT,AKE#ITYRESIDENTWOULDlNDTHAT9ELLOWSTONEDRIFTEDAWAYFROMHERATKMHR−!LBUQUERQUEMOVEDAWAYATKMHR−AND-INNEAPOLISRECEDEDATKMHR−4HUSARECESSIONALVELOCITYTHATISPROPORTIONALTODISTANCEISTHENATURALRESULTOFANEXPANSIONTHATISBOTHISOTROPICANDHOMOGENEOUSSAMEMAGNITUDE IN EVERY DIRECTION AND AT EVERY LOCATION	 /F COURSE OBSERVERS IN9ELLOWSTONE!LBUQUERQUEAND-INNEAPOLISWOULDCOMETOTHESAMECONCLUSION%VERYONEINVOLVEDINTHE EXPANSION SEES EVERYONE ELSE MOVING AWAY WITH A VELOCITY THAT OBEYS (UBBLES LAW4HERE IS A VITAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE VELOCITY OF A GALAXY THROUGH SPACECALLED ITSpeculiar velocity	 AND ITSrecessional velocityDUE TO THE EXPANSIONOF THE UNIVERSEGALAXYS RECESSIONAL VELOCITY ISnotDUE TO ITSMOTION THROUGHSPACE INSTEAD THE GALAXY IS BEING CARRIED ALONGwithTHE SURROUNDING SPACEThe Structure of the Universe
! 


<<<PAGE 1162>>>

FIGURE 9%INSTEINAND(UBBLEATTHE-T7ILSON/BSERVATORY2EPRODUCEDBYPERMISSIONOF4HE (UNTINGTON ,IBRARY 3AN -ARINO #!	9ELLOWSTONE3ALT,AKE#ITY!LBUQUERQUE-INNEAPOLIS
FIGURE 104HEEFFECTOFADOUBLINGOFTHESIZEOF%ARTHFROMTHEPERSPECTIVEOFANASTRONOMERIN 3ALT ,AKE #ITYASTHEUNIVERSEEXPANDS4HEMOTIONOFGALAXIESASTHEYPARTICIPATEINTHEEXPANSIONOFTHEUNIVERSE IS REFERRED TO AS THEHubble ﬂow )N THE SAME MANNER A GALAXYScosmologicalredshiftISPRODUCEDBYTHEEXPANSIONASTHEWAVELENGTHOFTHELIGHTEMITTEDBYTHEGALAXYIS STRETCHED ALONG WITH THE SPACE THROUGH WHICH THE LIGHT TRAVELS &OR THIS REASON THECOSMOLOGICAL REDSHIFT IS NOT RELATED TO THE GALAXYS RECESSIONAL VELOCITY BY THE $OPPLERSHIFT EQUATIONS4HOSE EQUATIONS WERE DERIVED FOR A STATIC %UCLIDEANSPACETIMEAND DO NOT INCLUDE THE EFFECTS OF THE EXPANDING CURVED SPACETIME OF OURUNIVERSEThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1163>>>

.EVERTHELESS ASTRONOMERS FREQUENTLY TRANSLATE A MEASURED REDSHIFTz INTOTHERADIAL VELOCITY A GALAXY WOULD HAVEas ifIT HAD A PECULIAR VELOCITY MOVING THROUGHSPACE	 INSTEAD OF ITS ACTUAL RECESSIONAL VELOCITY MOVING ALONG WITH EXPANDING SPACE	 &ORINSTANCE THE STATEMENTTHAT hQUASAR 3$33 + APPEARS TO BEMOVINGAWAY FROM US AT MORE THAN  OF THE SPEED OF LIGHTv MUST BE INTERPRETED INTHIS WAY &URTHERMORE FORz≤ THE DISTANCE ESTIMATE OBTAINED BY USING(UBBLES LAWd≃cH(z+)−(z+)+,	DIFFERS FROM THE ACTUAL PROPER DISTANCE BY LESS THAN 7HENz≪ THE EXPRESSION FORTHE DISTANCE ASSUMES THE NONRELATIVISTIC FORMd=czH,	AS WOULD BE FOUND BY USING (UBBLES LAW%Q 	 CANLEADTOSIGNIlCANTERRORSINTHEDISTANCEFORROUGHLYz>.=)TISIMPORTANTTOREALIZETHATALTHOUGHTHEUNIVERSEISEXPANDINGTHISDOESNOTMEANFOREXAMPLETHATTHEORBITSOFTHEPLANETSAROUNDTHE3UNHAVEBEENEXPANDING'RAVITATIONALLYBOUND SYSTEMS DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THE UNIVERSAL EXPANSION 4HERE IS ALSO NO COMPELLINGEVIDENCETHATTHECONSTANTSTHATGOVERNTHEFUNDAMENTALLAWSOFPHYSICSSUCHAS.EWTONSGRAVITATIONAL CONSTANTG	 WERE ONCE DIFFERENT FROM THEIR PRESENT VALUES 4HUS THE SIZES OFATOMSPLANETARYSYSTEMSANDGALAXIESHAVEnotCHANGEDBECAUSEOFTHEEXPANSIONOFSPACEALTHOUGH THE LATTER TWO MAY HAVE CERTAINLY GONE THROUGH EVOLUTIONARY CHANGES	The Value of the Hubble Constant)NPRINCIPLE(UBBLESLAWCANBEUSEDTOlNDTHEDISTANCETOANYGALAXYWHOSEREDSHIFTCANBE MEASURED4HE STUMBLING BLOCK TO CARRYING OUT THIS PROCEDURE HAS BEEN THE UNCERTAINTYIN THE (UBBLE CONSTANT 4HROUGH THE END OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURYHWAS KNOWN ONLY TOWITHIN A FACTOR OF TWO BETWEEN  KM S−-PC−AND  KM S−-PC−(ISTORICALLYTHEDIFlCULTYINDETERMININGTHEVALUEOFHAROSEFROMHAVINGTOUSEREMOTEGALAXIESFORITSCALIBRATION!MAJORSOURCEOFTHEDIVERSEVALUESOFHOBTAINEDBYDIFFERENTRESEARCHERS LAY IN THEIR CHOICE AND USE OF SECONDARY DISTANCE INDICATORS WHEN MEASURINGREMOTEGALAXIES4HEREAREALSOLARGESCALEMOTIONSOFGALAXIESRELATIVETOTHE(UBBLEmOWTHAT HAVE YET TO BE SORTED OUT AS WILL BE DESCRIBED IN 3ECTION )N ADDITION THERE IS A SELECTION EFFECT CALLED AMalmquist biasTHAT MUST BE GUARDEDAGAINST 4HIS CAN OCCUR WHEN AN ASTRONOMER USES A MAGNITUDELIMITED SAMPLE OF OBJECTSLOOKINGONLYATTHOSEOBJECTSBRIGHTERTHANACERTAINapparentMAGNITUDE!TLARGERDISTANCESONLYTHEINTRINSICALLYBRIGHTESTOBJECTSWILLBEINCLUDEDINTHESAMPLEWHICHIFNOTPROPERLYCORRECTED FOR	 WILL SKEW THE STATISTICS4HIS STATEMENT ASSUMES THAT THEUNIVERSEIShmATv /BSERVATIONSBYMISSIONSSUCH AS "OOMERANG AND7-!0INDICATE THAT SPACE IS VERY NEARLY mATThe Structure of the Universe
;



<<<PAGE 1164>>>

!S HAS BEEN TRADITIONALLY DONE IN ORDER TO INCORPORATE THE UNCERTAINTY INH IN THIS TEXTWE WILL DElNE A DIMENSIONLESS PARAMETERh THROUGH THE EXPRESSIONH=hKM S−-PC−.	$UETOEARLYUNCERTAINTYWITHHTHEVALUEOFhWASKNOWNONLYTOFALLSOMEWHEREBETWEENABOUTAND(OWEVERASTHEENDOFTHETWENTIETHCENTURYAPPROACHEDASTRONOMERSBEGANTO CONVERGE ON THE MIDDLE GROUND OF VALUES OFHThe Big Bang3INCETHEUNIVERSEISEXPANDINGITMUSTHAVEBEENSMALLERINTHEPASTTHANITISNOW)MAGINEVIEWINGAlLMEDHISTORYOFTHEUNIVERSEWATCHINGTHEGALAXIESmYFARTHERANDFARTHERAPART.OWRUNTHElLMbackwardINEFFECTREVERSINGTHEDIRECTIONOFTIME3EENINREVERSEALLOFTHE GALAXIES ARE APPROACHING ONE ANOTHER!CCORDING TO THE (UBBLE LAW A GALAXY TWICE ASFARAWAYISAPPROACHINGTWICEASFAST4HEINESCAPABLECONCLUSIONISTHATALLOFTHEGALAXIESand all of space	 WILL SIMULTANEOUSLY CONVERGE TO A SINGLE POINT !S EVERYTHING IN THEUNIVERSE RAPIDLY CONVERGED STILL RUNNING THE lLM BACKWARD	 IT HEATED TO EXTREMELY HIGHTEMPERATURES4HEEXPANSIONOFTHEUNIVERSEFROMASINGLEPOINTISKNOWNASTHEBig Bang4HEHOTEARLYUNIVERSEWASlLLEDWITHBLACKBODYRADIATIONANDASTHEUNIVERSEEXPANDEDTHATRADIATIONCOOLEDTOBECOMETHEcosmic microwave background (CMB)MICROWAVESTHAT WE DETECT ARRIVING FROM ALL DIRECTIONS IN THE SKY /BSERVATIONS OF THE #-" PROVIDECONVINCINGEVIDENCEFORTHEHOT"IG"ANG4HEWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe(WMAP)LAUNCHED IN  STUDIED THE MINUTE mUCTUATIONS ANISOTROPIES	 OF THE #-")N  THE lRST 7-!0 RESULTS WERE RELEASED4HISUSHEREDINANEWERAOFPRECISIONCOSMOLOGYAND THE UNCERTAINTYIN THE (UBBLECONSTANTANDh	FELLFROMA FACTOROF TWOTOJUST 4HE VALUEOFhDETERMINEDBY THE7-!0DATAAND THE STANDARD VALUE ADOPTEDIN THIS TEXT IS[h]7-!0=.+.−..	4HROUGHOUTTHEREMAINDEROFTHISCHAPTERWHENAQUANTITYINVOLVINGhISEVALUATED[h]7-!0WILL BE ASSUMED )N CONVENTIONAL UNITS THE (UBBLE CONSTANT ISH=.×−hS−	SO[H]7-!0=.×−S−.	$AVID7ILKINSONn	MADEPIONEERINGCONTRIBUTIONSTOMANY#-"EXPERIMENTSINCLUDING#/"%AND7-!04HE -!0SATELLITE WAS RENAMED h7-!0v AFTER IT WAS LAUNCHED IN 0ARAMETERSPUBLISHEDIN4ABLEh"ESTv#OSMOLOGICAL0ARAMETERS	OF"ENNETTETALSUCHASHAREPLACEDINSIDE A SQUARE BRACKET WITH A h7-!0v SUBSCRIPT WHILE QUANTITIES CALCULATED USING THESE PARAMETERS ARE NOT!LISTOFTHESEPARAMETERSMAYBEFOUNDIN!PPENDIX.!LTHOUGHIDENTIlEDINTHETEXTASh7-!0PARAMETERSvTHEYARE A COMBINATION OF 7-!0 RESULTS WITH MEASUREMENTS FROM PROJECTS SUCH AS #/"% THE #OSMIC "ACKGROUND)MAGER #")	 THE !RCMINUTE #OSMOLOGY "OLOMETER !RRAY 2ECEIVER !#"!2	 AND THE D& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT3URVEY D&'23	The Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1165>>>

4HUS A GALAXY WITH A MEASURED RECESSIONAL VELOCITY OF  KM S−IS AT A DISTANCE OFd=v/H=h−-PC ORd=. -PC4OESTIMATEHOWLONGAGOTHE"IG"ANGOCCURREDLETtHBETHETIMETHATHASELAPSEDSINCETHE"IG"ANG4HISISTHETIMEREQUIREDFORAGALAXYTOTRAVELTOITSPRESENTDISTANCEdWHILEMOVINGATITSRECESSIONALVELOCITYvASGIVENBY(UBBLESLAW!SSUMINGINCORRECTLY	THATvHAS REMAINED CONSTANTd=vtH=HdtH,	AND SO THEHubble timeIStH≡H=.×h−S=.×h−YR.	5SING7-!0VALUEStH=.×S=.×YR.	4HUS AS A ROUGH ESTIMATE THE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE IS ABOUT  'YR3CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES!STRONOMERS HOLD AS A FUNDAMENTAL TENET THAT ON THE LARGEST SCALES THE UNIVERSE IS BOTHHOMOGENEOUS AND ISOTROPIC APPEARING THE SAME AT ALL LOCATIONS AND IN ALL DIRECTIONS ANASSUMPTION CALLED THEcosmological principle	 (OWEVER THIS IS CERTAINLY NOT THE CASE ATSMALLER SCALESThe Classiﬁcation of Clusters!S HAS BEEN MENTIONED A NUMBER OF TIMES ALREADY IN THIS TEXT GALAXIES ARE NOT STREWNRANDOMLY THROUGHOUT THE UNIVERSE INSTEAD NEARLY ALL GALAXIES ARE FOUND IN ASSOCIATIONSEITHER INgroupsOR INclusters)N BOTH TYPES THE GALAXIES ARE GRAVITATIONALLY BOUND TOONE ANOTHER AND ORBIT THE SYSTEMS BARYCENTER CENTER OF MASS	'ROUPS GENERALLY HAVE LESS THAN  MEMBERS AND ARE ABOUT .h−-PC ACROSS 4HEGALAXIES OF A GROUP HAVE A VELOCITY DISPERSION OF ABOUT  KM S− AND THE MASS OFAN AVERAGE GROUP IS ON THE ORDER OF ×h−-⊙ OBTAINED FROM THEVIRIAL THEOREM&URTHERMORETHEMASSTOLIGHTRATIOOF A TYPICAL GROUP IS ABOUT h-⊙/,⊙WHICH IS INDICATIVE OF LARGE AMOUNTS OF DARK MATTER#LUSTERSONTHEOTHERHANDMAYCONTAINFROMAPPROXIMATELYGALAXIESApoorCLUSTER	TOTHOUSANDSOFGALAXIESArichCLUSTER	WITHINAREGIONOFSPACEABOUTh−-PCINDIAMETER4HEINDIVIDUALGALAXIESINACLUSTERMOVEMORERAPIDLYWITHRESPECTTOOTHERMEMBERSTHAN DO GALAXIES RESIDING IN A GROUP 4HE CHARACTERISTIC VELOCITY DISPERSION OF A CLUSTER ISKMS−POSSIBLYEXCEEDINGKMS−FORVERYRICHCLUSTERS!TYPICALCLUSTERSVIRIALMASSISAROUND×h−-⊙ANDITSMASSTOLIGHTRATIOISROUGHLYh-⊙/,⊙AGAIN3OME GALAXIES ARE NOT AFlLIATED WITH A KNOWN GROUP OR CLUSTER BUT THEY REPRESENT RARE EXCEPTIONSThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1166>>>

INDICATIVE OF LARGE AMOUNTS OF DARK MATTER #LUSTERS OF GALAXIES ARE FURTHER CLASSIlED ASregularSPHERICAL AND CENTRALLY CONDENSED	 ANDirregular)NTHISSECTIONWEWILLDESCRIBEHOWGROUPSOFGALAXIESCLUSTERSOFGALAXIESANDCLUSTERSOF CLUSTERS CALLEDsuperclusters	 MAKE UP THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSEThe Local Group!SSHOWNIN&IG ABOUTGALAXIESAREKNOWNTOLIEWITHINROUGHLY-PCOFTHE-ILKY7AY 4HIS COLLECTION OF GALAXIES IS KNOWN AS THELocal Group )TSzero velocity surfaceWHERE THE GALAXIES WOULD EVENTUALLY TURN AROUND IF THEIR MOTIONS WERE SUDDENLY DIRECTEDOUTWARD	 IS ABOUT  -PC FROM THE BARYCENTER )TS MOST PROMINENT MEMBERS ARE ITS THREESPIRAL GALAXIES OUR 'ALAXY - THE !NDROMEDA GALAXY	 AND - IN THE CONSTELLATION4RIANGULUM	 4HE ,ARGE AND 3MALL -AGELLANIC #LOUDS ARE THE NEXT MOST LUMINOUS THEYARE TWO OF THE  IRREGULAR GALAXIES IN THE ,OCAL 'ROUP ;4HE ,-# AND 3-# ARETHE TWOPROMINENT FEATURES BELOW THE'ALACTIC EQUATOR= 4HEREMAININGGALAXIESAREDWARF ELLIPTICALS OR DWARF SPHEROIDALS WHICH ARE VERY SMALL AND QUITE FAINT )T IS OBVIOUSFROM &IG  THAT MANY OF THESE GALAXIES HAVE ACCUMULATED AROUND THE -ILKY 7AY AND!NDROMEDA GALAXIES WHICH ARE ON OPPOSITE SIDES OF THE ,OCAL 'ROUP ABOUTr= KPCAPART %VEN AT THIS DISTANCE - IS ABOUT .◦WIDE ON THE SKY lVE TIMES THE -OONSDIAMETER	 )N ADDITION TO THE -AGELLANIC #LOUDS NINE OF THE DWARF ELLIPTICALS AND DWARF
FIGURE 114HE,OCAL'ROUPOFGALAXIES4HEDASHEDCIRCLESARECENTEREDONTHEBARYCENTEROFTHE,OCAL'ROUPANDHAVERADIIOFAND-PC4HEBARYCENTERISKPCFROMUSINTHEDIRECTIONOFGALACTICCOORDINATEℓ=.◦ANDb=−.◦	3OLIDLINESINDICATEDISTANCESABOVETHEARBITRARILYCHOSEN	 PLANE AND DASHED LINES SHOW DISTANCES BELOW THE PLANE &IGURE FROM 'REBEL h4HE ,OCAL'ROUPv INMicrolensing 2000: A New Era of Microlensing AstrophysicsA. S. P . Conference Series239  	4HIS ACCUMULATION CAN ALSO BE SEEN IN (UBBLES OWN VELOCITYnDISTANCE DIAGRAM &IG  THE ,OCAL 'ROUP ISREPRESENTED BY THE EIGHT DATA POINTS NEAR THE ORIGINThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1167>>>

SPHEROIDALSARESITUATEDNEARTHE-ILKY7AY)NTERESTINGLYSEVERALOFTHEMAREFOUNDINTHE-AGELLANIC 3TREAM THE LONG RIBBON OF NEUTRAL HYDROGEN GAS THAT WAS TIDALLY STRIPPED FROMTHE -AGELLANIC #LOUDS SOME  MILLION YEARS AGO )T SHOULD ALSO BE NOTED THAT ALL THREESPIRAL GALAXIES HAVE WARPED DISKS THAT RESEMBLE AN INTEGRAL SIGN /contintegraltext	 WHEN VIEWED EDGE ONRECALLTHEMAPOFTHE()WARPINOUR'ALAXY	)NFACTTHELINEOFSIGHTFROM %ARTH PASSESTWICE THROUGH SOME PARTS OF THE DISK OF -4HE !NDROMEDA AND -ILKY 7AY GALAXIES ARE APPROACHING EACH OTHER WITH A RELATIVEVELOCITY OFv= KM S− !PPARENTLY THE GRAVITATIONAL ATTRACTION BETWEEN THEM HASOVERCOME THEIR TENDENCY TO EXPAND ALONG WITH THE (UBBLE mOW !S A RESULT THEY WILLCOLLIDE IN APPROXIMATELYtc=r/v=. BILLION YEARS )NDEED ASTRONOMERS HAVE FOUNDTHAT THE ENTIRE ,OCAL 'ROUP IS STILL IN A STATE OF COLLAPSE"ECAUSETHE-ILKY7AYAND!NDROMEDADOMINATETHE,OCAL'ROUPPRODUCINGSOMEOF ITS LUMINOSITY THEIR MOTION TOWARD EACH OTHER PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY TO ESTIMATE THEIRCOMBINEDMASS7ECANASSUMETHATFOLLOWINGTHE"IG"ANGTHETWONEWLYFORMEDGALAXIESWEREINITIALLYMOVINGAPART !TSOMETIMEINTHEPASTTHEIRGRAVITATIONALATTRACTIONHALTEDANDREVERSEDTHEIRORIGINALRECESSIONALMOTION4HE-ILKY7AYAND-ARETHEREFOREINORBITABOUTONEANOTHERWITHANECCENTRICITYe≃IEONACOLLISIONCOURSE	&ROMCONSERVATIONOF ENERGY THE ORBITAL SPEED AND SEPARATION ARE RELATED BYv=GM/parenleftbiggr−a/parenrightbigg,WHEREMISTHETOTALMASSOFTHETWOGALAXIES4HEORBITSSEMIMAJORAXISaISRELATED TOITS PERIODP BY +EPLERS THIRD LAWP=πGMa.#OMBINING THESE RELATIONS TO ELIMINATEaLEADS TOv−GMr+/parenleftbiggπGMP/parenrightbigg/=.	)N THIS EQUATIONr= KPC ANDv= KM S−4O OBTAIN THE TOTAL MASSM WE NEEDANESTIMATEOFTHEORBITALPERIODP7HENTHEGALAXIESDOMEETINTHEFUTURETHEYWILLHAVERETURNEDTOTHEIRINITIALCONlGURATIONANDONEORBITALPERIODWILLHAVEELAPSEDSINCETHE"IG"ANG ,ET US THEREFORE USEP=tH+tc,- IS APPROACHING THE 3UN WITH A SPEED OF  KM S− BUT A LARGE FRACTION OF THIS IS DUE TO THE 3UNS ORBITALMOTION AROUND THE -ILKY7AY4HIS SUGGESTS THE POSSIBILITY THAT THEY MIGHT THEN MERGE TO FORM A GIANT ELLIPTICAL GALAXY2EMEMBER IN THE ABSENCE OF PECULIAR VELOCITIES ANexpansionMEANS THAT EVERY POINT IN SPACE MOVES DIRECTLYAWAY FROM EVERY OTHER POINT%QUATION 	ISACUBICEQUATIONFORM/THATHASONEREALROOTANDTWOCOMPLEXROOTS4HEREALROOTISTHEONE WITH PHYSICAL SIGNIlCANCEThe Structure of the Universe





<<<PAGE 1168>>>

WHEREtc=r/vISROUGHLYTHETIMEUNTILTHEYCOLLIDE4HISISANOVERESTIMATEOFTHEPERIODBECAUSE THE -ILKY 7AY AND - WILL ACCELERATE AS THEY APPROACH THEIR RENDEZVOUS &ORTHE 7-!0 VALUEh=. SOH= KM S−-PC−	 THE TOTAL MASS IS FOUND TO BEM=.×KG=.×-⊙4HISESTIMATEOFTHEMASSOFTHE,OCAL'ROUPISMUCHMORETHANTHELUMINOUSMASSOBSERVED IN THESE GALAXIES4HEBBAND LUMINOSITY OF THE -ILKY7AY IS ABOUT .×,⊙AND - IS ROUGHLY TWICE AS BRIGHT 4HUS THE MASSTOLIGHT RATIO IS ESTIMATED TO BEM/L=-⊙,⊙. O T ET H A TAS M A L L E RP E R I O DG I V E SAL A R G E RM A S S 4 H I SM E A N STHAT!CAREFULSTUDYOFTHE-AGELLANIC3TREAMSUPPORTSTHISCONCLUSION4HETIPOFTHISmOWOFNEUTRALHYDROGENGASISPLUNGINGTOWARDTHE'ALAXYWITHASPEEDOFKMS−2ESEARCHERSATTEMPTING TO REPRODUCE THE DYNAMICS OF THE STREAM OBTAIN THE BEST RESULTS WITH A MODELTHAT HAS A HALO OF DARK MATTER EXTENDING AT LEAST  KPC FROM THE 'ALAXY 4HE 'ALACTICMASSTOLIGHT RATIO FOR THESE MODELS EXCEEDS  -⊙,⊙Other Groups within 10 Mpc of the Local Group4HE ,OCAL 'ROUP IS INDEED A SPATIAL CONCENTRATION OF GALAXIES !LTHOUGH THERE ARE SOME GALAXIES IN THE ,OCAL 'ROUP WITHIN A VOLUME OF SPACE ABOUT A MEGAPARSEC ACROSS THENEXT NEAREST GALAXIES ARE FOUND IN THE 3CULPTOR GROUP SIX MEMBERS  -PC AWAY	 ANDIN THE - GROUP EIGHT MEMBERS  -PC AWAY	 4HE SIX SPIRAL GALAXIES OF THE 3CULPTORGROUP SPAN ABOUT ◦ON THE NIGHT SKY 9OU COULD JUST COVER THEM WITH YOUR OUTSTRETCHEDHANDHELDATARMSLENGTH/THERASSOCIATIONSWITHIN-PCINCLUDETHE#ENTAURUSGROUP MEMBERS  -PC AWAY	 AND THE - GROUP  MEMBERS  -PC AWAY	4HE -AND-GROUPSARESEPARATEDBYONLY◦INTHESKY4OGETHERTHEYCONTAINABOUTGALAXIESANDBOTHAREABOUT-PCFROM%ARTH!NDlNALLYTHELASTGROUPWITHIN-PCOF%ARTHIS THE .'#  GROUP  MEMBERS  -PC AWAY	 !LTOGETHER THERE ARE ABOUT TWENTYSMALLGROUPSOFGALAXIESTHATARECLOSERTOUSTHANTHE6IRGOCLUSTER-OSTGALAXIESAREFOUNDIN SUCH SMALL GROUPS AND POOR CLUSTERS )T IS ESTIMATED THAT AT MOST  OF ALL GALAXIESINHABIT RICH CLUSTERS LIKE THE6IRGO CLUSTER&IGURE  SHOWS THE POSITIONS OF THE NEAREST GALAXIES #ENTERED ON THE -ILKY 7AYTHE DIAGRAM REACHES OUT TO JUST PAST THE - GROUP 4HERE ARE MANY MORE DWARFS THANTHERE ARE GIANT GALAXIES AND BOTH TYPES ARE FOUND GENERALLY IN THE SAME REGIONS4HERE AREALSOSOMEEXTENDEDVOLUMESOFSPACETERMEDvoidsWHEREGALAXIESAREAPPARENTLYABSENT!NOTHERSTRIKINGFEATUREISTHATTHEGALAXIESSHOWATENDENCYTOLIEALONGATWODIMENSIONALPLANESGZ=	THATFORMSPARTOFTHE,OCAL3UPERCLUSTEROFGALAXIESCENTEREDONTHE6IRGOCLUSTER TO BE DISCUSSED LATER	)T IS FASCINATING TO REALIZE THAT MANY ASTRONOMICAL OBJECTS OCCUPY A SIGNIlCANT AREA OF THE SKY )F ONLY OUR EYESHAD THE SENSITIVITY TO SEE THEMh3'v DENOTES A SUPERGALACTIC COORDINATE SYSTEM CREATED BY DE6AUCOULEURSThe Structure of the Universe

because the value of P was overestimated, M/L has been underestimated. These numbers are much larger than the value of M/L ≃ 3M⊙/L⊙ for the luminous matter in the Milky Way’s thin disk and central bulge. Our WMAP result of M/L ≃ 57 M⊙/L⊙with the estimates when the MilkyWay’s dark halo is included. Apparently, astronomers  is consistent have seen less than approximately 10% of the matter that makes up the MilkyWay and Andromeda galaxies.


<<<PAGE 1169>>>

nnnn3'9 -PC	3': -PC	3'8 -PC	nn
FIGURE 12'ALAXIES NEAR THE -ILKY7AY -OST OF THE POSITIONS EXCEPT FOR - AND GALAXIESIN ITS SUBGROUP	 WERE FOUND USING REDSHIFTS AND THE (UBBLE LAW 4HESGYAXIS POINTS TOWARD THE6IRGO CLUSTERThe Virgo Cluster: A Rich, Irregular Cluster4HEVirgo clusterOF GALAXIES WAS lRST RECOGNIZED IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY BY 7ILLIAM(ERSCHEL,OCATEDWHERETHECONSTELLATIONSOF6IRGOAND#OMA"ERENICES"ERENICES(AIR	MEET THE 6IRGO CLUSTER COVERS A ◦×◦REGION OF THE SKY4HE CENTER OF THE CLUSTER ISLOCATED ABOUT  -PC FROM %ARTH4HIS RICH IRREGULAR CLUSTER IS A SPRAWLING COLLECTIONOF APPROXIMATELY  LARGE GALAXIES AND MORE THAN  SMALLER ONES CONTAINED WITHIN AREGIONABOUT-PCACROSS)NTERESTINGLYATLEASTSEVENOFTHESEGALAXIESDISPLAYBLUESHIFTEDSPECTRALLINESASTHEIRPECULIARVELOCITIESOFAPPROACHOVERPOWERTHERECEDING(UBBLEmOW,IKE MOST IRREGULAR CLUSTERS THE 6IRGO CLUSTER IS MADE UP OF ALL TYPES OF GALAXIES !LTHOUGH THE FOUR BRIGHTEST ARE GIANT ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES ELLIPTICALS MAKE UP ONLY  OF THECLUSTERS  BRIGHTEST GALAXIES 3PIRALS DOMINATE OVERALL ACCOUNTING FOR  OF THE TOP(OWEVERROUGHLYEQUALNUMBERSOFSPIRALSANDDWARFELLIPTICALSAREFOUNDWITHIN◦OFTHE CLUSTERS CENTER WITH THE ELLIPTICALS BECOMING INCREASINGLY COMMON NEAR THE CENTER )NFACTTHECENTEROFTHE6IRGOCLUSTERISDOMINATEDBYTHREEOFTHECLUSTERSFOURGIANTELLIPTICAL
"ERENICEWIFEOFTHE%GYPTIANKING0TOLEMY)))OFFEREDHERGOLDENTRESSESASASACRIlCETOTHEGODDESS!PHRODITEIN GRATITUDE FOR HER HUSBANDS VICTORY OVER THE!SSYRIANS4HIS VALUE OF THE DISTANCE TO THE 6IRGO CLUSTER IS IN THE BEST AGREEMENT WITH THE VALUES IN 4ABLE The Structure of the Universe

galaxies (M84, M86, and M87; see Fig. 13). The diameters of these galaxies are  comparable to the distance  between our Galaxy and Andromeda, so each of these giant ellipticals is nearly the size of the entire Local Group.M87, a giant E1 elliptical, is the largest and brightest galaxy in the Virgo clus-ter. Like many other luminous elliptical galaxies, it contains roughly 1010 M⊙ of hot ( 107 K) gas that has accumulated through normal stellar mass loss mechanisms. The gas loses energy by the free–free emission of X-ray photons. This thermal bremsst-rahlung process produces a characteristic spectrum that can be readily identiﬁed∼


<<<PAGE 1170>>>

FIGURE 134HECENTEROFTHE6IRGOCLUSTERSHOWINGTHEGIANTELLIPTICALS-RIGHT	AND-CENTER	 #OURTESY OF .ATIONAL /PTICAL!STRONOMY /BSERVATORIES	ANDUSEDTOESTIMATETHEMASSOFTHEGALAXY;SEE%Q 	AND&IG =!LTHOUGHTHEANALYSISISCOMPLICATEDOBSERVATIONSOFTHESPECTRUMOFTHEGASCANPROVIDEANIDEAOFHOWITS TEMPERATURET (r) AND MASS DENSITYρ(r) VARY WITHr THE DISTANCE FROM THE CENTER OFTHEGALAXY&ORTUNATELYTHENEARLYSPHERICALSHAPEOF-SIMPLIlESTHEGEOMETRY4HEGASIS IN HYDROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM TO A GOOD APPROXIMATION	 SOdPdr=−GMrρr.3UBSTITUTING THE IDEAL GAS LAWFOR THE PRESSUREP ASSUMING CONSTANTµ ANDSOLVING FOR THE INTERIOR MASSMr PRODUCEMr=−kT rµmHG/parenleftbigg∂LNρ∂LNr+∂LNT∂LNr/parenrightbigg.	!LL OF THE QUANTITIES ON THE RIGHTHAND SIDE CAN BE ROUGHLY EVALUATED FROM OBSERVATIONS OFTHE 8RAYS EMITTED BY THE HOT GAS AND USED TO CALCULATE THE INTERIOR MASS ON THE LEFTHANDSIDE .OTE THATMrIS THEtotalINTERIOR MASS BOTH LUMINOUS AND DARK 4HE DERIVATIVES ARETHEMSELVES NEGATIVE SOMrIS POSITIVE	The Structure of the Universe
One  result  for  M87  shows  that  Mr increases  linearly with  radius  out  to  about  300  kpc. This is the same signature seen for the distribution of dark matter in spiral gal-axies. The total mass contained within r = 300 kpc is Mr ≃ 3 × 1013 M⊙, with a cen-tral density of 1.5 × 10−2 M⊙ pc−3. The corresponding mass-to-light ratio is M/L ≃ 750 M⊙/L⊙. This is 250 times the mass-to-light ratio for the stars in the Milky Way’s  Galactic bulge and thin disk and indicates that over 99% of M87’s mass is dark mat-ter. M87 is not a typical elliptical galaxy. However, studies of other elliptical


<<<PAGE 1171>>>

GALAXIES HAVE FOUND THAT MANY OF THEM ALSO CONTAIN LARGE AMOUNTS  OR MORE	 OF DARKMATTERThe Coma Cluster: A Rich, Regular Cluster4HE NEAREST RICH REGULAR CLUSTER OF GALAXIES IS THEComa cluster )T IS ABOUT ◦NORTHIN DECLINATION	 OF THE 6IRGO CLUSTER IN THE CONSTELLATION #OMA "ERENICES 2ECALL FROM%XAMPLE  THAT THE #OMA CLUSTER IS ABOUT  TIMES FARTHER AWAY THAN IS THE 6IRGOCLUSTER OR ABOUT  -PC FROM %ARTH 4HE CLUSTERS ANGULAR DIAMETER IS ABOUT ◦ WHICHCORRESPONDS TO A LINEAR DIAMETER OF  -PC 4HE #OMA CLUSTER CONSISTS OF PERHAPS GALAXIES MOST OF THEM DWARF ELLIPTICALS THAT ARE TOO FAINT TO BE SEEN 'ENERALLY IN A RICHREGULARCLUSTERTHEVASTMAJORITYOFTHEGALAXIESAREELLIPTICALSAND3S4HISISTHECASEFORTHE #OMA CLUSTER )T CONTAINS OVER  BRIGHT GALAXIES BUT ONLY  OF THEM ARE SPIRALSAND IRREGULARS!T THE CLUSTERS CENTER ARE TWO LARGE LUMINOUS C$ ELLIPTICALSEvidence for the Evolution of Galaxies2ECALLTHATTHEPREDOMINANCEOFEARLYTYPEGALAXIESINACLUSTERMAYBEDUETOTHEINCREASEDLIKELIHOOD OF INTERACTIONS THE MORPHOLOGYnDENSITY RELATION	 0ERHAPS IN THE PAST MORESPIRALS EXISTED IN THE #OMA CLUSTER AND OTHER RICH REGULAR CLUSTERS BUT TIDAL INTERACTIONSAND MERGERS DESTROYED THE SPIRAL MORPHOLOGY LEAVING ELLIPTICALS AND 3S !LTERNATIVELYEARLYTYPE GALAXIES MAY SIMPLY FORM AS A RESULT OF HIERARCHICAL MERGERS OF PROTOGALAXIESNEAR THE BOTTOM OF THE CLUSTERS GRAVITATIONAL WELL IN REGIONS WHERE DARK MATTER WOULDNATURALLY TEND TO COLLECT)N SUPPORT OF THE INTERACTION VIEW &IG  SHOWS THE CENTER OF THE VERY RICH CLUSTER#,+WITHAREDSHIFTOFz=.IMPLYINGADISTANCEOFh−=-PC7EARESEEINGTHISCLUSTERASITWASABOUT.h−=.BILLIONYEARSAGOWHENMANYLATETYPE SPIRALS WERE FOUND IN THIS CENTRAL REGION4HIS IS UNLIKE THE CENTER OF ANY HIGHDENSITYCLUSTERBELONGINGTOTHEPRESENTEPOCH-OSTOFTHESPIRALSIN&IG SHOWATLEASTSOMEEVIDENCE OF AN INTERACTION 4HE FREQUENCY OF INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS IS PERHAPS AN ORDEROF MAGNITUDE GREATER THAN WOULD BE FOUND IN A CONTEMPORARY RICH CLUSTER,OOKING EVEN MORE DEEPLY INTO THE UNIVERSE ASTRONOMERS HAVE DISCOVERED A REMOTECLUSTERINTHECONSTELLATION3ERPENSATz≈.ORh−=-PC4HISCLUSTERSHOWNIN&IG ISSEENASITWASABOUT.h−=.BILLIONYEARSAGO)TCONTAINSAPPARENTLYMATUREELLIPTICALSBUTVERYFEWNORMALSPIRALS)NSTEADTHEREISANABUNDANCEOFODDGALACTICFRAGMENTS HAVING A BLUISH COLOR A SIGNATURE OF ACTIVE STAR FORMATION RECALL THE "UTCHERn/EMLER EFFECT	 )T IS NOT CLEAR WHETHER THESE ARE THE DEBRIS OF FORMER SPIRALS OR SPIRALS STILLIN THE PROCESS OF COALESCING &URTHER OBSERVATIONS SHOULD REVEAL MORE DETAILS ABOUT THEFORMATION AND DISRUPTION OF SPIRAL GALAXIES IN THE DYNAMIC ENVIRONMENT OF SUCH CROWDEDYOUNG CLUSTERSA Preponderance of Matter between the Galaxies)N  &RITZ :WICKY MEASURED THE RADIAL VELOCITIES OF GALAXIES IN THE #OMA CLUSTER FROMTHEIR$OPPLERSHIFTEDSPECTRA&ROMTHOSEOBSERVATIONSHECALCULATEDTHEDISPERSIONINTHEIRThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1172>>>

FIGURE 14!N (34 IMAGE OF THE CENTER OF THE RICH CLUSTER #, + &IGURE FROM$RESSLER ET ALAp. J. Lett.435 , 	
FIGURE 15!N(34VIEWOFAYOUNGCLUSTEROFGALAXIESCENTEREDONTHEPECULIARRADIOGALAXY#  ALSO SEEN AT BOTTOM RIGHT	 ATz=.!T CENTER RIGHT IS A PAIR OF NORMALAPPEARING ELLIPTICALGALAXIESWITHAFEWFAINTCOMPANIONSWHILEATTOPRIGHTARESOMEGALACTICFRAGMENTSTHATMAYBECOMEOR MAY HAVE ONCE BEEN SPIRALS ;#OURTESY OF -ARK $ICKINSON 343C)	 AND .!3!=The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1173>>>

RADIAL VELOCITIES NOW KNOWN TO BEσr= KM S− :WICKY THEN USED THE VIRIAL THEOREMTOESTIMATETHEMASSOFTHE#OMACLUSTER/VERALLTHE#OMACLUSTERSINTENSITYPROlLEI (r)Example 3.1.)N THE CASE OF THE #OMA CLUSTER THE DISPERSION IN THE RADIAL VELOCITY IS KM S− HE CLUSTER RADIUSR= -PC LEADS TO A MASS OFM≈σrRG=.×-⊙FORTHE#OMACLUSTER3INCETHEVISUALLUMINOSITYOFTHE#OMACLUSTERISABOUT×,⊙THE MASSTOLIGHT RATIO OF THE CLUSTER ISM/L≈ -⊙/,⊙:WICKY UNDERSTOOD THE SIGNIlCANCE OF THIS RESULT AND STATED THAT IN THE #OMA CLUSTERhTHE TOTAL MASS...CONSIDERABLY EXCEEDS THE SUM OF THE MASSES OF INDIVIDUAL GALAXIESv(E REALIZED THAT THERE IS NOT ENOUGH VISIBLE MASS TO BIND THE CLUSTER TOGETHER )F NOT FOR THEPRESENCE OF A LARGE AMOUNT OF UNSEEN MATTER THE GALAXIES IN THE #OMA CLUSTER WOULD HAVEDISPERSEDLONGAGO&ORTYYEARSLATERWHENTHEmATROTATIONCURVEOFTHE!NDROMEDAGALAXYWAS MEASURED OTHER ASTRONOMERS ALSO REALIZED THE SIGNIlCANCE OF :WICKYS RESULTThe Hot, Intracluster Gas!PORTIONOF:WICKYShMISSINGMASSvWASDISCOVEREDWITHTHE(IGH%NERGY!STRONOMICAL/BSERVATORY(%!/	SERIESOFSATELLITESTHATWERElRSTLAUNCHEDIN4HEYREVEALEDTHATMANYCLUSTERSOFGALAXIESEMIT8RAYSFROMMUCHOFTHECLUSTERSVOLUME4HESESATELLITESTOGETHERWITHOPTICALOBSERVATIONSINDICATEDTHATCLUSTERSOFGALAXIESCONTAINANintraclus-ter medium 4HE INTRACLUSTER MEDIUM HAS TWO COMPONENTS /NE IS A DIFFUSE IRREGULARDISTRIBUTIONOFSTARS4HEOTHERCOMPONENTISAHOTintracluster gasTHATISDISTRIBUTEDMOREOR LESS HOMOGENEOUSLY OCCUPYING THE SPACE BETWEEN THE GALAXIES AND lLLING THE CLUSTERSGRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL WELL 4HE 8RAY LUMINOSITIES LIE IN THE RANGE TO 7 WITHRICHERCLUSTERSSHININGMOREBRIGHTLYIN8RAYS4HECOREOFTHE6IRGOCLUSTERCONTAINSABOUT×-⊙OF 8RAY EMITTING GAS AND THE CORE OF THE #OMA CLUSTER HOLDS ×-⊙&IGURE  SHOWS THE 8RAY EMISSION FROM THE HOT GAS THAT lLLS THE #OMA CLUSTER 4YPICALLYTHEMASSOFTHEGASISSEVERALTIMESGREATERTHANTHECOMBINEDMASSOFALLSTARSINTHECLUSTERS GALAXIES4HERMAL BREMSSTRAHLUNG THE SAME MECHANISM THAT PRODUCES THE 8RAYS COMING FROMTHEHOTGASWITHININDIVIDUALGALAXIESDESCRIBEDEARLIERFOR-INTHE6IRGOCLUSTER	ISATWORK HERE AS WELL &OR FULLY IONIZED HYDROGEN GAS THE ENERGY EMITTED PER UNIT VOLUME PERUNIT TIME BETWEEN FREQUENCIESνANDν+dνIS GIVEN BYℓνdν=.×−/parenleftbigπne/parenrightbigT−/e−hν/kTdν7M−,	!MORE DETAILED CALCULATION RESULTS IN A MASSTOLIGHT RATIO ABOUT HALF AS LARGE AS OUR ESTIMATEThe Structure of the Universe

4follows a characteristic  law like those that describe the intensity proﬁles of the Milky Way’s bulge and halo, and elliptical galaxies. Presumably, like the stars that make up  elliptical galaxies and the spheroidal components of spirals, the galaxies in the Coma clus-ter have become dynamically relaxed and are in an equilibrium conﬁguration. This makes the virial theorem an appropriate method to use.r1/4


<<<PAGE 1174>>>

FIGURE 16!N 8RAY -ULTI-IRROR 8--	 TELESCOPE IMAGE OF THE #OMA CLUSTER TAKEN BYTHE %UROPEAN 3PACE !GENCYS 8--.EWTON SPACE OBSERVATORY 4HE MOSAIC IMAGE SHOWS 8RAYSIN THE nKE6 RANGE FROM THE #OMA CLUSTERS INTRACLUSTER GAS AND OCCUPIES A lELD OF VIEW OF.◦×.◦4HEINTENSITYOFTHE8RAYSINCREASESCONTINUOUSLYTOWARDTHECENTEROFTHECLUSTER 4HEIRREGULAR SHAPE OF THE EMISSION INDICATES THAT THE #OMA CLUSTER MAY HAVE FORMED FROM THE MERGER OFSEVERAL SUBCLUSTERS )MAGE COURTESY OF 5 "RIEL -AX 0LANCK )NSTITUT FàR EXTRATERRESTRISCHE 0HYSIK'ARCHING 'ERMANY AND THE %UROPEAN 3PACE!GENCY	WHERETISTHEGASTEMPERATUREANDneISTHENUMBERDENSITYOFFREEELECTRONS/NEVERSIONOFTHISSPECTRUMFORTHE#OMACLUSTERISSHOWNIN&IG 4HETOTALAMOUNTOFENERGYEMITTEDPER SECOND PER UNIT VOLUME AT ALL FREQUENCIES THEluminosity densityLVOL	 IS OBTAINED BYINTEGRATINGℓνOVER FREQUENCY4HIS RESULTS INLVOL=.×−neT/7M−.	Example 3.2.%QUATION  	 CAN BE USED TO ESTIMATE THE MASS OF THE #OMA CLUSTERS INTRACLUSTER GAS &OR SIMPLICITY WE WILL ASSUME THAT THE CLUSTER CAN BE MODELED ASAN ISOTHERMAL SPHERE OF HOT IONIZED HYDROGEN GAS &IGURE  INDICATES THAT THE CENTRALCORE RADIATES MOST STRONGLY SO WE WILL TAKE THE RADIUS TO BER=. -PC ONEHALF OF THECLUSTERSACTUALRADIUS	4HEGASISOPTICALLYTHINMEANINGTHATANYPHOTONEMITTEDALONGTHELINEOFSIGHTCANBEOBSERVED4HEGASTEMPERATURECOMESFROMTHE8RAYSPECTRUMOFTHEGAScontinuedThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1175>>>

n
n0HOTONSM SEC KE6(IGHENERGY DETECTOR-EDIUMENERGY DETECTOR"ESTFIT THERMAL BREMSSTRAHLUNG SPECTRUM
  %NERGY KE6	FIGURE 174HERMALBREMSSTRAHLUNGSPECTRUMLINE	FORMILLION+4HEPOINTSAREOBSERVATIONS OF 8RAYS FROM THE #OMA CLUSTERS INTRACLUSTER GAS 0HOTON ENERGY IS PLOTTED ON THE HORIZONTALAXIS &IGURE ADAPTED FROM (ENRIKSEN AND -USHOTZKYAp. J.302  	SHOWN IN &IG  5SING %Q  	 THE BEST lT TO THE DATA THE DOTS ON THE lGURE	 ISOBTAINED WITH A TEMPERATURE OF .×+5SING %Q  	LxCAN BE WRITTEN ASLx=πRLVOL.	3INCE THE 8RAY LUMINOSITY OF THE GAS ISLx=×7 THE VALUE OFne THE NUMBER OFFREE ELECTRONS PER M− ISne=/bracketleftbiggLxπRT/(.×−7M−)/bracketrightbigg/= M−.4HE INTRACLUSTER GAS IS SEVERAL MILLION TIMES LESS DENSE THAN THE GIANT MOLECULARCLOUDSFOR WHICHn(∼TO M−&ORIONIZEDHYDROGENTHEREISONEPROTONFOREVERYELECTRONSOTHETOTALMASSOFTHEGASISMGAS=πRnemH=.×-⊙,A SLIGHT OVERESTIMATE OF THE VALUE OF ×-⊙QUOTED PREVIOUSLYThe Structure of the Universe



<<<PAGE 1176>>>

,ETS COMPARE THE FOREGOING MASS OF THE INTRACLUSTER GAS WITH THE LUMINOUS MASS OFTHE #OMA CLUSTER 5SING THE MASSTOLIGHT RATIO FOR THE STARS IN THE -ILKY 7AYS 'ALACTICBULGE AND THIN DISKM/L≃-⊙/,⊙ AND THE VISUAL LUMINOSITY OF THE #OMA CLUSTERLV=×,⊙ THE VISIBLE MASS OF THE #OMA CLUSTER IS APPROXIMATELY .×-⊙!CCORDINGTOTHISESTIMATETHEREISROUGHLYTIMESMOREINTRACLUSTERGASINTHE#OMACLUSTERTHAN THERE IS IN ITS GALAXIESSTARS (OWEVER THE -⊙OF INTRACLUSTER GAS IS STILL ONLY AFEW PERCENT OF THE TOTAL MASS OF THE #OMA CLUSTER4HE8RAYSPECTRUMOFTHEINTRACLUSTERGASALSODISPLAYSEMISSIONLINESOFHIGHLYIONIZEDIRON EG &E 886 AND &E 886)	 SILICON AND NEON 4HIS INDICATES THAT THE GAS HAS BEENPROCESSEDTHROUGHTHESTARSINTHECLUSTERSGALAXIESBECOMINGENRICHEDINHEAVYELEMENTSVIASTELLARNUCLEOSYNTHESIS(OWTHENDIDSOMUCHMASSESCAPEFROMTHECLUSTERSGALAXIES-ERGERSMUSTHAVEOCCURREDMOREFREQUENTLYINTHEEARLYHISTORYOFTHECLUSTER7HENTHECLUSTERWASSTILLFORMINGDURINGITSlRSTFEWBILLIONYEARSITWASMOREDISPERSED!CCORDING
The Existence of Superclusters.EXTINTHEHIERARCHYOFGALACTICCLUSTERINGISTHEsupercluster!STHENAMESUGGESTSTHISIS A CLUSTERING OF CLUSTERS ON A GRAND SCALE UP TO ABOUT  -PC	 )T MAY BE THAT VIRTUALLYEVERY GALAXY BELONGS TO A SUPERCLUSTER CERTAINLY EVERY KNOWN RICH CLUSTER IS FOUND IN ONE4HE6IRGOCLUSTERISNEARTHECENTEROFTHELocal Supercluster4HISDISKOFCLUSTERSHASTHESHAPEOFAmATTENEDELLIPSOIDAPANCAKETHATCONTAINSMOSTOFTHEGALAXIESLYINGWITHINABOUT  -PC OF THE 6IRGO CLUSTER INCLUDING THE ,OCAL 'ROUP WHICH IS LOCATED NEAR THEEDGEOFTHESUPERCLUSTER	&IGURE SHOWSTHE,OCAL3UPERCLUSTERASTHELINEARGROUPINGOF GALAXIES EXTENDING FROM THE CENTER OF THE lGURE 4HE VIEW THAT IS DEPICTED IS PARALLELTO THE PLANE OF THE SUPERCLUSTER SO YOU ARE LOOKING AT THE PANCAKE EDGEON #OMPARE THISVIEWWITH&IG ANDNOTETHATTHECONCENTRATIONOFGALAXIESALONGAPLANECONTINUESIN&IG  /F THE OTHER KNOWN SUPERCLUSTERS TWO OF THE MOST PROMINENT ARE THE 0ERSEUSn0ISCES SUPERCLUSTER NAMED FOR THE NORTHERN CONSTELLATIONS IN WHICH IT IS FOUND AND THE(YDRAn#ENTAURUSSUPERCLUSTERINTHESOUTHERNSKY4HE0ERSEUSn0ISCESSUPERCLUSTERISABOUTh−-PC AWAY AND HAS A THREADLIKE APPEARANCE A PLANAR lLAMENTARY STRUCTURE THAT ISABOUTh−-PCLONGSEE&IG 4HE(YDRAn#ENTAURUSSUPERCLUSTERISATh−-PCIN ROUGHLY THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION"ECAUSE THE ,OCAL 'ROUP RESIDES NEAR THE EDGE OF THE ,OCAL 3UPERCLUSTER IT MIGHT BEEXPECTED THAT THE SUPERCLUSTERS GRAVITATIONAL PULL WOULD BE DETECTABLE )N  DE 6AUCOULEURS FOUND THAT THE ,OCAL 'ROUP IS MOVING AWAY LESS RAPIDLY FROM THE 6IRGO CLUSTERTHANWOULDBEEXPECTEDSOLELYFROMTHEEXPANSIONOFTHEUNIVERSE!TADISTANCEOF-PCAPURE(UBBLEmOWWOULDPRODUCEARECESSIONALVELOCITYOFv=Hd=hKMS−4HEDIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE ACTUAL VELOCITY OF THE ,OCAL 'ROUP RELATIVE TO THE6IRGO CLUSTER ANDThe Structure of the Universe
to the virial theorem, the cluster’s galaxies would have been moving more slowly, thereby increasing the dynamical friction and the chance of a merger. The large amounts of intra-cluster gas found in many rich clusters were probably ejected during these early galactic interactions, or by bursts of star formation. Once this process was under way, it would have been enhanced by ram-pressure stripping. When a galaxy moves at several thousand kilometers per second through the intracluster gas, it encounters a furious wind that is capable of stripping its gas away.


<<<PAGE 1177>>>

3':
3'9
FIGURE 184HE DISTRIBUTION OF  BRIGHT GALAXIES OUT TO ROUGHLY  -PC4HE ,OCAL 3UPERCLUSTER EXTENDS TO THE RIGHT WITH THE -ILKY7AY AT CENTER	 LOCATED NEAR THE EDGE OF THE SUPERCLUSTER4HE PLANE OF THE -ILKY7AY BISECTS THE hEMPTYv SLICES GALAXIES WITHIN THESE SLICES ARE HIDDEN FROMVIEW BY 'ALACTIC DUST AND GAS THE ZONE OF AVOIDANCE	 &IGURE FROM4ULLYAp. J.257  	THE(UBBLEmOWCALLEDTHEVirgocentric peculiar velocityOFTHE,OCAL'ROUPISESTIMATEDTO BE ± KM S−BY 3ANDAGE AND4AMMANN 	!N ARGUMENT SIMILAR IN SPIRIT TOTHATUSEDFORTHEAPPROACHINGPATHSOFTHE-ILKY7AYAND-CANNOWBEINVOKEDTOESTIMATE THE MASS AND THE MASSTOLIGHT RATIO OF THE ,OCAL 3UPERCLUSTER 4HE RESULTS SHOW THATTHESUPERCLUSTERSMASSISABOUT×h−-⊙4HECORRESPONDINGMASSTOLIGHTRATIOISM/L≃h-⊙/,⊙ PROVIDING MORE EVIDENCE FOR A PREPONDERANCE OF DARK MATTERLarge-Scale Motions Relative to the Hubble FlowKMS−4HISRIVERLIKEMOTIONOFTHOUSANDSOFGALAXIESEXTENDSATLEASTh−-PCBOTHUPSTREAMANDDOWNSTREAM!STRONOMERSWOULDLIKETOUSETHISSTREAMINGTODEDUCETHELOCATIONS	OFTHEMASSVISIBLEORDARKCAPABLEOFEXERTINGSUCHANIMMENSEGRAVITATIONALTUG4HE(YDRAn#ENTAURUSSUPERCLUSTERWHICHISINTHEDIRECTIONOFTHEmOWISnotRESPONSIBLESINCE IT TOO IS MOVING ALONG WITH THE mOW OF THE REST OF THE GALAXIES 4HIS IMPLIES THAT THESOURCE OF THE MOTION LIES BEYOND THAT SUPERCLUSTER)N THE S !MERICAN ASTRONOMERS !LAN $RESSLER AND 3ANDRA &ABER CALCULATED THEPRESENCE OF AGreat Attractor'!	 A DIFFUSE COLLECTION OF CLUSTERS SPREAD OVER A WIDEThe Structure of the Universe
The Virgocentric peculiar velocity is a minor perturbation in a much larger scale in-homogeneity in the Hubble ﬂow. There is a large-scale streaming motion (rela-tive to the Hubble ﬂow) that carries the Milky Way, the Local Group, the Virgo clus-ter, and thousands of other galaxies through space in the direction of the constellation Centaurus. The peculiar velocity of the Local Group relative to the Hubble ﬂow is


<<<PAGE 1178>>>


          )NSIDE '! REGION/UTSIDE '! REGIONV#"2 KM SECn	
0REDICTED DISTANCE hn -PC	FIGURE 19,EFTVELOCITIESOFGALAXIESINTHE#ENTAURUSREGIONCOMPAREDWITHTHE(UBBLEmOWDASHED LINE	4HE DOTTED LINE SHOWS THE THEORETICAL VARIATION IN VELOCITY PRODUCED BY A MODEL OF THE'REAT!TTRACTOR4HE(YDRAn#ENTAURUSSUPERCLUSTERISCENTEREDATABOUTh−-PC2IGHTCOMPARISONlGUREFORGALAXIESOBSERVEDINANOTHERDIRECTION&IGUREADAPTEDFROM$RESSLERAND&ABERAp. J. Lett.354 , 	◦	REGIONOFTHESKY!CCORDINGTOTHEIRCALCULATIONSTHE'!LIESINTHESAMEPLANEASTHE,OCAL3UPERCLUSTERABOUTh−-PCAWAYINTHEDIRECTIONOFℓ=◦b=◦'ALACTICCOORDINATES	INTHECONSTELLATION#ENTAURUS4HEMASSOFTHE'REAT!TTRACTORISESTIMATEDTOBEABOUT×h−-⊙BUTTHEREAREJUSTGALAXIESKNOWNINTHATREGIONTOOFEWTOACCOUNTFORSOMUCHMASS4HISSUGGESTSTHATAPPROXIMATELYOFTHEMASSOFTHE'!MAY BE IN THE FORM OF DARK MATTER !LTERNATIVELY BECAUSE THE 'REAT !TTRACTOR LIES BEHINDTHE PLANE OF OUR GALAXY AND IS OBSCURED BY DUST THERE COULD BE A LARGE HIDDEN SUPERCLUSTEROFGALAXIESINTHATDIRECTION)FSOITWOULDBECENTEREDONACLUSTEROFGALAXIESCALLED!BELL&IGURE SHOWSTHEVELOCITIESOF%AND3GALAXIESINTHEREGIONOFTHE'REAT!TTRACTORTHE lGURES DOTTED LINE IS THE GALACTIC VELOCITY lELD CALCULATED FOR A SPECIlC MODEL OF THE'! /N THE NEAR SIDE OF THE '! THE VELOCITIES CLEARLY EXCEED THAT OF THE UNPERTURBED(UBBLE mOW THE DIAGONAL DASHED LINE IN THE lGURE	 4HERE ARE HINTS OF A hBACK mOWv OFTHE FARSIDE OF THE '!VELOCITIES LESS THAN THE (UBBLE mOW	 BUT THIS HAS BEEN DISPUTED BYOTHERINVESTIGATORS 4HESEASTRONOMERSBELIEVETHATTHEVELOCITYEXCESSACTUALLYCONTINUESbeyondTHEPROPOSEDLOCATIONOFTHE'!ANDSUGGESTOTHERORADDITIONAL	CONCENTRATIONSOFMATTER7HETHER OR NOT THE 'REAT!TTRACTOR EXISTS AS DESCRIBED THE EXISTENCE OF LARGESCALESTREAMING MOTIONS RELATIVE TO THE (UBBLE mOW SEEMED UNDENIABLE!NOTHERPOSSIBILITYISTHATTHE'REAT!TTRACTORISNOTSOLELYRESPONSIBLEFORTHELARGESCALESTREAMING MOTION 4HEShapley concentrationOF GALAXIES IS PROBABLY THE MOST MASSIVECOLLECTION OF GALAXIES IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE UNIVERSE SEE &IG  7ITH A CORECONSISTING OF A GRAVITATIONALLY BOUND CONCENTRATION OF SOME  RICH CLUSTERS OF GALAXIESTHE 3HAPLEY CONCENTRATION HAS A MASS OF A FEW×h−-⊙AND LIES WITHIN ◦OF THE3EE FOR EXAMPLE A SIMILAR DIAGRAM IN -ATHEWSON &ORD AND "UCHHORN 	The Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1179>>>

nnnnn$ECLINATION 	
HMHMHMHMHM2IGHT ASCENSION 	FIGURE 20! LARGESCALE VIEW OF THE CENTER OF THE 3HAPLEY CONCENTRATION CENTERED ON THEGALAXY ! AND ITS COMPANIONS 4HE ENTIRE COLLECTION OF GALAXIES IS ABOUT ◦ACROSS IN THE SKY&IGURE FROM "ARDELLI ET ALAstron. Astrophys.396 	DIRECTIONOFTHE,OCAL'ROUPSMOTIONANDVERYCLOSETOTHEDIRECTIONOFTHE'REAT!TTRACTOR(OWEVER ITS DISTANCE OF h−-PC IS THREE TIMES THE DISTANCE CALCULATED FOR THE 'REAT!TTRACTORSOITCANNOTBEIDENTIlEDWITHTHE'!3TILLITISPROBABLYRESPONSIBLEFORnOF THE NET ACCELERATION OF THE ,OCAL 'ROUP!STRONOMERS BELIEVE THAT THE LARGESCALE BULK MOTIONS CANNOT CONTINUE ON INCREASINGLYLARGER SCALES BECAUSE THAT WOULD VIOLATE THE COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE THAT THE UNIVERSE ISISOTROPIC4HEDIRECTIONSUCHALARGESCALEBULKMOTIONWOULDBEAPREFERREDDIRECTIONINTHEUNIVERSE2ECENTOBSERVATIONSBASEDON4YPE)ASUPERNOVADISTANCESWHICHHAVEASMALLERUNCERTAINLYTHANTHE4ULLEYn&ISHERDISTANCESOFTENUSEDINTHESESTUDIES	INDICATETHATTHESEVAST BULK mOWS EVENTUALLY CONVERGE WITH THE (UBBLE mOW WITH NO PECULIAR VELOCITY	 AT ADISTANCEOFABOUTnh−-PC)NFACTSOMEOBSERVATIONSUSING4YPE)ASUPERNOVAEFAILTO lND ANY EVIDENCE AT ALL OF LARGESCALE COHERENT MOTION 7E WILL HAVE TO WAIT FOR MORECOMPLETE AND PRECISE OBSERVATIONS BEFORE THE ISSUE CAN BE SETTLEDBubbles and Voids: Structure on the Largest Scales4OlNDHOWTHEUNIVERSELOOKSWHENEXAMINEDATEVENLARGERSCALESEXTENSIVESURVEYSOFTHESKYHAVEBEENCONDUCTED$URINGTHESTHE0ALOMAR/BSERVATORY3KY3URVEYRECORDEDTHE NORTHERN PORTION OF THE HEAVENS ON GLASS PHOTOGRAPHIC PLATES EACH COVERING A ◦×◦The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1180>>>

FIGURE 214WO MILLION GALAXIES COMPILED BY THE 5NITED +INGDOM 3CHMIDT 4ELESCOPE SKYSURVEYOVERAREGIONOFSQUAREDEGREESCENTEREDONTHESOUTH'ALACTICPOLE&IGUREFROM-ADDOXET ALMNRAS242 P 	AREA )N THIS STUDY TWO PLATES WERE MADE FOR EACH AREA OF SKY RECORDED ON EMULSIONS THATWEREMORESENSITIVETOEITHERREDORBLUELIGHTTHUSGIVINGANINDICATIONOFTHETEMPERATURESOFTHEOBJECTSPHOTOGRAPHEDINADDITIONTOTHEIRRELATIVEBRIGHTNESSES&IGURE SHOWSTHERESULTOFAMORERECENTSURVEYOFTHESOUTHERNSKIESMADEWITHTHE5NITED+INGDOM3CHMIDT4ELESCOPE4HIS MAP DISPLAYS SOME TWO MILLION GALAXIES BETWEEN APPARENT MAGNITUDES ANDTHATAREFOUNDWITHINSQUAREDEGREESOFTHESKYCENTEREDONTHESOUTH'ALACTICPOLE )T IS NOT A PHOTOGRAPH RATHER EACH DOT HAS AN INTENSITY BLACK TO WHITE	 REPRESENTINGBETWEENZEROBLACK	ANDWHITE	GALAXIES)TISOBVIOUSTHATTHEGALAXIESARENOTRANDOMLYDISTRIBUTEDACROSSTHESKY4HESMALLBRIGHTREGIONSARECLUSTERSANDTHELONGERlLAMENTARYSTRANDS ARE SUPERCLUSTERS4HEHUMANEYEANDBRAINHAVEATALENTFORlNDINGPATTERNSEVENWHENNONEEXIST)NTHECASE OF &IG  THE DIFlCULTY IS COMPOUNDED BECAUSE IT IS A TWODIMENSIONAL DEPICTIONOF THE SKY!LL OF THE GALAXIES ARE PROJECTED ONTO THE PLANE OF THE SKY SO TRUE ASSOCIATIONSCANNOTBEDISTINGUISHEDFROMLINEOFSIGHTCOINCIDENCES4HREEDIMENSIONALSTRUCTURESMAYBEHIDDENORDISTORTEDWHENmATTENEDINTOTWODIMENSIONS)NTHESSEVERALGROUPSOFASTRONOMERS BEGAN MAKING THREEDIMENSIONAL MAPS OF THE UNIVERSE BY USING THE REDSHIFTSOF GALAXIES AND THE (UBBLE LAW TO PROVIDE THE DISTANCE OF THE GALAXIESRedshift surveysSUCHASTHESEREVEALEDTHEEXISTENCEOFHUGEVOIDSIMMENSEVERSIONSOFTHEVACANTREGIONSSEEN IN &IG  4HESE VOIDS MEASURE UP TO  -PC ACROSS AND ARE VAGUELY SPHERICALRATHER THAN mATTENED LIKE THE SHEETS OCCUPIED BY SUPERCLUSTERS 4HE SPACE INSIDE A VOID ISEMPTYOFBRIGHTSPIRALSANDELLIPTICALSALTHOUGHAFEWFAINTDWARFELLIPTICALSMAYBEPRESENT-OST OF THE EARLY SURVEYS SAMPLED JUST ONE AREA OF THE SKY SO IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE TOGET AN OVERALL PICTURE OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF GALAXIES 4O REMEDY THIS -ARGARET 'ELLER AND*OHN (UCHRA OF THE (ARVARDn3MITHSONIAN #ENTER FOR!STROPHYSICS #F!	 ALONG WITH THEIRCOWORKERSCARRIEDOUTSURVEYSOFWEDGESHAPEDSLICESOFTHEHEAVENSSEE&IG ,IKEMAKINGPARALLELCUTSTHROUGHABLOCKOF3WISSCHEESETHISTECHNIQUESHOWSWHERETHEEMPTYThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1181>>>

FIGURE 224WOADJACENT◦WIDEWEDGESUSEDINTHE#F!REDSHIFTSURVEY&IGUREFROM'ELLERMercury -AY*UNE 	REGIONS ARE AND HOW THEY RELATE TO ONE ANOTHER $URING A NIGHTS OBSERVATION THE ROTATIONOF %ARTH CARRIES THE TELESCOPE THROUGH ABOUT  HOURS OF RIGHT ASCENSION AND REDSHIFTS AREMEASUREDFORTHEGALAXIESTHATCROSSTHETELESCOPESlELDOFVIEW4HISPROCEDUREISREPEATEDUNTILALLOFTHEGALAXIESINA◦DECLINATIONSLICEHAVEBEENMEASUREDOUTTOARADIALVELOCITYOF SOME  KM S−A DISTANCE OF ABOUT h−-PC ACCORDING TO (UBBLES LAW	&IGURES A	ANDB	SHOWTWOOFTHElRSTSLICESCOMPLETEDIN"ECAUSEOFTHEUNCERTAINTY IN THE VALUE OFHAT THE TIME THE DISTANCE IS EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF A RADIALVELOCITYcz WHEREzIS THE MEASURED REDSHIFT CF %Q 	 %ACH DOT ON THE PLOTS IS AGALAXY 3TUDY THE lGURES AND TRY TO IMAGINE A THREEDIMENSIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF GALAXIESTHATWOULDHAVETHESECROSSSECTIONS#LEARLYTHEGALAXIESARENOTRANDOMLYDISTRIBUTED4HESLICES ALSO SHOW THAT GALAXIES DO NOT FORM A NETWORK OF THREADLIKE lLAMENTS THAT MEANDERTHROUGH SPACE )F THEY DID THEN A SLICE WOULD BE MUCH MORE LIKELY TO CUT ACROSS A lLAMENTTHAN ALONG IT THINK OF CUTTING THROUGH A BOWL OF COOKED SPAGHETTI	 4HERE ARE SIMPLY TOOMANY CONNECTED FEATURES AND TOO FEW ISOLATED CLUMPS FOR THIS TO BE TRUE!NOTHER TERRESTRIAL ANALOGY DOES SUPPLY A STRUCTURE THAT MATCHES THESE OBSERVATIONS! SLICE THROUGH A FROTH OF SOAP BUBBLES WOULD LOOK VERY MUCH LIKE WHAT IS SEEN HERE&IGURES A	 AND B	 SHOW THAT GALAXIES LIE ON TWODIMENSIONAL SHEETS THAT FORM THEWALLS OF BUBBLESHAPED REGIONS OF SPACE AND THAT INSIDE THE BUBBLES ARE HUGE VOIDS /NE&OR DISTANCES OVER ROUGHLY h−-PC ONLY THE BRIGHTER GALAXIES COULD BE MEASURED PRODUCING A SPARSERDIAGRAM NEAR THE CURVED EDGE!NOTHER POSSIBILITY IS THAT THE VOIDS ARE CONNECTED LIKE THE INTERIOR OF A SPONGE WITH THIN SHEETS OF GALAXIESSEPARATING THE PASSAGEWAYSThe Structure of the Universe




<<<PAGE 1182>>>


  /H9254   GALAXIEScz KILOMETERS PER SECOND	A	
  /H9254   GALAXIEScz KILOMETERS PER SECOND	B	2IGHT ASCENSION HOURS	
2IGHT ASCENSION HOURS	
FIGURE 234WOSLICESFROMTHE#F!REDSHIFTSURVEY2IGHTASCENSIONISINDICATEDALONGTHETOPOFEACHlGUREA	.◦<δ<.◦B	.◦<δ<.◦&IGURESADAPTEDFROM'ELLERMercury-AY*UNE 	SUCH LARGE VOID IS ATα=Hv= KM S−h−-PC AWAY	 AND HAS A DIAMETER OFKMS−h−-PC	)N&IG A	THE#OMACLUSTERISTHETORSOOFTHEHUMANLIKElGURE AT THE CENTER OF THE SLICE !PPARENTLY RICH CLUSTERS AND SUPERCLUSTERS ARE FOUND AT4HELARGEPECULIARVELOCITIESOFTHECLUSTERSGALAXIESCAUSETHEMTOBESPREADOUTINTHERADIALVELOCITYDIRECTION4HIS SOMEWHAT ELONGATES THE #OMA CLUSTERS APPEARANCEThe Structure of the Universe



<<<PAGE 1183>>>

cz KILOMETERS PER SECOND	2IGHT ASCENSION HOURS	
FIGURE 24!COMBINATION OF THE lRST TWO SLICES OF THE #F!REDSHIFT SURVEY FOR .◦<δ<.◦ &IGURE ADAPTED FROM 'ELLERMercury -AY*UNE 	THE INTERSECTIONS OF BUBBLES AND LONG STRUCTURES LIKE THE 0ERSEUSn0ISCES SUPERCLUSTER MAYLIEALONGTHESURFACEOFADJOININGBUBBLES4HElLAMENTARYFEATURESSHOWWHERETHESURVEYSLICES THROUGH THE SHEETS OF GALAXIES THAT FORM THE WALLS OF THE VOIDS 4HIS INTERPRETATIONIS STRENGTHENED BY &IG  WHICH SHOWS THE COMBINATION OF THE lRST TWO SLICES ON THESAMEDIAGRAM.OTONLYDOTHEFEATURESSHOWAGENERALCORRESPONDENCEBUTTHEYARESLIGHTLYOFFSETSOMEFEATURESOFTHECOMBINEDSLICEARESOMEWHATTHICKERTHANTHOSEOFTHEINDIVIDUALSLICES4HISISBECAUSETHESLICESARENOTPERPENDICULARTOTHEWALLSOFTHEVOIDS)NSTEADTHECURVATUREOFAWALLCAUSESADJACENTSLICESTOINTERSECTTHEWALLATSLIGHTLYDIFFERENTLOCATIONS&IGURE SHOWSACOMBINATIONOFRESULTSFROMTHE#F!REDSHIFTSURVEYOFTHENORTHERNSKIESWITHASOUTHERNSURVEYCARRIEDOUTBY,.ICOLACIDA#OSTAANDCOWORKERS4HELONGARCATTHETOPISTHE'REAT7ALLWITHITSCOUNTERPARTTHE3OUTHERN7ALLRUNNINGDIAGONALLYACROSS THE BOTTOM!T THE TIME OF THIS WRITING THESE ARE THE LARGEST KNOWN STRUCTURES IN THEUNIVERSE AND THEY MAY CONSIST OF THE WALLS OF SEVERAL ADJACENT BUBBLES 4HE 'REAT 7ALLPASSESTHROUGHTHEARMSOFTHEHOMUNCULUSIN&IG )TEXTENDSFORat leasth−-PCINRIGHTASCENSIONANDat leasth−-PCINDECLINATIONPERPENDICULARTOTHEDIAGRAM	BUTISLESSTHANh−-PCTHICK4HE'REAT7ALLDISAPPEARSINTOREGIONSOFTHESKYTHATAREOBSCUREDBY DUST ON ONE END	 OR NOT YET MAPPED ON THE OTHER END	 )T MAY ACTUALLY CONTINUE ON TOJOIN UP WITH THE 3OUTHERN7ALL WHICH CONTAINS THE 0ERSEUSn0ISCES SUPERCLUSTER4HE DEEPEST SURVEY TO DATE IS THE D& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT 3URVEY D&'23	 CARRIED OUTBY THE !NGLO!USTRALIAN /BSERVATORY )T PRODUCED A THREEDIMENSIONAL MAP OF GALAXIES BRIGHTER THANm=−. AND COVERING  OF THE SKY 4HE SURVEY PENETRATEDOUT TO APPROXIMATELY  'PC TO A REDSHIFT OFz≈. &IGURE  SHOWS A ◦SLICE THATCUTS THROUGH THE NORTH LEFT	 AND SOUTH RIGHT	 GALACTIC POLES )T INCLUDES  GALAXIESAND CLEARLY SHOWS THE GALAXIES COLLECTING ON THE WALLS OF IMMENSE VOIDS 4HE SPONGELIKESTRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSE IS APPARENT IN &IG  WHICH ILLUSTRATES HOW THE CLUSTERS ANDSUPERCLUSTERS OF GALAXIES CLUMP TOGETHERThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1184>>>

FIGURE 25!CROSS SECTION OF THE UNIVERSE WITHcz≤, KM S−WITHIN h−-PC OF%ARTH	 SHOWING  GALAXIES 4HE COORDINATES OF THE TOP SLICE ARE H<α<HAND .◦<δ<.◦ THOSE OF THE BOTTOM SLICE .H<α<HAND−◦<δ<.◦ &IGURE FROM DA #OSTA ET ALAp. J. Lett.424 , 	
HHHHHHHHHHH"ILLION LIGHTYEARS2EDSHIFTD& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT 3URVEY
FIGURE 26!◦SLICE THROUGH THE D& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT 3URVEY )T DISPLAYS  GALAXIES4HENORTHGALACTICPOLEISONTHELEFTANDTHESOUTHGALACTICPOLEISONTHERIGHT&IGUREADAPTEDFROM#OLLESS ET AL AR8IVASTROPH 	The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1185>>>

FIGURE 27!CUBICALVOLUMEOFSPACEWITHSIDES-PCLONG4HECLUSTERSANDSUPERCLUSTERSOFGALAXIESWITHINAREJOINEDTOGETHERILLUSTRATINGTHESPONGELIKESTRUCTUREOFSPACE&IGURECOURTESYOF THE D& 'ALAXY 2EDSHIFT 3URVEY4EAM	4HEONGOING3LOAN$IGITAL3KY3URVEY3$33	ISTHEMOSTRECENTADVANCEINDEEPSURVEYSOF THE UNIVERSE 4HE lRST PHASE OF THE PROJECT COMPLETED IN *UNE  IMAGED MORE THAN OF THE SKY AT lVE WAVELENGTHS AND RECORDED SOME  MILLION OBJECTS 4HE 3$33OBTAINED SPECTRA OF OVER  GALAXIES  QUASARS AND  STARS 4HE 3$33UTILIZES A METER TELESCOPE ON !PACHE 0OINT .EW -EXICO )TS MEGAPIXEL CAMERACAN PHOTOGRAPH  SQUARE DEGREES OF SKY AT A TIME EIGHT TIMES THE AREA OF THE FULL MOON	7HENCOMPLETEDTHE3$33WILLHAVEPRODUCEDATHREEDIMENSIONALMAPOFMORETHANOFTHESKY3UCHANEXTENSIVEMAPSHOULDPROVIDEAMORECOHERENTANDDETAILEDVIEWOFTHELARGESCALESTRUCTURESOFTHEUNIVERSEANDSUPPLYCLUESCONCERNINGTHEIRORIGIN&IGURE BASED ON THE D&'23 AND 3$33 CATALOGS SHOWS THE CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES BELONGING TO THE0ISCESn#ETUS SUPERCLUSTER OF GALAXIES 4HE LINES CONNECTING THE  CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES ATANAVERAGEREDSHIFTOFz=.	OUTLINETHECOSMICWEBOFINTERCONNECTEDlLAMENTSTHATMAKE UP THIS SUPERCLUSTERQuantifying Large-Scale Structure!NOTHER METHOD OF INFERRING THE PRESENCE OF LARGE FEATURES IS TO USE THE AVAILABLE DATA TOMATHEMATICALLY DESCRIBE THE CLUSTERING OF GALAXIES )F GALAXIES WERE UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTEDTHROUGHSPACEWITHANUMBERDENSITYnTHENTHEPROBABILITYdPOFlNDINGAGALAXYWITHINA VOLUMEdVWOULD BE THE SAME EVERYWHEREdP=ndV(OWEVER GALAXIES ARE NOTSCATTEREDABOUTRANDOMLY4HEPROBABILITYOFlNDINGAGALAXYWITHINAVOLUMEdVATDISTANCE7E ASSUME THATdVIS SUFlCIENTLY SMALL THATdP≤The Structure of the Universe



<<<PAGE 1186>>>

nnnnn$EC DEGREES	     n n n2! DEGREES	!!33%!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!h -PC
!n
FIGURE 28#LUSTERS OF GALAXIES BELONGING TO THE 0ISCES#ETUS SUPERCLUSTER OF GALAXIES 4HELINES CONNECTING THE CLUSTERS ARE BETWEEN h−-PC AND h−-PC LONG &IGURE ADAPTED FROM0ORTER AND 2AYCHAUDHURYMon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.364  	rFROM A SPECIlED GALAXY THEN BECOMESdP=n[+ξ(r)]dV,	WHEREnISTHEAVERAGENUMBERDENSITYOFGALAXIESANDξ(r)ISAtwo-point correlation functionTHATDESCRIBESWHETHERTHEGALAXIESAREMORECONCENTRATEDξ>	ORMOREDISPERSEDξ<	THAN AVERAGE &OR  GALAXIES FROM THE 3$33 AND SEPARATIONS OF .h−-PC<r<h−-PC THEcorrelation functionIS OBSERVED TO BE OF THE FORMξ(r)=/parenleftbiggrr/parenrightbigg−γ,	WHERErTHECORRELATIONLENGTHISr=.h−-PCANDγ=.4HECORRELATIONLENGTHVARIES WITH THE LUMINOSITIES OF THE GALAXIES AND RANGES FROM .h−-PC TO .h−-PCBRIGHTER GALAXIES HAVING THE LONGER CORRELATION LENGTHS!SSURVEYSSUCHASTHE3$33SAMPLEMOREREMOTEREGIONSOFSPACESAYWITHINASPHEREOF RADIUSRs	 THE BEHAVIOR OFrWITH SAMPLE DEPTHRsIS OF SOME INTEREST )F AS SOMEHAVE SUGGESTED THE UNIVERSE HAS A FRACTAL STRUCTURE AND IS SCALEFREE THENrSHOULD INCREASEPROPORTIONALLYWITHRs)FTHEUNIVERSELOOKSESSENTIALLYTHESAMEATALLSCALESTHENDEEPER OBSERVATIONS MUST REVEAL EVER LARGER VERSIONS OF SMALLER STRUCTURES	 (OWEVER THECOSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE OF HOMOGENEITY REQUIRES THATrBECOME CONSTANT FOR SUFlCIENTLYDEEP SAMPLES BECAUSE BEYOND SOMERsTHERE ARE NO LARGER STRUCTURES TO BE FOUND4HESEARCHISUNDERWAYTOlNDTHEVALUEOFRsWHERETHEUNIVERSEBECOMESHOMOGENEOUS!LTHOUGH SOME STUDIES SUCH AS THE ONE SHOWN IN &IG  HAVE APPARENTLY FOUND THETRANSITION TO HOMOGENEITY OTHERS HAVE NOT 4HERE IS GENERAL AGREEMENT THAT THE UNIVERSEThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1187>>>


        r
Rs hn -PC	FIGURE 294HECORRELATIONLENGTHrASAFUNCTIONOFTHESAMPLEDEPTHRsFORTHE#F!))CATALOGA GALACTIC REDSHIFT CATALOGUE COMPILED BY THE (ARVARD #ENTER FOR!STROPHYSICS	4HE mAT PLATEAU ONTHE RIGHT INDICATES A TRANSITION TO HOMOGENEITY FOR THIS STUDY AT ABOUTRs≈nh−-PC &IGUREADAPTED FROM -ARTINEZ ET ALAp. J.  , 	HASAFRACTALSTRUCTUREONSCALESOUTTO≈h−-PC4HISDOESnotMEANTHATTHEUNIVERSEIS A FRACTAL BECAUSE THE SELFSIMILARITY HOLDS ONLY FOR SMALLER SCALES AND NOT FOR LARGERONES	4HEPREVAILINGVIEWISTHATTHETRANSITIONTOHOMOGENEITYOCCURSSOMEWHEREAROUNDOR PASTRs≈h−-PC PERHAPS AS FAR ASRs≈h−-PC 4HIS SCALE IS CONSISTENTWITH THE EXTENT OF THE LARGEST COHERENT STRUCTURES IN THE UNIVERSE THE COSMIC NETWORK OFINTERCONNECTED lLAMENTS OF GALAXIES THAT lLL THE UNIVERSE SEE &IG 	What Were the Seeds of Structure?)TISNOTEASYTOIMAGINEHOWTHEPATTERNOFGALAXIESREVEALEDBYTHEREDSHIFTSURVEYSCOULDHAVE COME ABOUT FROM AN INITIALLY RANDOM DISTRIBUTION OF GALAXIES "Y CHANCE OF COURSESOME AREAS WOULD HAVE HAD MORE GALAXIES THAN OTHERS 4HE DENSER REGIONS WOULD HAVEGRAVITATIONALLYATTRACTEDSTILLMOREGALAXIESLEAVINGTHELESSDENSEVOLUMESEMPTY!LTHOUGHGRAVITY DOES ACT TO INCREASE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HIGH AND LOWDENSITY REGIONS IT IS NOTENOUGH TO EXPLAIN THE VOIDS 4HE LARGE VOIDS ARE SOME  -PC ACROSS BUT THE PECULIARVELOCITIES OF GALAXIES ARE ONLY ON THE ORDER OF HUNDREDS OF KILOMETERS PER SECOND 5SING ACHARACTERISTIC PECULIAR VELOCITY OF∼ KM S− THE TIME FOR A GALAXY TO CROSS A VOID ISAT LEAST  'YR 4HIS IS MUCH LONGER THAN THE AGE OF THE UNIVERSEtH AND MEANS THAT THEGALAXIES COULDnotHAVE FORMED INSIDE THE VOIDS AND THEN MOVED OUT )NSTEAD THE GALAXIESMUST HAVE FORMED NEARLY IN THEIR PRESENT PATTERN!PPARENTLY THE SEEDS OF THE STRUCTURE WESEETODAYWEREPRESENTFROMTHEEARLIESTMOMENTSOFTHEUNIVERSEThe Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1188>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneral"ERENDZEN 2ICHARD (ART 2ICHARD AND 3EELEY $ANIELMan Discovers the Galaxies 3CIENCE (ISTORY 0UBLICATIONS .EW9ORK &ERRIS4IMOTHYThe Red Limit 3ECOND %DITION 1UILL .EW9ORK ,AKE 'EORGE h#OSMOLOGY OF THE ,OCAL 'ROUPvSky and Telescope $ECEMBER ,ANDY 3TEPHEN $ h-APPING THE 5NIVERSEvScientiﬁcAmerican *UNE /STERBROCK $ONALD % 'WINN *OEL! AND "RASHEAR 2ONALD 3 h%DWIN (UBBLE AND THE%XPANDING 5NIVERSEvScientiﬁcAmerican *ULY 3ILK*OSEPHThe Big Bang4HIRD%DITION7(&REEMANAND#OMPANY.EW9ORK7ALLER7ILLIAM ( AND (ODGE 0AUL7Galaxies and the Cosmic Frontier (ARVARD 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE Technical"INNEY*AMESAND4REMAINE3COTTGalactic Dynamics0RINCETON5NIVERSITY0RESS0RINCETON .* #OURTEAU3AND$EKEL!h#OSMIC&LOWS!3TATUS2EPORTvAstrophysical Ages and TimeScales!30#ONFERENCE3ERIESVON(IPPEL43IMPSON#AND-ANSET.EDS	245 $RESSLER!LAN ET AL h3PECTROSCOPY AND 0HOTOMETRY OF %LLIPTICAL 'ALAXIES )!.EW $ISTANCE %STIMATORvThe Astrophysical Journal313  $RESSLER!LAN AND &ABER 3 - h.EW -EASUREMENTS OF $ISTANCES TO 3PIRALS IN THE 'REAT!TTRACTOR &URTHER #ONlRMATION OF THE ,ARGE3CALE &LOWvThe Astrophysical JournalLetters354 , (ECK! AND #APUTO & EDS	Post-Hipparcos Cosmic Candles +LUWER!CADEMIC 0UBLISHERS $ORDRECHT (UBBLE %DWIN h!2ELATION BETWEEN $ISTANCE AND 2ADIAL 6ELOCITY AMONG %XTRA'ALACTIC.EBULAEvThe Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences15  *ACOBY'EORGE(ETALh!#RITICAL2EVIEWOF3ELECTED4ECHNIQUESFOR-EASURING%XTRAGALACTIC $ISTANCESvPublications of the Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc104 *ONES "ERNARD * 4 ET AL h3CALING ,AWS IN THE $ISTRIBUTION OF 'ALAXIESvReviews ofModern Physics76  ,EIBUNDGUT " AND 4AMMANN '! h3UPERNOVA 3TUDIES ))) 4HE #ALIBRATION OF THE!BSOLUTE -AGNITUDE OF 3UPERNOVAE OF 4YPE )AvAstronomy and Astrophysics230 -ATHEWSON $ 3 &ORD 6 , AND "UCHHORN - h.O "ACK3IDE )NFALL INTO THE 'REAT!TTRACTORvThe Astrophysical Journal Letters389 , 0EEBLES0*%Principles of Physical Cosmology0RINCETON5NIVERSITY0RESS0RINCETON.* The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1189>>>

2IESS !DAM ' ET AL h#EPHEID #ALIBRATIONS FROM THE (UBBLE 3PACE 4ELESCOPE OF THE,UMINOSITY OF 4WO 2ECENT 4YPE )A 3UPERNOVAE AND A 2EDETERMINATION OF THE (UBBLE#ONSTANTvThe Astrophysical Journal627  2OWAN2OBINSON-ICHAELThe Cosmological Distance Ladder7(&REEMAN.EW9ORK3OLANES*OSÏ-ETALh4HE4HREE$IMENSIONAL3TRUCTUREOFTHE6IRGO#LUSTERFROM4ULLYn&ISHER AND () $ATAvThe Astronomical Journal124  3PARKE,INDA3AND'ALLAGHER*OHN3Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction#AMBRIDGE 5NIVERSITY 0RESS #AMBRIDGE 4REMAINE 3COTT h4HE $YNAMICAL %VIDENCE FOR $ARK -ATTERvPhysics Today &EBRUARY7ILLICK *! h#OSMIC6ELOCITIES !2EVIEWv AR8IVASTROPH V :EHAVI)DITETALh/N$EPARTURESFROMA0OWER,AWINTHE'ALAXY#ORRELATION&UNCTIONvThe Astrophysical Journal608  The Structure of the Universe


<<<PAGE 1190>>>

PROBLEM SET1By equating the period–luminosity relation, the below equation andtheperiod–luminosity–tion, Eq. (1), estimate the range of theB−Vcolorindexfor
2ThecentrallightringproducedbySN1987A(showninthe figure below)gaveastronomerschance to determine its distance (and therefore the distance to the Large MagellanicCloud).The supernova heated the ring of gas, causing it to glow. The ring, which has andiameter of 1.66′′(long axis), is presumed to be circular but tilted from the pers-pective ofEarth. Light was received from the near side of the ring 340 days before light arri-ved from itsfar side.(a)Carefully measure the photograph, and determine the angle between the plane of the ringand the plane of the sky.(b)Use the time delay to determine the diameter of the ring in parsecs, and compare yourresult with the caption to the figure.(c)Use trigonometry to ﬁnd the distance to SN 1987A.The Structure of the Universe
M⟨V⟩=−2.81 log10Pd−1.43M⟨V⟩=−3.53 log10Pd−2.13+2.13(B−V)(1)a uniqueangular
Rings around SN 1987A, detected by the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994. Thediameter of the inner ring is 0.42 pc. (Courtesy of Dr. Christopher Burrows, ESA/STScI and NASA.)From Chapter 27 of An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,Second Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.variablestars.colorrelaCepheid
FIGURE


<<<PAGE 1191>>>

4Show that an uncertainty in the distance modulusm−Mof 0.4 mag corresponds to an uncer-tainty in the distance of about 20%. What uncertainty in the distance modulus would producea 5% uncertainty in the distance? What uncertainty in the distance modulus would produce a50% uncertainty in the distance?5In Eq. ( 4), the value ofCfor the Fornax cluster of galaxies isC=−1.264. What is theratio of the distances to the Virgo and Fornax clusters? to the Coma and Fornax clusters?3The three brightest red stars in the galaxy M101(the “Pinwheel” galaxy; see)havevisual magnitudes ofV=20.9. Assuming that there is 0.3 mag of extinction,what is thedistance to M101? How does this compare to the distance of 7.5 Mpc found using classicalCepheids?
(a)(b)
(c)(d)Typical normal spirals. (a) NGC 7096 (Sa(r)I), (b) M81/NGC 3031 (Sb(r)I–II),(c) M101/NGC 5457/Pinwheel (Sc(s)I), (d) M104/NGC 4594/Sombrero (Sa/Sb) seen nearly edge on.(Images from Sandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution of Washing-ton, Washington, D.C., 1994.)the be  lowfig  ure
(27.4)
log10D=1.333logσ+C(4)The Structure of the Universe: Problem Set 
FIGURE


<<<PAGE 1192>>>

7Use the relative motion of the Andromeda and Milky Way galaxies to estimate their total massfor the caseh=0.5. What is the corresponding mass-to-light ratio of these galaxies?The Magellanic Stream orbits the Milky Way and extends from 50 kpc to 100 kpc from theGalactic center.(a)Consider a clump of gas in the stream in a circular orbit about the Galactic center. Takethe radius of the orbit to be 75 kpc and the orbital speed to be 244 km s−1. Treating theGalaxy and the mass clump as point masses, estimate the mass of the Milky Way. What isthe corresponding mass-to-light ratio?(b)Suppose a clump of gas at the tip of the stream starts with zero radial velocity at a distanceof 100 kpc and reaches a radial velocity of−220 km s−1after falling down to 50 kpc fromthe Galactic center. Assuming that the transverse (orbital) velocity of the clump of gashas not changed, use conservation of energy to estimate the mass of the Milky Way. Findthe corresponding mass-to-light ratio. As before, treat the Galaxy and the clump of gas aspoint masses.6Use the solid line in Hubble’s velocity–distance diagram, Fig. 7 , to determine his value ofH0.Why was his result so different from today’s value?
FIGURE 7Hubble’s 1936 velocity–distance relation. The two lines use different corrections forthe Sun’s motion. (The vertical units should be km s−1.) (Figure from Hubble,Realm of the Nebulae,Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, ©1936.)
9Assuming that the Sculptor group of galaxies occupies a spherical volume of space, ﬁnd thedifference in magnitude between two identical objects located at the very front and back ofthe group.8
Derive Eq. (17).11Supposethat the densities of the dark matter and interstellar gas in M87 have the samer-dependence (i.e., they are proportional). Use Eq. ( 17) to show that the gas is isothermal.Hint:AssumeT∝rαand showα=0. Use ﬂat rotation curves and make use of the  below equations. [The controversial assumption thatT (r)=constant has been used in some studiesof dark matter in elliptical galaxies.]Mr=−kT rµmHG/parenleftbigg∂lnρ∂lnr+∂lnT∂lnr/parenrightbigg.(17)Mr=V2rG10The Structure of the Universe: Problem Set
Mr=−kT rµmHG/parenleftbigg∂lnρ∂lnr+∂lnT∂lnr/parenrightbigg.(17)


<<<PAGE 1193>>>

12Like the Coma cluster, the Virgo cluster contains a large amount of hot (70 million K) intra-cluster gas that emits X-rays.(a)If the X-ray luminosity of the Virgo cluster’s intracluster gas is about 1.5×1036W, useEq. ( 20) to ﬁnd the electron number density and the mass of the gas. Assume that theVirgo cluster is a sphere of radius 1.5 Mpc that is ﬁlled with completely ionized hydrogen.(b)UseLV=1.2×1012L⊙for the visual luminosity of the Virgo cluster to estimate thecluster’s luminous mass. How does this compare with your answer to part (a) for the massof the intracluster gas?(c)Assuming that the gas has no energy source and that it is simply losing energy via thermalbremsstrahlung, use the below equation for theaveragekineticenergypergasparticle(protonsand electrons) to estimate how long it will take for the gas to lose all of its energy.(Assumethat the X-ray luminosity remains constant throughout your calculation.) Howdoes youranswer compare with the Hubble time,tH?13Estimate how long a galaxy in the Coma cluster would take to travel from one side of thecluster to the other. Assume that the galaxy moves with a constant speed equal to the cluster’sradial velocity dispersion. How does this compare with the Hubble time,tH? What can youconclude about whether the galaxies in the Coma cluster are gravitationally bound?14For the galaxies in the Virgo cluster, the dispersion in the radial velocity isσr=666 km s−1.Use the virial theorem to estimate the mass of the Virgo cluster.15Suppose that the galaxies in the Coma cluster are all movingawayfrom the cluster’s centerbut that the measured value of the radial velocity dispersion is unchanged. (For example,ρ(r)=V24πGr2.
Lx=43πR3Lvol.(20)
12mv2=32kT.
directing each galaxy’s present velocity radially outward would accomplish this.) In this case,the cluster would not be in equilibrium. What is the sign of the term⟨d2I/dt2⟩in the virialtheorem,shown below?ExplainhowneglectingthistermwouldaffectyourestimateoftheoftheComacluster.Howwouldyouranswerbedifferentifallofthegalaxiesweretowardthe cluster’s center?12⎝angbracketleftbiggd2Idt2⎝angbracketrightbigg−2⟨K⟩=⟨U⟩.16For the galaxy NGC 5585, the quantity 2vr/sini=218 km s−1, and its apparentHmagnitudeisH=9.55 (already corrected for extinction). Use the Tully–Fisher method to determine thedistance to this galaxy.17The brightest galaxy in the cluster A1060 has an apparent visual magnitude ofV=10.99.Estimate the distance to the cluster. Use the uncertainty in the average absolute magnitude ofthe brightest galaxy to determine how far off your answer could be.18The Galactic coordinates of the direction of the large-scale streaming motion of galaxies in thedirection of the Great Attractor areℓ=309◦,b=18◦. Convert these to equatorial coordinates,and use a star chart to conﬁrm that your answer is in the constellation of Centaurus.The Structure of the Universe: Problem Set
movingmass


<<<PAGE 1194>>>

COMPUTER PROBLEM19Given the results in Table 1 for the distance to the Virgo cluster of galaxies, the problemarises of howdave, the average distance, should be chosen.(a)davemight be chosen to minimize/Delta1≡/summationdisplayi/parenleftbiggdi−daveδi/parenrightbigg2,whereδiis the uncertainty in the distancedidetermined by theith method in the table(e.g., for the estimate using novae,d=21.1 Mpc andδ=3.9 Mpc). (There are echoesof the least-squares ﬁt to a straight line in this approach.) Make a graph of/Delta1vs.daveforvalues ofdavebetween 15 and 22 Mpc, and determine (to the nearest 0.1 Mpc) the valueofdavethat minimizes/Delta1.(b)Theweighted meanvalue isdw=/summationtexti(di/δ2i)/summationtexti(1/δ2i).Calculate the weighted mean for the values in Table 1, and compare your answer withwhat you found in part (a).(c)Prove that your answers to parts (a) and (b) will always agree.TABLE 1Distance Indicators. (Adapted from Jacoby et al.,Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac.,104, 599,1992.)Uncertainty for Distance toSingle Galaxy Virgo Cluster RangeMethod(mag) (Mpc) (Mpc)Cepheids0.16 15−25 29Novae0.4 21.1±3.92 0Planetary nebulaluminosity function 0.3 15.4±1.15 0Globular clusterluminosity function 0.4 18.8±3.85 0Surface brightnessﬂuctuations0.3 15.9±0.95 0Tully–Fisher relation 0.4 15.8±1.5>100D–σrelation0.5 16.8±2.4>100Type Ia supernovae 0.10 19.4±5.0>1000The Structure of the Universe: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1195>>>



<<<PAGE 1196>>>

Active Galaxies1Observations of Active Galaxies2A Uniﬁed Model of Active Galactic Nuclei3Radio Lobes and Jets4Using Quasars to Probe the Universe1OBSERVATIONS OF ACTIVE GALAXIESThe story of modern astrophysics is one of a dynamically evolving universe. On every scale,from planets to stars to galaxies, the objects that are present in this era differ from whatthey were during previous epochs. As we study the ancient light that arrives from distantcorners of the universe, we are able to examine how galaxies looked and behaved in theiryouth. These observations reveal a level of activity in the centers of young, remote galaxiesthat is rarely found in nearer galactic nuclei.Seyfert GalaxiesThe ﬁrst hint of the violent heritage of today’s galaxies was found by EdwardA. Fath (1880–1959), who in 1908 was observing the spectra of “spiral nebulae.”Although most showed anabsorption-line spectrum produced by the combined light of the galaxy’s stars, NGC 1068displayed six bright emission lines. In 1926 Edwin Hubble recorded the emission lines ofthis and two other galaxies. Seventeen years later Carl K. Seyfert (1911–1960) reported thata small percentage of galaxies have very bright nuclei that are the source of broad emissionlines produced by atoms in a wide range of ionization states. These nuclei are nearly stellarin appearance.Today these objects are known asSeyfert galaxies, with spectra that are categorizedinto one of two classes.Seyfert 1galaxies have very broad emission lines that include bothallowed lines (H I, He I, He II) and narrower forbidden lines (such as [O III]).1Seyfert 1galaxies generally have “narrow” allowed lines as well, although even the narrow lines arebroad compared to the spectral lines exhibited by normal galaxies. The width of the lines isattributed to Doppler broadening, indicating that the allowed lines originate from sourceswith speeds typically between 1000 and 5000 km s−1, while the forbidden lines correspondto speeds of around 500 km s−1.Seyfert 2galaxies have only narrow lines (both permitted1orbidden lines involve low-probability transitions in atoms and are an indicationof low gas densities.From Chapter  of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.28F,

<<<PAGE 1197>>>

1.00.50.0350450550Mrk 1243Mrk 1243H/H9253
H/H9252H/H9251, [N II]Fe IIFe II
He I[O III]
[O III]1.00.50.0450550650Wavelength (nm)FIGURE 1The visible spectrum of Mrk 1243, a Seyfert 1 galaxy. (Figure adapted from Oster-brock,QJRAS,25, 1, 1984.)and forbidden), with characteristic speeds of about 500 km s−1. Every spectrum also showsa featureless continuum that is devoid of lines, originating from a small central source. Thegreat luminosity of a Seyfert 1 galaxy arises from this continuum, which often overwhelmsthe combined light of all of the galaxy’s stars. The continuum observed for a Seyfert 2 issigniﬁcantly less luminous.Figures 1 and 2, respectively, show the visible spectra of Mrk 1243 (a Seyfert 1)and Mrk 1157 (a Seyfert 2), where “Mrk” indicates an entry in the galaxy catalog of E. B.Markarian (1913–1985), produced in 1968. Some spectra display both broad and narrowpermitted lines, and so they are classiﬁed as an intermediate type such as Seyfert 1.5.However, it is important to emphasize that this is a spectral classiﬁcation. The spectra ofa few Seyfert galaxies have changed nearly from type 1.5 to type 2 in a matter of years,although the broad Hαemission line has rarely if ever completely disappeared.The galaxies known to emit the most X-ray energy are Seyferts of types 1 and 1.5. TheX-ray emission is quite variable, and can change appreciably on timescales ranging fromdays to hours. In contrast, X-rays are less frequently measured for Seyfert 2 galaxies. Ananalysis of the hard X-rays that are observed for Seyfert 2s indicates that the “missing”X-rays have been absorbed by intervening material with huge hydrogen column densities2of between 1026and 1028m−2.Seyferts make up only a few tenths of a percent of all ﬁeld galaxies. It is interesting thatat least 90% of the Seyferts close enough to be resolved by telescopes are spiral galaxies,typically of types Sb or SBb. They are frequently accompanied by other galaxies with which2ine proﬁles can be used to calculate the column density of the absorbing material.Active Galaxies
L

<<<PAGE 1198>>>

1.00.50.01.00.50.0Mrk 1157
Mrk 1157H/H9252[O II]
[O I][S II][O III]
H/H9252H/H9251[O III]350450550
450550650Wavelength (nm)FIGURE 2The visible spectrum of Mrk 1157, a Seyfert 2 galaxy. (Figure adapted from Oster-brock,QJRAS,25, 1, 1984.)
FIGURE 3A long exposure of the Seyfert 1 (or 1.5) galaxy NGC 4151 showing the galacticdisk around its bright nucleus. (Image from Sandage and Bedke,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies,Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C., 1994.)they may be gravitationally interacting. Figure 3 is a long-exposure view of the Seyfertgalaxy NGC 4151 (type Sab) that shows the galactic disk around its bright nucleus.The Spectra of Active Galactic NucleiSeyferts belong to the general class of galaxies withactive galactic nuclei, or AGN forshort. Other members of this class, such as radio galaxies, quasars, and blazars, will beintroduced in the discussion that follows.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1199>>>

012345678Log10 /H9263F/H9263 (arbitrary units)
10 12 14 16 18Log10 /H9263 (Hz)Radio quiet~ 90%Radio loud~ 10%TurnoverIR bumpBig blue bump
FIGURE 4A sketch of the continuum observed for many types of AGNs.Figure 4 is a rough schematic of the continuum observed for many types of AGNs(note that the logarithm of the productνFνis plotted on the ﬁgure’s vertical axis). The mostnotable feature of thisspectral energy distribution(SED) is its persistence over some10 orders of magnitude in frequency. This wide spectrum is markedly different from thethermal (blackbody) spectrum of a star or the combined spectra of a galaxy of stars.When AGNs were ﬁrst studied, it was thought that their spectra were quite ﬂat. Accord-ingly, a power law of the formFν∝ν−α(1)was used to describe the monochromatic energy ﬂux,Fν.3Thespectral index,4α, wasbelieved to have a value ofα≃1.The power received within any frequency interval betweenν1andν2isLinterval∝/integraldisplayν2ν1Fνdν=/integraldisplayν2ν1νFνdνν=ln 10/integraldisplayν2ν1νFνdlog10ν,(2)so that equal areas under a graph ofνFνvs. log10νcorrespond to equal amounts of energy;hence the reason for plotting log10νFνon the ordinate in Fig. 4. A value ofα≃1 reﬂectsthe horizontal trend seen to the right of the turnover in Fig. 4.The continuous spectra of AGNs are now known to be more complicated, involving amix of thermal and nonthermal emission. However, Eq. ( 1) is still used toparameterize3Fνdνis the amount of energy with a frequency betweenνandν+dνthat arrivesperunitareapersecondonadetectoraimedatthesource.4Warning:Some authors deﬁne the spectral index with the opposite sign.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1200>>>

the continuum. The spectral index typically has a value between 0.5 and 2 that usuallyincreases with increasing frequency, so the curve of log10νFνvs. log10νin Fig. 4 isgenerally concave downward. In fact, the value ofαis constant over only a limited rangeof frequencies, such as in the infrared and visible regions of the spectrum. The shape andpolarization of the visible-UV spectrum indicates that it can sometimes be decomposed intocontributions from thermal sources (blackbody spectrum, low polarization) and nonthermalsources (power-law spectrum, signiﬁcant polarization). The thermal component appears asthebig blue bumpin Fig. 4, which can contain an appreciable amount of the bolometricluminosity of the source. It is generally believed that the emission from the big blue bumpis due to an optically thick accretion disk, although some researchers have suggested thatfree–free emission may be responsible. Also evident is a thermalinfrared bumpto the leftof the big blue bump; it is probably due to emission from warm (T/lessorsimilar2000 K) dust grains.A pure power-law spectrum (with constantα) is the signature of synchrotron radiation,which is frequently encountered in astronomical situations involving relativistic electronsandmagneticﬁelds.AsshowninFig.5,asynchrotronspectrumisproducedbythecombinedradiationemittedbyindividualelectronsastheyspiralaroundmagneticﬁeldlines.Ifthedistributionoftheindividualelectronenergiesobeysapowerlaw,thentheresultingsynchrotronspectrumisdescribedbyEq.(1).However, the synchrotron spectrum does not continue to rise without limit as the frequencydecreases. At a transition frequency, the spectrum turns over and varies asν5/2(spectral
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2002468101214161820
Power law F/H9263  µ /H9263–/H9251 Single electron spectrum
0–2–4 –62–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.0
Log10 /H9263 (arbitrary units)Log10 F/H9263 (arbitrary units)
Log10 (F/H9263/F/H9263,max)
Log10 (/H9263//H9263max)
FIGURE 5The power-law spectrum of synchrotron radiation, shown as the sum of the radiationproduced by individual electrons as they spiral around magnetic ﬁeld lines. The spectrum of a singleelectron is at the upper right. The turnover at low frequencies is not shown.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1201>>>

indexα=−2.5). This occurs because the plasma of spiraling electrons becomes opaqueto its own synchrotron radiation, an effect known assynchrotron self-absorption.In some SEDs, the “turnover” evident in the schematic continuum spectrum in Fig. 4may be due to synchrotron self-absorption. However, the thermal contributions to the con-tinuum spectrum evident in the infrared bump suggest that in other cases, the turnovermay be due to the long-wavelength Rayleigh–Jeans portion of the blackbody spectrumproduced by the warm dust grains. It is possible that the steeper, low-frequency spectraof radio-quiet AGNs are due to the thermal spectrum of dust grains, while the shallower,low-frequency spectra of radio-loud AGNs may be due to a combination of thermal andnonthermal emission.Radio GalaxiesAfter World War II the science of radio astronomy that was started by Karl Jansky maderapid progress, led by astronomers in Australia and England. The ﬁrst discrete source ofstrong radio waves (other than the Sun) was discovered in the constellation Cygnus andwas named Cygnus A (a modern VLA radio image of Cyg A is shown in Fig. 6). Usingthe accurate position provided by English radio astronomer F. Graham Smith, the team ofWalter Baade and Rudolph Minkowski (1895–1976) was able to ﬁnd the optical counterpartof Cyg A. It is a peculiar-looking cD galaxy whose center is apparently encircled by a ringof dust (Fig. 7 shows an optical image of Cyg A obtained using the Hubble SpaceTelescope). Cyg A’s spectrum shows a redshift ofz=τDeltaφλ/λrest=0.057, correspondingtoarecessionalvelocityof16,600kms−1.FromHubble’slathedistancetoCygAisabout170h−1Mpc (implying a distance of 240 Mpcifh=[h]WMAP).ConsideringthatCygAisthebrightestradiosourcebeyondtheMilkyWay,thisdistanceissurprisinglylarge.Infact,theonlydiscreteradiosourcesbrighterthan
FIGURE 6A VLA radio image of Cygnus A, showing the two radio lobes separated by about100h−1kpc and the jet extending from the galaxy to the right-hand lobe. Cyg A is a narrow-line radiogalaxy. The central cD galaxy does not show up on this radio picture (see Fig. ). The width of theimage is about 2 arcminutes. [Courtesy of R. A. Perley, J. W. Dreher, and J. J. Cowan (NRAO/AUI).]Active Galaxies
7w,CygAarethe


<<<PAGE 1202>>>

Declination (J2000)
19h59m28s.5528.5028.4528.4028.3528.3028.2528.2028.1540º44'04"03020100Right ascension (J2000)FIGURE 7A continuum HST image of Cygnus A (3C 405) taken at a wavelength of 622 nm.(Figure adapted from Jackson, et al.,MNRAS,301, 131, 1998.)andCassiopeiaA,thenearby(3kpc)remnantofaTypeIIsupernova.Tobedetectedsofaraway,CygAmustpouroutenormousamountsofradioenergy.Cyg A is one example of a class of galaxies, calledradio galaxies, that are extremelybright at radio wavelengths.Example 1.1.The radio energy emitted by Cygnus A can be estimated by using itsdistance ofd=170h−1Mpc together with the observed value of the monochromatic ﬂuxat a radio frequency of 1400 MHz,F1400=1.255×10−23Wm−2Hz−1=1255 Jy.The radio spectrum follows the power law of Eq. ( 1) withα≃0.8, soFν∝ν−0.8. Thatis, we can writeFν=F1400/parenleftBigν1400 MHz/parenrightBig−0.8.Theradioluminositycanbefoundbyintegratingthemonochromaticﬂuxovertherangeofradiofrequencies.The upper frequency limit is takentobeν2=3×109Hz,correspondingtoaradiowavelengthof0.1m.AsisshowninProblem20,thepower-lawbehavioroftheradiospectrumdoesnotcontinuetoν=0.Instead,theﬂuxreceivedfromCygnusAdeclineswhenthefrequencyfallsbelowaboutcontinuedActive Galaxies
Sun


<<<PAGE 1203>>>

ν1=107Hz. With these limits, the radio luminosity is approximatelyLradio=4πd2/integraldisplayν2ν1Fνdν=4πd2F1400/integraldisplayν2ν1/parenleftBigν1400 MHz/parenrightBig−0.8dν=2.4×1037h−2W.Using the WMAP value of[h]WMAP=0.71, the radio luminosity of Cygnus A is esti-mated to beLradio=4.8×1037W. This is several million times more radio energy than isproduced by a normal galaxy such as M31 and is roughly three times the energy producedatallwavelengths by the Milky Way.Like Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies may also be divided into two classes:broad-lineradio galaxies(BLRGs, corresponding to Seyfert 1s) andnarrow-line radio galaxies(NLRGs, corresponding to Seyfert 2s). BLRGs have bright, starlike nuclei surrounded byvery faint, hazy envelopes. NLRGs, on the other hand, are giant or supergiant ellipticalgalaxies (types cD, D, and E); Cyg A is a NLRG.Despite their similarities, there are obvious differences between Seyferts and radio galax-ies. Although Seyfert nuclei emit some radio energy, they are relatively quiet at radio wave-lengths compared with radio galaxies. Furthermore, while nearly all Seyferts are spiralgalaxies, none of the strong radio galaxies are spirals.Radio Lobes and JetsA radio galaxy may display extendedradio lobes, as in Fig. 6, or it may radiate its energyboth from a compactcorein its nucleus and from ahalothat is about the size of the visiblegalaxy or larger. The optical cD galaxy in Fig. 7 is the central dot in the Cyg A radioimage shown in Fig. 6. The optical galaxy is ﬂanked by two huge radio lobes that arethe sources of the tremendous radio luminosity estimated in Example 1.1. Each of thelobes has a diameter of about 17h−1kpc.Observations reveal that one of the lobes is connected to the central galaxy of Cyg Aby a collimatedjetthat spans the roughly 50h−1kpc of space separating the galaxy fromthe lobe. (Since the orientations of jets and radio lobes are not well determined, the valuesfor their sizes quoted here are projected distances on the plane of the sky.) At least halfof the stronger radio galaxies have detectable jets, as do more than three-quarters of theweaker sources. The jets associated with the powerful sources tend to be one-sided (likeCyg A’s), while those found in less luminous radio galaxies are typically two-sided. Onereason for this is that the stronger radio galaxies can be seen at greater distances, and so adim counterjet may go undetected. (Reasons why counterjets may not appear as luminousto the observer will be discussed in Section 3.)Figure 8 shows the strong jet and weak counterjet of the elliptical galaxy NGC 6251at several radio frequencies. Note that the Moon’s angular diameter would just ﬁt into eitherof the two rectangular boxes at the top of the ﬁgure, while the scale of the bottom box isjust a few milliarcseconds across. It is remarkable that the jet can be traced essentially allthe way to the core of the galaxy.Other radio jets are not as straight as those of Cyg A or NGC 6251. Figure 9 shows thewindblown appearance of the jets emanating from NGC 1265, produced by that galaxy’smotion through the intracluster gas of the Perseus cluster.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1204>>>

16h56m00s
16h56m00s16h48m00s16h40m00s16h32m00s16h40m00s16h32m00s16h24m00s
16h24m00s82º30'82º20'82º20'82º50'82º50'82º40'82º30'82º10'16h48m00sHPBWDec.R.A.
–200–100 0 100Offset from Core (arcsec)200 300 400
0 50 100 150Offset from Core (arcsec)
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0Offset from Core (arcsec)200 250
0".001NGC 6251WSRT610 MHzVLA1664 MHzVLA1410 MHzVLA1662 MHzVLB10651 MHzFIGURE 8The jet and counterjet (second panel) of the radio galaxy NGC 6251. (Figure adaptedfrom Bridle and Perley,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,22, 319, 1984. Reproduced by permission fromthe Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume 22, ©1984 by Annual Reviews Inc.)Following Cyg A, many more radio galaxies were discovered. One of these is M87,thegiantelliptical(E1)galaxythatliesatthecenteroftheVirgocluster.WithanapparentvisualmagnitudeofV=8.7,M87isoneofthebrighter-appearinggalaxies in the sky. Figure 10 shows two HST views of M87, also known as Virgo Ato radio astronomers. Its prominent jet, shown at the right, was discovered optically in1917. The jet extends from the galaxy some 1.5 kpc into one of its radio lobes. The jetalso displays evenly spaced knots that are bright at radio, visible, and X-ray wavelengths.The X-ray luminosity of M87, including the jet, is roughly 1036W. This is about 50 timesgreater than M87’s radio luminosity. The inset shows the spiral-shaped disk of hot gas thatis at the core of M87. There is also evidence for a faint counterjet extending away fromM87 in the direction opposite that of the dominant jet.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1205>>>

03h15m00s57s54s30"30"40º41'00"
Right ascension (1950.0)Declination (1950.0)NGC 12654873 MHz
FIGURE 9The radio appearance of NGC 1265, with its jets swept back by that galaxy’s motionthrough the surrounding intracluster gas. (Figure adapted from O’Dea and Owen,Ap. J.,301, 841,1986.)
FIGURE 10Two HST views of M87 and its jet. The inset shows the spiral-shaped disk of hot gasat the center of M87. [Courtesy of H. Ford (STScI/Johns Hopkins U.); R. Harms (Applied ResearchCorp.); Z. Tsvetanov, A. Davidsen, and G. Kriss (Johns Hopkins U.); R. Bohlin and G. Hartig (STScI);L. Dressel and A. K. Kochhar (Applied Research Corp.); and Bruce Margon (U. Washington).]Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1206>>>

FIGURE 11The visual and radio appearance (superimposed contour lines) of the radio galaxyCentaurus A. (Courtesy of NRAO.)One of the largest radio galaxies known is 3C 236 (the “3C” designates a listing in theThird Cambridge Catalogof radio sources). With a redshift ofz=0.0988, its distanceis about 280h−1Mpc, according to Hubble’s law. The radio lobes of 3C 236 are separatedby more than 1.5h−1Mpc, projected onto the plane of the sky, while its radio jet is only400h−1pc long.The closest example of anAGN is CentaurusA(NGC 5128), at a distance of 4.7h−1Mpc.Figure 11 shows an optical image of Cen A, an E2 galaxy girded by a thick dust lane.Superimposed on the photograph is a radio map showing the radio lobes.LikeM87,CenAhasajetextendingfromitsnucleuscontainingseveralknotsofradioandX-rayemission.AlthoughCenAisinourastronomicalbackyard,radiogalaxiesonaverageareroughly100timeslessabundantthanSeyfertsinregionsthatarenearbyincosmologicalterms.The Discovery of QuasarsAs radio telescopes discovered increasing numbers of radio sources in the late 1950s, thetask of identifying these sources with known objects became more important. In 1960Thomas Matthews and Allan Sandage were searching for an optical counterpart to anotherradio source, 3C 48. They found a 16th-magnitude starlike object whose unique spectrumdisplayed broad emission lines that could not be identiﬁed with any known element ormolecule. In Sandage’s words, “The thing was exceedingly weird.” In 1963 a similarlyweird spectrum was found for another radio source with a stellar appearance, 3C 273.Figure 12 shows 3C 273 and its jet, which extends a projected distance of 39h−1kpcfrom the nucleus.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1207>>>

FIGURE 12The quasar 3C 273 and its jet. [Courtesy of NASA and J. Bahcall (IAS).]
Comparisonspectrum3C 273
388.9 nm501.6 nm603.0 nmH/H9254H/H9254H/H9253H/H9252
H/H9253H/H9252FIGURE 13Thez=0.158 redshift of the quasar 3C 273. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy ofPalomar/Caltech.)3C 48, 3C 273, and other, similar sources were classiﬁed asquasi-stellar radio sources(QSRs), which became known asquasars. But names are not a substitute for understanding,and an understanding of quasars proved to be elusive. Later that year, the mystery liftedsomewhat when Dutch astronomer Maarten Schmidt recognized that the pattern of thebroad emission lines of 3C 273 was the same as the pattern of the Balmer lines of hydrogen.These familiar lines had been severely redshifted (z=0.158) to unfamiliar wavelengths,making their identiﬁcation difﬁcult; see Fig. 13. This Doppler shift means that 3C 273is receding from Earth at 14.6% of the speed of light. According to Hubble’s law, thisplaces 3C 273 at a distance of about 440h−1Mpc. At Caltech, Schmidt’s associates JesseActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1208>>>

Greenstein (1909–2002) and Thomas Matthews calculated that 3C 48 has an even greaterredshift,z=0.367, corresponding to a radial velocity of 0.303cand a Hubble distance ofjust over 900h−1Mpc. Astronomers realized that 3C 48 was one of the most distant objectsyet discovered in the universe.Quasar LuminositiesA quasar’s radio emission may come either from radio lobes or from a central source inits core. Quasars are so far away that in optical images most appear as overwhelminglybright, starlike nuclei surrounded by faint fuzzy halos. In some cases, a fuzzy halo can beresolved into a faint parent galaxy. To be visible from such great distances, quasars must beexceptionally powerful.Example 1.2.quation can be used to obtain the absolutevisualmagnitudeof the quasar 3C 273, which has an apparent visual magnitude ofV=12.8[h]WMAP=0.71 yields a distance ofd≃620 Mpc, implying thatMV=V−5 log10/parenleftbiggd10 pc/parenrightbigg=−26.2.This value can be used to obtain an estimate of the luminosity of the quasar at visualwavelengths. UsingMSun=4.82fortheSun’sabsolutevisualmagnitudegivesanestimateofthequasar’svisualluminosity:LV≈100(MSun−MV)/5L⊙=2.6×1012L⊙=1×1039W.The radio energy emitted by 3C 273 can be estimated from its distance and thevalue of the monochromatic ﬂux at a radio frequency of 1400 MHz,F1400=4.64×10−25Wm−2Hz−1=46.4 Jy. The radio spectrum follows the power law of Eq. ( 1)with a spectral index ofα≃0.24. Integrating the monochromatic ﬂux fromν1≃0t oν2=3 GHz givesLradio=4πd2/integraldisplayν2ν1Fνdν=7×1036W.The bolometric luminosities inferred for quasars range from about 1038W to more than1041W, with 5×1039W being a typical value; see Fig. 16. This implies that the mostluminous quasars are on the order of 105times more energetic than a normal galaxy likeour own Milky Way.Quasar SpectraThe monochromatic ﬂux of 3C 273 is shown in Fig. 14. This continuous spectrum spansnearly 15 orders of magnitude in frequency, very broad compared with the sharply peakedblackbody spectrum of a star. The gentle decline at the low-frequency end of the spectrumreﬂects the larger-than-average spectral index (α=0.24) for 3C 273 in this regime. (Atlow frequencies, the spectrum of 3C 273 is dominated by radiation from its jet rather thanActive Galaxies
The  following  e: m−M=5 log10(d)−5=5 log10/parenleftbiggd10 pc/parenrightbigg.Adopting


<<<PAGE 1209>>>

810121416Log10 /H9263F/H9263 (Hz–Jy)
10152025Log10 /H9263 (Hz)F/H9263 = constant
FIGURE 14The spectrum of 3C 273, after the Doppler shift of the frequencies due to the Hubbleﬂow has been removed. A horizontal line would correspond to a spectral index ofα=1; for reference,the diagonal dashed line shows the slope forFν=constant. The two lines on the right correspondto 3C 273 during quiescence and during an outburst. (Figure adapted from Perry, Ward, and Jones,MNRAS,228, 623, 1987.)from its core.) For most other quasars, the spectrum at the low-frequency end falls off moreabruptly (smallerα). A typical spectrum turns over in the far infrared at a frequency ofabout 5×1012Hz, possibly due to dust and/or synchrotron self-absorption. Also, althoughsome quasars are most luminous at infrared wavelengths and others peak in X-rays, thepeak power output of 3C 273 is in the form of low-energy gamma rays.Quasars emit an excess of ultraviolet light relative to stars and so are quite blue inappearance. For example, the color indices of 3C 48 areU−B=−0.61 andB−V=0.38(you should note that this lies well above the positions of main-sequence stars on thecolor–colordiagram.InFig.14,thisultravioletexcessisindicatedbythebigbluebump between roughly 1014Hz and 1016Hz. A big blue bump is a feature of most (but notall) quasar spectra.Absorption lines may also be present in some quasar spectra. In particular, Doppler-broadened absorption lines, found in up to 10% of the spectra of quasars, originate fromsources with speeds exceeding 104km s−1. These lines are believed to be associated withthequasaritself.Manyadditionalnarrowabsorptionlinesaretypicallyseeninthespectraquasarswithhighredshifts(z>2.2)duetotheLymanseriesofhydrogenandmetalssuchasCIVandMgII.Theselineswouldnormallyappearatultravioletwavelengths but have been redshifted into the visible spectrum by the recessional velocityof the absorbing material. The absorption lines of a given quasar can be placed into differentgroups that share common redshifts. Furthermore, the redshifts of these narrow absorptionlines are nearly always less than the redshift of the quasar’s emission lines. The variousgroupings of lines are thought to arise from clouds of intervening material that lie betweenthe quasar and Earth, as will be discussed in Section 4.Active Galaxies
)of


<<<PAGE 1210>>>

Quasi-Stellar ObjectsThe distinctive appearance of quasars, starlike with an excess of ultraviolet light, led as-tronomers to search for more objects ﬁtting this description. In fact, choosing those objectswithU−B<−0.4 results in a nearly complete list of possible quasars (those at veryhighzare redder), which must then be conﬁrmed by a spectroscopic analysis. Researchersdiscovered that about 90% of the conﬁrmed quasar candidates, and AGNs in general, arerelatively radio-quiet. For this reason, most of these objects are technically referred to asquasi-stellar objects(QSOs), rather than quasars (QSRs).Quasar TerminologyToday, the termquasarhas come to be used almost universally for both radio-loud QSRsand radio-quiet QSOs. As a result, it is common to encounter the descriptionsradio-loudquasarsandradio-quiet quasars. However, it is also sometimes the case that QSO is usedas an abbreviation forquasar. The terminology can be confusing in the literature, so it isimportant for you to understand the context in which the term is being used. In this text,we will generally usequasarto represent both classes of objects, making the distinctionbetween radio-loud and radio-quiet when necessary.5Ultraluminous Infrared GalaxiesNearly all quasars have spectra similar to those of broad-line radio galaxies and Seyfert 1s,with bright power-law continua and broad emission lines (both allowed lines and narrowerforbidden lines). Seyfert 2 spectra, with their narrow emission lines (both permitted andforbidden), appear to have no counterparts among the quasars. However, some astronomersargue that a subset of the galaxies that were cataloged by the IRAS satellite as being ultra-luminous at infrared wavelengths, known asultraluminous infrared galaxies(ULIRGs),shouldbeconsideredquasarsoftype2ratherthanstarburstgalaxies.Itissuggestedthattheinfraredlightresultsfromdustthatabsorbsandreradiatesthelightfromthequasarnucleus.The High Cosmological Redshifts of QuasarsTheSloan Digital Sky Survey(SDSS)hascataloged46,420quasars.Thebrightesten-try in the catalog in theiband (centered on a wavelength of 748.1 nm) is the objectSDSS 17100.62+641209.0 at a redshift ofz=2.7356, havingMi=−30.242. The mostdistant quasar in the catalog is SDSS 023137.65−072854.4 at a redshift ofz=5.4135,implying a recessional velocity of more than 0.95c. In fact, there are 520 quasars in theSDSS catalog with redshifts greater thanz=4.Forsuchlargecosmologicalredshifts,wemustabandonusingtheHubblelawtodeterminedistances.Cosmologicalredshiftsarecausedbytheexpansionofthespacethroughwhichthelighttravels,soforextremelylargedistancestotalelongationofthewavelengthdependsonhowtheexpansionoftheuniversehas5It has been pointed out by more than one astronomer that this confusing terminology is also a bit contradictory; tosay that a particular quasar is radio-quiet is equivalent to saying that we are discussing aradio-quietquasi-stellarradio source(based on the original deﬁnition ofquasar)!Active Galaxies
the


<<<PAGE 1211>>>

changed with time. The rate of expansion is changing in response to all of the matter andenergy in the universe. For this reason, it is customary to quote the redshift,z, rather than anactual distance determination. You should keep in mind, however, that the fractional changein wavelength for a cosmological redshift is the same as the fractional change in the size ofthe universe,R, since the time when the light was emitted.6That is,z=λobs−λemittedλemitted=Robs−RemittedRemitted,which givesRobsRemitted=1+z.(3)Thus a redshift ofz=3 means that the universe is now four times larger than when thelight was emitted.Evidence for Quasar Evolutionheregionsthatarecosmologicallyclosetousmakeup“today’suniverse.”Inobservingtheseregions,astronomerscanstudygalaxiesastheyappearhereandnowinthepresentepoch.Whenlookingdeeperintotheuniverse,however,weseeancientphotonsthathavebeentravelingforalongtimefromasourcethatmayhavechangedsigniﬁcantlysincethelightbeganitsjourney.Thisessentiallymeansthatlookingfartherintospaceimpliespeeringfartherintothepast.Thustelescopesserveastimemachines,providingawindowtotheearlyuniverse.Bright quasars were certainly more common at earlier epochs than they are now, asevidenced by observations at large and smallz, respectively. Several factors could contributeto the greater space density of luminous quasars in the past. Both the total number of quasarsand their luminosities may have been different then, and it is obviously a difﬁcult task todisentangle these inﬂuences. A further complication is introduced by the expansion of theuniverse. The universe is larger today than it was at a redshiftzby a factor of 1+z,s ot h espace density of quasars would be greater in the past even if their numbers and luminositieshave remained constant. To avoid unnecessary confusion caused by the expansion of theuniverse, astronomers have deﬁned acomoving space densitythat mathematically removesthe effect of the expanding universe. The number of objects per Mpc3at a redshiftzis dividedby(1+z)3, scaling the space density down to the value it would have today (atz=0).The comoving space density of a constant number of nonevolving objects does not changeas the universe expands, and so a change in this density implies that the number of objectsis varying or that the objects are evolving (or both).Statistical studies indicate that there are more than 1000 times as many quasars perMpc3(comoving space density) brighter thanMB=−25.9a tz=2 than there are today(z=0). However, there is strong evidence that the total number of quasars hasnotchangedsigniﬁcantly from the present (z=0) back to roughlyz=2. Figure 15 shows several6This fractional change can be measured by the average separation of its constituents, for instance.Active Galaxies
T


<<<PAGE 1212>>>

–22–241.3901.6701.9550.5400.8251.110
–26–22–24–26–22–24–26Mg10–710–610–710–6F(Mg) (Mpc–3 mag–1)
FIGURE 15Luminosity functions for quasars with different redshifts. The redshifts are indicatedin each frame; for instance, in the upper-left-hand frame,z=0.540. The jagged line that is presentin every frame (upper right inz=0.540) represents the data forz=1.390. Note that the populationis brighter at greater redshifts. Data are from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and the 2-degreeField survey (2dF) for 5645 quasars. Thegband is centered on 480 nm. (Figure adapted from Richardset al.,MNRAS,360, 839, 2005.)luminosity functions,τPhiφ, for quasars in different redshift intervals, whereτPhiφ(Mg)is thenumber of quasars per Mpc−3(comoving) that have an absolute magnitude betweenMgandMg+dMg. Note that forz<2, the curves would overlap if they were shifted horizontallyalong theMg-axis. This indicates that forz<2, the populations of quasars with differentredshifts differ only in their luminosities, not in their comoving space densities. If this is so,then the scarcity of bright quasars today is an evolutionary effect, caused by a decrease intheir luminosities with time. This luminosity evolution of quasars is shown in Fig. 16.7Apparently, a picture in which a constant number of quasars grows dimmer as the universeexpands is consistent with the observations forz<2.The situation becomes more complicated betweenz=2 andz=3. Astronomers canstudy the birth and evolution of quasars out toz∼6. Statistical surveys at both optical andX-ray wavelengths show that the comoving space density of AGNs peaks at a redshift ofapproximatelyz≈2.5 and then drops off forz>3; see Fig. 17. These studies indicatethat the comoving space density declines by roughly a factor of 10 from its peak value byz≈4.This high-zdeﬁcitinthenumberofquasarscouldreﬂectagrowthphaseofsupermassiveblackholesthatpowerthenascentAGN.well-deﬁnedrelationshipexistsbetweenthemassofasupermassiveblackholeandthevelocitydispersionofthespheroidofagalaxy,suggestingthatasthemassofthegalaxygrowsandthevelocity7Note that Figure 16 assumes a pre-WMAP value ofh=0.5 and a speciﬁc model for the expansion of theuniverse that corresponds to a “ﬂat universe” (a deceleration parameter ofq0=0.5).Active Galaxies
A -


<<<PAGE 1213>>>

012z = 2.2
z = 0.3–20–22–24–26–28–301038103910401041
567891011Redshift (z)
Look–back time (109 yr)
Absolute magnitude (MB)Luminosity (W)1990
FIGURE 16The dimming of quasars with time. Forz<0.3, there are too few nearby objects toprovide an adequate sample for this ﬁgure. The empty region at the upper left has not been sampled byobservations in this study. (Figure adapted from Boyle,The Environment and Evolution of Galaxies,Shull and Thronson (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993.)
10–810–710–610–5Number density (Mpc–3)
012345RedshiftChaMP + CDF + ROSATROSAT (Miyaji et al. 2000)COMBO–17 (Wolf et al. 2003)2dF (Croom et al. 2004)SSG (1995)SDSS (Fan et al. 2001)
FIGURE 17The comoving space density of active galactic nuclei (number per cubic mega-parsec) as a function of redshift. (Figure adapted from Silverman et al.,Ap. J.,624, 630, 2005.)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1214>>>

dispersion of its spheroid increases, so does the mass of the central supermassive blackhole.There is evidence, including interactions in observed quasars, suggesting that an individ-ual quasar “event” lasts only for a galactic dynamical timescale (the dynamical timescale,essentially the characteristic free-fall or orbital time).Figure18showsthequasarPKS2349−014andacompaniongalaxyaboutthesizeoftheLMC(thesmallbrightspotjustabovethequasar).Thethincurvedwispsthatalmostsurroundthequasarareprobablytheresultofatidalinteractionbetweenthequasarandthecompaniongalaxy.ThecompanionissoclosethatitwillprobablymergewithPKS 2349−014inthenearfuture.Aportionofthediffusenebulositycenteredonthequasarmay(ormaynot)representahostgalaxyinwhichitresides.In 2003, James S. Dunlop, Ross J. McLure, and their colleagues reported on an extensivestudy of the morphology of the host galaxies of 33 radio-loud quasars, radio-quiet quasars,and radio galaxies in the redshift band 0.1<z<0.25. The study was conducted by usingthe Hubble Space Telescope in combination with VLAradio imaging. The research team wasable to conclude that all of the galaxies in their sample associated with radio-loud quasarsor radio galaxies are massive ellipticals. Of the 13 radio-quiet quasars in the sample, 9 arehosted by massive ellipticals while the remaining 4 are in disk/bulge systems. Furthermore,of the 4 disk/bulge systems, the luminosities of 2 of them are dominated by their bulgecomponents, implying that 11 of the 13 radio-quiet quasars (or∼85%) are associatedwith galaxies that are predominantly spheroidal. In addition, the 2 disk-dominated galaxiesare the sites of the lowest-luminosity AGNs in the sample by far, and they may be moreappropriately considered Seyfert 2 galaxies. From the systems investigated in this study, itappears that all of the true quasars and radio galaxies in the sample are hosted by massiveellipticals that are nearly indistinguishable from lower-zquiescent galaxies typically foundnear the centers of rich clusters.
FIGURE 18The quasar PKS 2349−014 in a gravitational interaction with a companion galaxy.(Figure from Bahcall, Kirhakos, and Schneider,Ap. J. Lett.,447, L1, 1995. Courtesy of J. Bahcall,Institute for Advanced Study, NASA.)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1215>>>

The study also revealed that all of the radio-loud quasars contained central supermassiveblack holes of at least 109M⊙and that the radio-quiet quasars contained black holes withmasses in excess of 5×108M⊙. It appears from this work that radio-loud systems aremuch less abundant than radio-quiet systems (10% vs. 90%) simply because the radio-loudsystems require more massive central black holes to power the strong radio energy emission.However, although the investigation did ﬁnd a broad correlation between increasing blackhole mass and increasing radio luminosity, the most luminous radio sources cannot beattributed to black hole mass alone. Rather, there is speculation that black hole rotation alsomay be required to power the strongest radio sources.In a second, statistical study of 12,698 quasars with redshifts in the range 0.1<z<2.1found in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey quasar catalog, McLure and Dunlop considered theevolution of black hole masses with increasing redshift. They found that black hole massessufﬁcient to power quasars were in place byz∼2. They further determined that all ofthe central black holes had masses in the range 107M⊙<Mbh<3×109M⊙, where theupper limit corresponds to the most massive black holes yet found in the local universe(speciﬁcally, in M87 and Cygnus A).The SDSS quasar study was also able to point out that quasar bolometric luminositiesincrease steadily with redshift from roughly 0.15LEdatz∼0.2 to 0.5LEdatz∼2.0, whereLEdistheEddingtonluminosity.It is also evident from the data that theEddingtonluminositylimitremainsvalidatthehigh-zend of the study.Timescales of AGN VariabilityThe energy produced by many of the AGNs discussed above (excluding NLRGs andSeyfert 2s) can vary on short timescales. The luminosity of the broad emission lines andcontinuum of some Seyfert 1 galaxies and quasars can change by a factor of 2 within afew months, weeks, or even days, although there is little or no corresponding variation inthe narrow lines. The variation in broad emission lines typically lags behind the continuumvariation over similar timescales. There are also variations of a few percent in the visibleand X-ray output of Seyfert 1s and quasars on timescales as short as a few minutes, withX-ray ﬂuctuations typically the most rapid. At the other end of the scale, there may bechanges of a longer duration. For example, Fig. 19 shows that around the year 1937, thequasar 3C 279 brightened by a factor of 250 at visible wavelengths during an outburst thatlasted for several years.Polarization of the EmissionQuasars typically show low degrees of polarization. At visible wavelengths, the degreeof linear polarization is usually less than 3% for both radio-quiet and radio-loud objects,although it may reach up to 35% polarization for a few objects. The radio emission fromhigh-polarization quasars comes mostly from a compact core; such quasars are calledcore-dominant radio sources(and alsocompact sources). These quasars are less polarized atradio wavelengths than thelobe-dominant sources, which may reach up to 60% linearpolarization. The degree of linear polarization of AGN radio jets is typically 40% but mayexceed50%withinasmallregion.(ynchrotronradiationishighlylinearlypolarized.Thelowerpolarizationofthecore-dominantsourcesisprobablyActive Galaxies
Sduetosynchrotron


<<<PAGE 1216>>>

1817161514131211mB26,000 28,000 30,000 32,000 34,000Julian days – 2,400,0001931.0 1934.0 1937.0 1940.0 1943.0 1946.0 1949.0 1952.0
FIGURE 19The variation in the apparent magnitude of the quasar 3C 279, based on an exam-ination of archival astronomical photographs. (Figure adapted from Eachus and Liller,Ap. J. Lett.,200, L61, 1975.)self-absorption.)Figure20showstheorientationofthemagneticﬁeldofthequasar3C47,asobtainedfrompolarizationmeasurements.Fanaroff–Riley Luminosity ClassesIn 1974, B. L. Fanaroff and J. M. Riley suggested that the radio-loud AGNs in the thirdCambridge catalog could be categorized into two general luminosity classes. Fanaroff andRiley deﬁned Class I objects as those for which the ratio of the distance between the brightestspots of radio emission on either side of the center (excluding the central source) to the fullextent of the radio source is less than 0.5; Class II objects have a ratio greater than 0.5. Anexample of an FR I galaxy is NGC 1265, shown in Fig. 9, and Cyg A is a classic exampleof an FR II galaxy (Fig. 6). Quasars are also FR II objects.From the classiﬁcation scheme, it becomes apparent that FR I sources have diminishingradio luminosity with increasing distance from the center of the jets, while FR IIs tend tobe most radio-bright at the ends of the lobes. It is also common that FR I galaxies havetwo recognizable radio jets, while FR II galaxies often exhibit only a single identiﬁable jet(the counterjet is either very weak or undetectable). Furthermore, FR I galaxies may havecurved jets, while FR II jets tend to be straight.Also intriguing, and the reason why this morphological classiﬁcation scheme is referredto as a luminosity classiﬁcation, is that there is also a rather clear demarcation between FR Iand FR II classes in terms of the speciﬁc luminosity. Sources having a speciﬁc luminosityat 1.4 GHz of less than 1025W Hz−1are identiﬁed as FR Is, and those with greater speciﬁcluminosities are inevitably classiﬁed as FR IIs.BlazarsThe properties of rapid variability and a high degree of linear polarization at visible wave-lengths deﬁne the class of AGNs known asblazars. The most well-known object in thisclass is BL Lacertae, found in the northern constellation of Lacerta (the Lizard). BL LacActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1217>>>

3041 4500153020º42'45"Declination (B1950)
01h33m42.5s42.0 41.5 41.0 40.5 40.0 39.5 39.0 38.5Right ascension (B1950)3C47 IPOL 4885.100 MHz 3C47 B+C 6.ICONV .1
FIGURE 20Polarization mapping of the magnetic ﬁeld of the quasar 3C 47. Both lobes arehighly polarized. (Figure adapted from Fernini et al.,Ap. J.,381, 63, 1991.)was originally classiﬁed as a variable star because of its irregular variations in brightness;hence the variable star type of designation. In a week’s time BL Lac would double its lu-minosity, and it would change by a factor of 15 as the months passed. But although BL Lachas a stellar appearance, its spectrum shows only a featureless continuum with very weakemission and absorption lines. Careful observations reveal that the bright, starlike nucleusof BL Lac is surrounded by a fuzzy halo that has a spectrum similar to that of an ellipticalgalaxy.BL Lac objectsare a subclass of blazars that are characterized by their rapid time-variability. Remarkably, their luminosities may change by up to 30% in just 24 hours andby a factor of 100 over a longer time period. BL Lacs are also distinguished by theirstrongly polarized power-law continua (30–40% linear polarization) that are nearly devoidof emission lines. However, observations of a few faint spectral lines have revealed highredshifts, so that, like quasars, BL Lacs are at cosmological distances. Of those BL Lacs thathave been resolved, about 90% appear to reside in elliptical galaxies. Joining the BL Lacobjects in the blazar classiﬁcation are theoptically violently variable quasars(OVVs).They are similar to the BL Lacs except that they are typically much more luminous, andtheir spectra may display broad emission lines.LINERsA ﬁnal class of objects worth mentioning consists of the so-calledLow Ionization NuclearEmission-line Regions(LINERs). These galaxies have very low luminosities in their nuclei,Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1218>>>

but with fairly strong emission lines of low-ionization species, such as the forbidden linesof [O I] and [N II]. The spectra of LINERs seem similar to the low-luminosity end ofthe Seyfert 2 class, and LINER signatures are detected in many (perhaps a majority of)spiral galaxies in high-sensitivity studies. These low-ionization lines are also detectable instarburst galaxies and in H II regions, and so it is unclear whether LINERs truly representa low-luminosity limit of the AGN phenomena.A Summary of AGN ClassiﬁcationsThis section has introduced a large number of objects with some commonalities and someapparent differences. Before proceeding to a discussion of how we might unify the descrip-tion of AGN phenomena, we brieﬂy summarize the objects in Table 1.TABLE 1A Summary of AGN Classes.Class Sub-class DescriptionSeyferts Type 1 broad and narrow emission lines, weak radioemission, X-ray emission, spiral galaxies, variableType 2 narrow emission lines only, weak radio emission,weak X-ray emission, spiral galaxies, not variableQuasars Radio-loud broad and narrow emission lines, strong radio(QSR) emission, some polarization, FR II, variableRadio-quiet broad and narrow emission lines, weak radio(QSO) emission, weak polarization, variableRadio BLRG broad and narrow emission lines, strong radioGalaxiesemission, FR II, weak polarization, ellipticalgalaxies, variableNLRG narrow emission lines only, strong radio emission,FR I and FR II, no polarization, elliptical galaxies,not variableBlazars BL Lacs almost devoid of emission lines, strong radioemission, strong polarization, rapid variability,90% in ellipticalsOVV quasars broad and narrow emission lines, strong radioemission, strong polarization, rapid variability,much more luminous than BL LacsULIRGspossibly dust-enshrouded quasars, alternativelymay be starburst phenomenaLINERssimilar to low-luminosity Seyfert 2, low-ionizationemission lines, in many (perhaps majority of)spiral galaxies, alternatively may be starburstphenomena or H II region emissionActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1219>>>

2A UNIFIED MODEL OF ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEIThe last section presented a bewildering array of observations of AGNs. Although therewere many similarities, such as a bright compact nucleus, a wide continuum, and timevariability, there were also many differences, including the presence or absence of broademission lines, and the strength of radio and X-ray emission. The question is: Are the typesof AGNs fundamentally different or fundamentally the same?It now seems likely that active galactic nuclei are all powered by the same generalengine, accretion onto central supermassive black holes.Accordingly,theobservationaldifferencesareduetothedifferentorientationsoftheobjectsasviewedfromEarthandtothedifferentratesofaccretionandmassesofthecentralblackholes.Thepresenceofradiolobesisthensomethinginadditionto,andconsistentwith,thebasicmodel.Although there is not yet general agreement on some of the speciﬁc details of a uniﬁedmodel of AGNs, the model does serve to provide a framework for organizing the observa-tions of AGNs and their interpretations. Any model should be self-consistent, meaning thatits constitutive elements are all in harmony. Also, as with all viable theories and modelsin science, a successful AGN model should have the power to predict the results of newobservational tests, in addition to explaining all of the observations made previously. Suc-cessful predictions have been made on the basis of the idea of uniﬁcation, and it appearsthat the basic features of a uniﬁed model of AGNs are in hand. The purpose of this sectionis to demonstrate how the features of such a model may be deduced and to describe the bestidea of what an AGN probably looks like.Toward a Uniﬁed Model of AGNsFirst, we will examine two pieces of evidence suggesting that the pursuit of a uniﬁed modelis indeed justiﬁed. Figure 21 showsLHα, the luminosity in the Hαemission line, andLFC, the luminosity of the featureless continuum at a wavelength near 480 nm, plotted fora variety of AGNs (excluding blazars). If the hydrogen emission lines are produced via thephotoionization of hydrogen atoms by the continuum radiation and the atoms’ subsequentrecombination, then the two luminosities should be proportional, and a straight line with aslope of 1 should be found on a log–log graph.The slope of the dashed line is 1.05, conﬁrmingthatLHα∝LFC. This result implies a common origin for the hydrogen emission lines, bothbroad and narrow, that are observed in AGNs for Seyfert 1 and 2 galaxies, broad- andnarrow-line radio galaxies, and radio-loud and radio-quiet quasars.Another piece of evidence for a uniﬁed model comes from an observation reported byRobertAntonucci and Joseph Miller in 1985. When they observed NGC 1068 (a Seyfert 2) inpolarized light, they found a Seyfert 1 spectrum with broad emission lines. This and similarcases discovered since then imply that within these Seyfert 2s are Seyfert 1 nuclei thatare hidden from the direct view of Earth by some optically thick material. The diminishedSeyfert 1 spectrum (normally overwhelmed by the direct Seyfert 2 spectrum) comes fromlight that reaches us indirectly by reﬂection from the interstellar medium outside the nucleus.This reﬂection would also contribute to the observed linear polarization, when the electricﬁeld vector is perpendicular to the radio axis. The orientation of the AGN relative to theline of sight from Earth will be an important factor in the uniﬁed model to be described.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1220>>>

293133353739Log10 (LH/H9251)Photo Ion/H9251 = 1.05
17 19 21 23 25Log10 (LFC NT)FIGUR 21The luminosity in the Hαemission line versus the luminosity of the featurelesscontinuum at a wavelength near 480 nm (the “NT” stands for “nonthermal”). The symbols are quasars(open circles), Seyfert 1s (ﬁlled circles), Seyfert 2s (open squares), NLRGs (triangles), and moreSeyfert 2s and NLRGs (ﬁlled squares). (Figure adapted from Shuder,Ap. J.,244, 12, 1981.)RO/H9258/H51292/H51291FIGURE 22The brightening of a sphere as seen by a distant observer at pointO.The Nature of the Central EngineThe most important clue to the nature of the central engine that powers AGNs is their rapidtime variability. Consider an optically thick sphere of radiusRthat simultaneously (in itsown rest frame) brightens everywhere; see Fig. 22. The news of the change reaches adistant observer ﬁrst from the nearest part of the sphere after traveling a distanceℓ1, andlast from the edge or limb after traveling a distanceℓ2. (The back of the sphere isn’t seen.)Usingℓ2=ℓ1+Rcosθ≃ℓ1+RActive Galaxies
E 


<<<PAGE 1221>>>

forR≪ℓ1and cosθ≃1, the light from the limb of the sphere must travel an additionaldistance ofℓ2−ℓ1≃R. The brightening is thus smeared out over a time intervalτDeltaφt=R/c.In this way, the rapidity of a luminosity change can be used to set an upper limit on thesize of the object involved. The high recessional speeds of quasars mean that relativity alsoplays a role. It is left as an exercise to show that if the sphere described above were movingaway from Earth with a velocityv, then its radius as determined on Earth would beR=cτDeltaφt/radicalbigg1−v2c2=cτDeltaφtγ,(4)whereγis the Lorentz factor.UsingτDeltaφt=1 hr for a typical value,andtakingγ=1forconvenience,theradiusoftheemittingregionisnomorethanR≃cτDeltaφtγ=1.1×1012m=7.2 AU.Considering that AGNs are the most luminous objects known, this is an incredibly smallsize. Whatever powers an active galactic nucleus would ﬁt comfortably within our SolarSystem!The typical quasar luminosity of 5×1039W is equivalent to more than 360 Milky Waygalaxies. However, there is an upper limit to the luminosity,L, of any spherically symmetricobject that is in equilibrium. It must be less than the Eddington limit,L<LEd, where,LEd≃1.5×1031W/parenleftbiggMM⊙/parenrightbigg.For a luminosity ofL=5×1039W, this provides a lower limit for the mass:M>L1.5×1031WM⊙=3.3×108M⊙.(5)Finding such a large amount of mass in such a small space is clear evidence for asupermassive black hole.he mass of ablack hole with the radiusRfound in Eq. (4) isM=Rc22G=3.7×108M⊙.The fact that these two mass estimates are of the same order of magnitude is enough tosupport the idea that supermassive black holes are involved in powering AGNs. For the restof this section, we will assume a value of 108M⊙for a typical mass, which corresponds toa Schwarzschild radius ofRS≃3×1011m≃2 AU≃10−5pc.Generating Luminosity through AccretionThemostefﬁcientwayofgeneratingenergyisbythereleaseofgravitationalpotentialenergythroughmassaccretion.ormatterfallingontothesurfaceofa1.4M⊙neutronstar,about21%oftherestenergyisreleased.However,Active Galaxies
T
F


<<<PAGE 1222>>>

dropping matter straight down onto a black hole is veryinefﬁcientbecause there is nosurface for the mass to strike. Instead, according to an observer at a great distance, a freelyfalling mass would slow to a halt and then disappear as it approached the Schwarzschildradius,RS. On the other hand, as matter spirals in toward a black hole through an accretiondisk, a substantial fraction of the rest energy can be released as viscosity converts kineticenergy into heat and radiation.For a nonrotating black hole, the smallest stable circular orbit for a massive particle (andtherefore the inner edge of an accretion disk) is atr=3RS. At this location, theoreticalcalculations show that the gravitational binding energy is 5.72% of the particle’s rest-mass energy, so mass spiraling down through an accretion disk would release this muchenergy. The situation is even more favorable for a rotating black hole because the eventhorizon is located at a smallerr. For the most rapidly rotating black hole possible, both theevent horizon and the smallest stable prograde orbit are atr=0.5RS(the smallest stableretrograde orbit is at 4.5RS). The gravitational binding energy in this case of maximalrotation is calculated to be 42.3% of a particle’s rest mass.Theaccretion luminositygenerated by a mass accretion rate,˙M, through the disk maybe written asLdisk=η˙Mc2,(6)whereηistheefﬁciencyoftheprocess,0.0572≤η≤0.423.(Forcomparison,heefﬁcienciesforaccretionontoa0.85M⊙whitedwarfanda1.4M⊙neutronstarareη=1.9×10−4and 0.21, respectively.)The accretion of matter through a disk around a rapidly rotating black hole is an ex-tremely efﬁcient way of producing large amounts of energy. Furthermore, the smalleststable prograde orbit lies inside the ergosphere of a rapidly rotating black hole, and framedragging guarantees that the accreting matter will rotate along with the black holeForthesereasons,mostastronomersbelievethatanaccretiondiskaroundasupermassive black hole is an essential ingredient of a uniﬁed model of AGNs. Figure 10shows the spiral-shaped disk of gas that lies at the center of M87. The inner edge of the diskis rotating with a speed of about 550 km s−1, causing the light from the lower right-handedge of the disk to be blueshifted (approaching), while the light from the upper-right isredshifted (receding). The central supermassive black hole is calculated to have a mass ofabout 3×109M⊙.heinnerregionsofaccretiondisksaroundwhitedwarfsandneutronstarsarebrightatultravioletandX-raywavelengths,respectively.Itmightbeexpectedthatanaccretiondiskaroundasupermassiveblackholewouldbeasourceofphotonsofevenhigherenergies,butthisisnotthecase.Becausetheyaresupportedbydegeneracypressure,whitedwarfsandneutronstarsobeythemass–volumerelation,whichstatesthatthesestarsbecomesmallerwithincreasingmass.Therefore,theaccretiondisksaroundmoremassivewhitedwarfsandneutronstarspenetratedeeperintotheirgravitationalpotentialwells.TheSchwarzschildradius,however,increaseswithincreasingmass,andsothecharacteristicdisktemperature,Tdisk,decreases asthemassoftheblackholeincreases.(he equation forTdiskwas derived usingNewtonianphysics,butinthiscaseafullrelativistictreatmentisclearlywarranted.)Active Galaxies
.
TTt


<<<PAGE 1223>>>

To see this, we will assume a rapidly rotating black hole and adoptR=0.5RS=GM/c2for the location of the inner edge of the accretion disk.hecharacteristicdisktemperaturebecomesTdisk=/parenleftbigg3c6˙M8πσG2M2/parenrightbigg1/4.(7)For a disk radiating at a fractionfEdof the Eddington limit,fEd≡Ldisk/LEd.(8)Equation (6) giveη˙Mc2=fEd4πGcκM,or˙M=fEdη4πGκcM.(9)Substituting this expression into Eq. (7) shows thatTdisk=/parenleftbigg3c5fEd2κσGMη/parenrightbigg1/4,(10)and so for the disk temperature,Tdisk∝M−1/4.Example 2.1.Consider an accretion disk around a rapidly rotating supermassive blackhole of 108M⊙. The value offEdis probably close to 1 for luminous quasars and roughlybetween 0.01 and 0.1 for Seyfert galaxies. In this example, let the disk luminosity be equaltotheEddingtonlimit(fEd=1),L=1.5×1039W. Also, we willadoptη=0.1asarepresentativeaccretionefﬁciency.Themassaccretionraterequiredtomaintainthediskluminosityis˙M=fEdη4πGκcM=1.64×1023kg s−1=2.60 M⊙yr−1.Luminous quasars must be fed at a rate of around 1 to 10 M⊙yr−1. Less luminous AGNsmay have correspondingly smaller appetites. The characteristic disk temperature isTdisk=/parenleftbigg3c5fEd2κσGMη/parenrightbigg1/4=7.30×105K,hereX=0.7hasbeenusedfortheopacityduetoelectronscattering.AccordingtoWien’sdisplacementlaw,thespectrumofablackbodywiththistemperaturepeaksatawavelengthof39.7nm,intheextremeultravioletregionoftheelectromagneticspectrum.Although this expression forTdiskis at best a rough estimate of the characteristic disktemperature, temperatures of several hundred thousand kelvins agree with the results ofmore realistic disk calculations.Active GalaxiesT
s
so  
W


<<<PAGE 1224>>>

It is thought that the big blue bump observed in the spectra of quasars is the thermalsignature of an underlying accretion disk. However, although accretion is believed to providethe power for AGNs, the theoretical spectrum of an accretion diskcannotaccountforthewidecontinuumthatisactuallyobserved.Structure of the Accretion DiskA detailed model of the accretion disk around a supermassive black hole is difﬁcult toderive because the high luminosities involved must have a signiﬁcant effect on the disk’sstructure. Theoretical calculations indicate that the structure of the accretion disk dependsonfEd(Eq. 8). Several possible structures have been identiﬁed. IffEd<0.01, then thedensity of the disk is too small for efﬁcient cooling. The energy generated by the disk’sviscosity (internal friction) cannot be radiated away efﬁciently, and the disk puffs up intoanion torusthat is supported by the pressure of the hot ions. Part or all of the disk wouldthen resemble a doughnut around the central black hole. Values of 0.01<fEd<0.1o rs oimplyageometricallythindiskforclosebinarysystemsbydeﬁnition,atanyradialdistancerinathindisk,theverticalheighth≪r). As thevalueofLdiskbecomessuper-Eddington(fEd>1),theradiationpressurethatisgeneratedbalancestheforceofgravityandthephotonsarecapableofsupportingthematterinaninﬂatedradiation torus.One scenario involves a composite disk that has three regions, as shown in Fig. 23.Within about 1000RSof the center, radiation pressure exceeds the gas pressure, resultingin a thick, hot disk. This is the probable origin of the big blue bump in the continuousspectrum. Exterior to this, reaching out to some 105RS(≃1p cf o rM=108M⊙), is a thindisk that is supported by gas pressure. This part of the disk ﬂares outward, becoming thickerwith increasing radius. The concave surface of the outer disk means that it can be irradiatedby the central source or the thick, hot portion of the inner disk, resulting in a wind ﬂowing
Hot diskJetBlack holeRadiation from inner disk
~ 103RS~ 105RSFIGURE 23A schematic structure of the accretion disk in an AGN. The radial direction is notdrawn to scale.Active Galaxies
(


<<<PAGE 1225>>>

outward from the disk. Finally, beyond about 105RS, the thick disk breaks up into numeroussmall clouds.Unfortunately, some problems with this picture remain. For example, the values offEdquoted above for Seyferts appear to be incompatible with models of thick disks.The Implications of AGN SpectraFor the blazars, at least, there is widespread agreement that the continuous spectrum, withits power-law form and signiﬁcant polarization, is produced by synchrotron radiation.orpulsars,synchrotronradiationisproducedwhenrelativisticchargedparticles,suchaselectrons,spiralaroundmagneticﬁeldlines.(Forobjectsotherthanblazars,thesituationismorecomplicated.hebigbluebumpobservedinthe continua of other types of AGNs is believed to be thermal radiation. In addition, dustemission plays an important role in the infrared.)With a wide range of photon energies available for ionizing atoms, synchrotron radiationcan account for the variety of ionization states observed in the emission line spectra ofAGNs.For example, a number of ionization states have been seen for forbidden lines, including[O I] and [Fe X]. Furthermore, synchrotron radiation can be up to 70% linearly polarized,in agreement with the high degrees of polarization observed for some AGNs.Producing a Relativistic Outﬂow of Charged ParticlesIt might seem surprising to ﬁnd a magnetic ﬁeld involved in this situation. Although itis theoretically possible for an isolated black hole to have a magnetic ﬁeld, it is unlikelyto occur naturally. This is because although the three attributes of a black hole (its mass,angular momentum, and electric charge) can be combined to produce a magnetic ﬁeld, blackholes should be essentially electrically neutral, since any net charge acquired by a blackhole would be rapidly canceled as it attracted charge of the opposite sign. However, theionized disk material is highly conducting, so there can be a magnetic ﬁeld that is generatedby the accretion disk as the disk orbits the black hole.It may be thatthevaryingmagneticﬁeldnearthesurfaceofthediskinducesalargeelectricﬁeldthatiscapableofacceleratingchargedparticlesawayfromthedisk.Astheparticlesmoveoutward, they are accelerated to relativistic speeds while they spiral around the magneticﬁeld lines that rotate with the disk. Because the ﬁeld lines are anchored to the conductingdisk, the particle energy ultimately comes at the expense of the accretion energy.There is another source of energy that taps the rotational energy of the black hole itself,ﬁrst described by Roger Blandford and Roman Znajek. Detailed calculations show thatthe rotating black hole can be thought of as a spinning conductor in a magnetic ﬁeld; seeFig. 24. Just as the motion of a conducting wire through a magnetic ﬁeld will producean electromotive force (emf) between its ends, the rotation of a black hole in a magneticﬁeld will produce a potential difference between its poles and its equator. The effectiveresistance of the rotating black hole between its poles and equator is about 30τOmegaφ. In thispicture, the black hole acts like an immense battery connected to a 30-τOmegaφresistor. Power isextracted from the black hole’s rotational energy, just as if a current of charged particleswere ﬂowing through the resistor in response to the voltage difference. As a result, the blackActive Galaxies
TF


<<<PAGE 1226>>>

DiskDiskFIGURE 24An accretion disk and its magnetic ﬁeld orbiting a rotating black hole.hole’s rate of spin is reduced. The power generated by theBlandford–Znajek mechanismis approximatelyP≃4πµ0B2R2Sc(11)=2.7×1038W=7.1×1011L⊙for a 108M⊙black hole withRS=3×1011m and a magnetic ﬁeld of 1 T. The energyis in the form of electromagnetic radiation and a ﬂow of relativistic pairs of electrons andpositrons. Up to 9.2% of the rest energy of a maximally rotating black hole may be extractedin this manner. This is another important source of energy, comparable to that obtained bydisk accretion.The two processes just described appear capable of producing a relativistic outﬂowof charged particles, although the mechanism is still uncertain. As the electrons spiralaround the magnetic ﬁeld lines, they emit the synchrotron radiation that contributes tothe continuous spectrum of AGNs. (You will recall from Section 1 that the observedpower-law synchrotron spectra of AGNs imply that the distribution of electron energies isdescribed by a power law. Just how this distribution comes about is as yet unknown, butpower-law synchrotron spectra are also observed for supernova remnants such as the CrabNebula.)The Generation of X-RaysAGNs can be very bright in X-rays,8and several mechanisms are usually invoked to ex-plain the excess over that produced directly by synchrotron radiation. The high-frequencyend of the accretion disk spectrum may be sufﬁcient to account for the soft (low-energy)X-rays. Lower-energy photons from other sources may also be scattered to much higher8X-rays from AGNs are probably responsible for theX-ray background, a uniform glow of X-ray photons that per-vades the sky. Discovered in 1962, the X-ray background extends into the gamma-ray region of the electromagneticspectrum.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1227>>>

energies by collisions with relativistic electrons. As the name suggests, thisinverse Comp-ton scatteringis the reverse of the Compton scattering process.Inaddition,inverseComptonscatteringmayproducethegammarayscomingfromthequasar3C273.Thermalbremsstrahlung,themechanismthatproducestheX-rayemissionobservedinclustersofgalaxies,hasacharacteristicspectrumthat could alsobeconsistentwithobservationsofX-raysfromAGNs.Broad-Line and Narrow-Line EmissionThe characteristic broad emission lines (when present) and narrow emission lines of AGNsare the result of photoionization by the continuum radiation. A careful examination of theselines reveals much about the conditions under which they were formed.All of the broad linesarise from permitted atomic transitions, but none of them involve the forbidden transitionsseen in some narrow lines. The broad Hαand Hβlines vary on timescales of a monthor less, while the narrow lines seem to vary little, if at all. This evidence, along with thediscovery that Seyfert 2 galaxies may harbor Seyfert 1 nuclei that are hidden from directview by some obscuring material, indicates that the broad and narrow lines in the spectraof AGNs originate in different regions under different conditions.The Broad-Line RegionThe broad emission lines observed in the spectrum of manyAGNs are formed in abroad-lineregionthat is relatively close to the center.Astudy of the Seyfert galaxy NGC 4151 revealedthat when the intensity of the continuum radiation varied, most of the broad emission linesresponded very quickly, within a month or less and perhaps as quickly as one week. Lightcan travel a distance of nearly 1015m in 30 days, so this provides a rough estimate ofthe radius of the broad-line regions for Seyferts and BLRGs. The variation of the lines inquasars takes place more slowly, so their broad-line regions may be larger by a factor offour or so. A study of the broad Fe II emission lines that are usually present indicates thatthe temperature in the broad-line region is∼104K. Other lines indicate that the numberdensity of electrons probably lies between 1015m−3and 1016m−3. Forbidden lines will notbe seen with large number densities such as these because of the frequent collisions betweenthe atoms. Atoms and ions with electrons in the long-lived metastable states that give riseto forbidden lines are deexcited by collisions before downward radiative transitions canoccur. As a result, the forbidden lines are much weaker than the permitted lines.There is widespread agreement that the broad-line region must be clumpy, containingpartially ionized clouds of gas, rather than being homogenous. The optically thick cloudsthat actually produce the emission lines ﬁll only about 1% of the available volume andprobably have a ﬂattened distribution. These regions of high density may be surrounded bya rareﬁed, high-temperature medium that prevents the clouds from dispersing.According to the uniﬁed model, the various types of observed AGN phenomena (seeTable 1) derive from different viewing angles of the central engine and surroundingenvironment. The uniﬁed model postulates that a large, optically thick torus of gas and dustsurrounds the clouds of the broad-line region. This is presumably what conceals the broad-line region and the central source from direct view when observing a Seyfert 2 galaxy; seeFig. 25. In this case, the continuum and emission lines must reach the observer indirectlyActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1228>>>

JetDiskIonizedclouds
Narrow-linecloudsSeyfert 1BLRGQSOBlazarBroad-linecloudsSeyfert 2NLRGNeutralcloudsTorus
FIGUR25Asketchofauniﬁedmodelofanactivegalacticnucleus.Thejetswouldbepresentinaradio-loudAGN.Atypicalobserver’spointofviewisindicatedforAGNsofvarioustypes.byreﬂectedlight,whichexplainswhythecontinuumofSeyfert2sismuchfainterthanthecontinuumofSeyfert1s.Overall,thelightreceiveddirectlyfromthecentralnucleusmakesSeyfert1galaxiesgenerallybrighterthanSeyfert2s.ThetorusisalsothoughttobeopaquetosoftX-raysbecausetheX-raysobservedforSeyfert2sarehard(withenergiesaboveapproximately5keV).DeterminingBlackHoleMassesinBroad-LineRegionsThebroademissionlinesalsoindicatethatthecloudsorbitthecentralsupermassiveblackhole.Infact,takingthe5000kms−1widthofthelinestobeanorbitalvelocityandusingr=1015masanorbitalradiusprovidesanestimateofthecentralmass.Mbh=rv2G=1.9×108M⊙,whichisconsistentwithpreviousmassestimates.AsecondtechniquefordeterminingthemassesofthecentralblackholesofAGNsinbroad-lineregionsisbasedonmeasuringthelagtimebetweenchangesinbrightnessofthecontinuumandemissionlines.Thisreverberationmappingtechniquecombinesthemeasuredtimedelay,τ,withtheroot-mean-squarewidthoftheemissionline,σline,givingamassestimateofMbh=fcτσ2lineG,(12)wherecisthespeedoflightandfisafactorthatdependsonthestructure,kinematics,andActive Galaxies
E 


<<<PAGE 1229>>>

103410351036103710381039106107108109103510361037103810391040
Optical luminosity lLl (510 nm)Black hole mass (solar masses)Bolometric luminosity
LEdd0.1LEdd0.01LEddNGC 32273C 390.33C 273
NGC 4051FIGURE 26The masses of the supermassive black holes in AGNs as a function of their lumi-nosities. The solid diagonal lines represent lines of constant fractions of the Eddington luminosity.The masses were determined by the reverberation mapping technique. The bolometric luminositiesare given on the top axis, and the optical luminosities (centered at 510 nm) are given on the bottomaxis. (Figure courtesy of Bradley Peterson.)orientation of the broad-line region. Clearlycτis a measure of the size of the broad-lineregion. Of course it is important to be consistent in terms of which ionized species areused in making the measurement (in other words, which emission line is used in the study)because highly ionized species tend to have the shortest lag times, suggesting that the levelof ionization in the broad-line region is dependent on distance from the central source.Bycomparisonwithotherblackhole–spheroidrelations,suchasthemass–velocitydispersionrelationforasampleofresolvedgalacticcenters,thescalingfactorinEq.(12)isfoundtohavethevaluef≈5.5.Thereverberationmappingmethodrequires long-term observations to determine the lag times, and high spectral resolution,but it does not require spatially resolving the central region of the host galaxy. Thus, thereverberation technique holds great promise for measuring black hole masses in AGNs thatare at highz. Figure 26 shows the results of a study of AGN broad-line emission regions.The Narrow-Line RegionOutside the opaque torus is thenarrow-line regionwhere the narrow emission lines orig-inate. The number density of electrons in the narrow-line region is only about 1010m−3,comparable to the values found in planetary nebulae and dense H II regions. The narrow-lineregion contains more mass than the broad-line region, and both permitted and forbiddenlines can be formed in such an environment. They reveal a temperature of approximatelyActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1230>>>

104K. Like the broad-line region, the region that generates the narrow-line spectrum isclumpy. It is probably composed of a more or less spherical distribution of clouds. Theclouds that are far enough above or below the plane of the obscuring torus can be illumi-nated and photoionized by the continuum radiation from the center. Other clouds have theirlines of sight to the central source blocked by the opaque torus, and so they remain neutral.Infact,ifthenarrow-lineregioncanbetreatedasaclumpyHIIregion,thenthe Strömgren radius can be used to estimate the fraction of the narrow-line region thatis occupied by clouds. If the clouds occupy a fractionϵ(referred to as theﬁlling factor)ofthevolumeofthenarrow-lineregion,canbemodiﬁedtoproduceanestimateoftheradiusofthatregion,rNLR≈/parenleftbigg3N4παqmϵ/parenrightbigg1/31n2/3e.(13)In this caseNis the number of photons per second produced by the central source ofthe AGN that have enough energy to ionize hydrogen from the ground state, andαqmis a quantum-mechanical recombination coefﬁcient (notthe spectral index)Example 2.2.To estimate the ﬁlling factor of the narrow-line region, we will assumean AGN luminosity ofL=5×1039W. The continuum includes photons with a wide rangeof energies. We will assume that the monochromatic energy ﬂux (Eq. 1) obeys a powerlaw with a spectral index ofα=1. Recalling Example 1.1, the ﬂux is related to theluminosity byL=4πd2/integraldisplayν2ν1Fνdν=/integraldisplayν2ν1Cν−1dνwithν1=1010Hz andν2=1025Hz for the range of frequencies of the continuous spectrum(cf., Fig. 14), andCis a constant to be determined.9Evaluating the integral and solvingforCgivesC=Lln(ν2/ν1)=Lln 1015=0.029L.We are now ready to ﬁndN, the number of photons emitted per second with an energyEH>13.6 eV , or a frequencyνH>3.29×1015Hz, required to ionize hydrogen from theground state. Dividing the monochromatic energy ﬂux by the energy per photon,Ephoton=hν, results inN=/integraldisplayν2νHCν−1hνdν=/integraldisplayν2νH0.029Lhν2dν≃0.029LhνH=6.64×1055s−1,whereν2≫νH.continued9The constantCincludes the leading factor of 4πd2.Active Galaxies
it.


<<<PAGE 1231>>>

Observations of the nearest Seyfert 2 galaxies show narrow-line regions with diametersbetween roughly 100 and 1000 pc. If we letrNLR=200 pc,ne=1010m−3, andαqm=3.1×10−19m3s−1,the ﬁlling factor of the narrow-line region is approximatelyϵ≈3N4παqm1n2er3NLR=2.2×10−2.Thus clouds occupy roughly 2% of the volume of the narrow-line region.The proﬁles of the narrow emission lines seen in Seyfert 2s often have extended bluewings, indicating that the clouds are moving toward us relative to the galactic nucleus. Thisis usually interpreted as a radial ﬂow of the clouds away from the center. The light fromthe clouds moving away from us on the far side of the AGN is presumably diminished byextinction.An outward ﬂow of clouds in the region that produces narrow emission lines could bedriven by a combination of radiation pressure and a wind coming from the accretion disk,as mentioned previously, or the outﬂow could be associated with the material in radio jets.Figure 27 shows an image obtained by the Hubble Space Telescope of the narrow-line
FIGURE 27An HST image of the narrow-line region of the Seyfert 1 galaxy, NGC 4151.Numerous clouds are evident in a biconical distribution. The clouds to the southwest are approachingthe observer relative to the nucleus, and the clouds to the northeast have recessional velocities. Thereis some evidence that the clouds may be associated with the galaxy’s radio jets. An angular scale of 1′′is indicated on the image; at the distance to NGC 4151, 1′′corresponds to a projected linear distanceof 63 pc. The labels correspond to clouds identiﬁed in the paper. (Figure from Kaiser et al.,Ap. J.,528, 260, 2000.)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1232>>>

region for the Seyfert 1 galaxy, NGC 4151. Distinct emission clouds are clearly evidentin this high-resolution image. It is also evident that the optical emission falls within twoconical distributions extending to the northeast and the southwest of the center of the galaxy.When a radio map is overlaid on the image, the radio emission also falls along the sameaxis as the biconical optical emission.Similar observations have been made of Mrk 3, a Seyfert 2 galaxy. In this case there isadditional evidence that the narrow-line region is composed of expanding shells around theradio jets. It has been suggested that the material forming the radio jets is expanding at near0.1cfrom the center of the galaxy. As the jets move through the interstellar material, the gasis ionized at a temperature of∼107K. The overheated gas expands outward away fromthe jets, energizing the gas near the surface of the expanding shell, which then produces thenarrow-line emission region.A further consequence of the expanding jet model of producing the narrow-line regionis that the region may be relatively short-lived, at least in the case of the relatively weakSeyfert systems. Since the radio jets of Seyfert galaxies are typically only a few kiloparsecsin length, this implies that ages of roughly 104to 105years can be deduced based on theexpansion velocity of the jets. If that is the case, Seyfert phenomena may be relativelytransient events, perhaps caused by the temporary feeding of the galaxy’s supermassiveblack hole.A Summary of the Uniﬁed Model of AGNsThe preceding details comprise what must be considered as a rough sketch of a uniﬁedmodel of an AGN. Its central engine is an accretion disk orbiting a rotating, supermassiveblack hole. The AGN is powered by the conversion of gravitational potential energy intosynchrotron radiation, although the rotational kinetic energy of the black hole may also serveas an important energy source. The structure of the accretion disk depends on the ratio ofthe accretion luminosity to the Eddington limit. To supply the observed luminosities, themost energetic AGNs must accrete between about 1 and 10 M⊙yr−1. The perspective ofthe observer, together with the mass accretion rate and mass of the black hole, largelydetermines whether the AGN is called a Seyfert 1, a Seyfert 2, a BLRG, a NLRG, or aradio-loud or radio-quiet quasar.Although many of the details of the uniﬁed model have not yet been fully conﬁrmed,the uniﬁed model does appear to provide an important framework for describing many ofthe general characteristics of active galaxies. For example, Fig. 28 shows an amazingHST image of NGC 4261, an elliptical radio galaxy in the Virgo cluster that is classiﬁedoptically as a LINER. The core of this radio-loud object shows a bright nucleus surroundedby a large, obscuring torus that is perpendicular to the radio jets. The central object isprobably a 107M⊙black hole, although the HST image does not have the resolution toconﬁrm this. The torus has a radius of about 70 pc (2×1018m), and the jets reach out some15 kpc from the nucleus.1010The Schwarzschild radius of a 107M⊙black hole is 2.95×1010m, smaller than the torus by nearly eight ordersof magnitude. The black hole would be less than a nanometer wide on the scale of Fig. 28.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1233>>>

FIGURE 28Two views of NGC 4261. Left: a composite optical and radio image from theground, showing the radio jets. Right: an optical image from the HST, showing the dusty torus aroundthe nucleus. (Courtesy of NASA.)3RADIO LOBES AND JETSThere is a basic division of active galaxies into objects that are radio-loud and those thatare radio-quiet. Radio-loud sources usually consist of a radio core, one or two detectablejets, and two dominant radio lobes. The radio-quiet sources are less luminous at radiowavelengths by a factor of 103to 104, consisting of a weak radio core and perhaps a feeblejet. The increased level of activity in radio-loud AGNs is not conﬁned to radio wavelengths,however; they also tend to be about three times brighter in X-rays than their radio-quietcousins.The Generation of JetsThe radio lobes are produced by jets of charged particles ejected from the central nucleusof the AGN at relativistic speeds; recall Fig. 8. These particles are accelerated awayfrom the nucleus in two opposite directions, powered by the energy of accretion and/or bythe extraction of rotational kinetic energy from the black hole via the Blandford–Znajekmechanism. The jet must be electrically neutral overall, but it is not clear whether the ejectedmaterial consists of electrons and ions or an electron–positron plasma. The latter, being lessmassive, would be more easily accelerated. The disk’s magnetic ﬁeld is coupled (“frozenin”) to this ﬂow of charged particles. The resulting magnetic torques may remove angularmomentum from the disk, which would allow the accreting material to move inward throughthe disk.The incredible narrowness and straightness of some jets means that a collimating pro-cess must be at work very near the central engine powering the jet. A thick, hot accretionActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1234>>>

OutflowBBlackhole/H9275Disk
FIGURE 29Aschematic showing the collimation of outﬂowing material by a thick, hot accretiondisk. The loops represent contours of constant disk density.disk around the black hole could provide natural collimation by funneling the outﬂowingparticles, as shown in Fig. 29. Because the accreting material retains some angular mo-mentum as it spirals inward through the disk, it will tend to pile up at the smallest orbit thatis compatible with its angular momentum. Inside this “centrifugal barrier” there may be arelatively empty cavity that can act as a nozzle, directing the accreting gases outward alongthe walls of the cavity. However, producing highly relativistic jets, as frequently observed,appear to be difﬁcult to accomplish with this nozzle mechanism.Alternatively, magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) effects could play an important role in ac-celerating and collimating the relativistic ﬂows. Unfortunately, details of MHD mechanismshave not yet been fully developed either. Whatever the speciﬁc details of the collimation ofjets, their straightness is likely to be linked to the rotating supermassive black holes at thehearts of AGNs.The Formation of Radio LobesAs a jet of material travels outward, its energy primarily resides in the kinetic energy ofthe particles. However, the jet encounters resistance as it penetrates the interstellar mediumwithin the host galaxy and the intergalactic medium beyond. As a result, the material at thehead of the jet is slowed, and a shock front forms there. The accumulation and decelerationof particles at the shock front cause the directed energy of the jet to become disordered as theparticles “splash back” to form a large lobe in which the energy may be shared equally bythe kinetic and magnetic energy. The problem of calculating the motion of a jet through theintergalactic medium is so complicated that extensive numerical simulations are required tomodel the process. Figure 30 shows a series of computer simulations of jets with variousinitial energies working their way through the intergalactic medium.The motion of the charged particles and the magnetic ﬁelds within the lobes of radio-loud objects contain an enormous amount of energy. For Cygnus A, the energy of eachActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1235>>>

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)FIGURE 30Numerical simulation of electron–positron plasma jets moving through the inter-galactic medium, which is assumed to be decreasing in density with increasing distance from thesource of the jets (left-hand side of each frame). The frames correspond to initial Lorentz factors (γ)at the source of the jets of (a) 2.0, (b) 2.5, (c) 5.0, (d) 7.0, and (e) 10.0. Somewhat different behaviorsare seen in the simulations when the jet material is assumed to be composed of electrons and protons.(Figure from Carvalho and O’Dea,Ap. J. Suppl.,141, 371, 2002.)lobe is estimated to be approximately 1053to 1054J, equivalent to the energy liberated by107supernovae.Example 3.1.Assuming that each radio lobe of Cyg A contains an energy ofElobe=1053J, and adoptingh=[h]WMAP=0.71 for the values given in Example 1.1 for CygA,the lifetime of the radio lobes can be estimated. With Cyg A’s radio luminosity ofLradio=4.8×1037W, the time to radiate away the energy stored in its radio lobes istlobe=ElobeLradio=66 Myr.Generally, the lifetime of the radio emission from radio lobes ranges from 107to more than108years.The average strength of the magnetic ﬁeld in the lobes can be estimated by making thecommon assumption that the energy is shared equally between the kinetic and magneticActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1236>>>

energy.hemagneticenergystoredperunitvolumeisum=B2/2µ0.I fthevolumeofthelobeisVlobe, then12Elobe=umVlobe=B2Vlobe2µ0orB=/radicalBiggµ0ElobeVlobe.(14)Example 3.2.Assume that each of Cyg A’s radio lobes can be modeled as a sphereof radiusR=8.5 kpc=2.6×1020m, characteristic of the size of the lobes. WithElobe=1053J, the average value of the magnetic ﬁeld in the lobes is estimated to beB=/radicalBiggµ0Elobe43πR3lobe≈41 nT.A value of order 10 nT is typical of the bright emission regions (“hot spots” that are a fewkpc across) found in radio lobes. In diffuse radio lobes, the value may be more than an orderof magnitude smaller, while the ﬁeld strength in the radio core is probably around 100 nT.Accelerating the Charged Particles in the JetsThe observations of jets are made possible by inefﬁciencies in the transport of particles andenergy out to the radio lobes. The spectra of the radio lobes and jets follow a power law,with a typical spectral index ofα≃0.65. The presence of power-law spectra and a highdegree of linear polarization strongly suggest that the energy emitted by the lobes and jetscomes from synchrotron radiation.The loss of energy by synchrotron radiation is unavoidable, and in fact the relativisticelectrons in jets will radiate away their energy after just 10,000 years or so. This impliesthat there is not nearly enough time for particles to travel out to the larger radio lobes; forexample, for the large radio galaxy 3C 236, the journey would take several million years,even at the speed of light. This long travel time and the long lifetime of radio lobes implythat there must be some mechanism for accelerating particles in the jets and radio lobes. Asone possibility, shock waves may accelerate charged particles by magnetically squeezingthem, reﬂecting them back and forth inside the shock. Radiation pressure may also play arole, but it alone is not enough to generate the necessary acceleration.Superluminal VelocitiesAlthough the standard model of jets and radio lobes requires a steady supply of chargedparticles moving at relativistic speeds, evidence for such high velocities is difﬁcult to obtain.The absence of spectral lines in a power-law spectrum means that the relativistic velocity ofthe jet material cannot be measured directly but must be inferred from indirect evidence. Themost compelling argument for relativistic speeds involves radio observations of materialActive GalaxiesT


<<<PAGE 1237>>>

ejected from the cores of several AGNs with so-calledsuperluminal velocities. This effectis observed within about 100 pc of the AGN’s center and probably continues farther out.Example 3.3.Figure 31 is a radio view of the core of the quasar 3C 273 thatshows a blob of radio emission moving away from the nucleus with an angular velocityofµ=0.0008′′yr−1. Assuming that the radio knot is traveling in the plane of the sky,perpendicular to the line of sight, and using a distance ofd=440h−1Mpc for 3C 273, theapparenttransverse velocity of the blob away from the nucleus is,vapp=dµ=1.67×109h−1ms−1=5.57h−1c.Ifh=[h]WMAP, we ﬁnd thatvapp=7.85c. This is clearly unphysical, and so the assumptionof motion perpendicular to the line of sight must be wrong.Figure 32 shows how the motion of the knot toward the observer can resolve thisdilemma. Suppose a source is traveling with a velocityv(the actual speed of the source,not its apparent speed) at an angleφmeasured from the line of sight. A photon is emittedalong the line of sight at timet=0 when the source is a distancedfrom Earth. At a latertime (te), another photon is emitted when the distance to Earth isd−vtecosφ. The ﬁrst
3C 27310.65 GHz1977.56
1978.24
1978.921980.521979.441978.92
Beam2 arc msENFIGURE 31The motion of a radio-emitting knot ejected from the core of the quasar 3C 273.The dates of the observations are recorded as fractions of a year, and the third image has been repeatedfor clarity. (Figure adapted from Pearson et al.,Nature,290, 365, 1981. Reprinted by permission fromNature, V ol. 290, pp. 365–368. Copyright 1981 Macmillan Magazines Limited.)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1238>>>

Photon 2To EarthPhoton 1Distance d to EarthPosition of knot at t = 0/H9278vte cos /H9278Knot travels vtePosition of knot at t = te
FIGURE 32Two photons emitted att=0 andt=teby a source moving with speedv.photon reaches Earth at timet1, wheret1=dc.The second photon arrives at Earth at timet2=te+d−vtecosφc.The time on Earth between the reception of the two photons is thusτDeltaφt=t2−t1=te/parenleftBig1−vccosφ/parenrightBig,a time that isshorterthante. The apparent transverse velocity measured on Earth is thenvapp=vtesinφτDeltaφt=vsinφ1−(v/c)cosφ.Solving this forv/cresults invc=vapp/csinφ+(vapp/c)cosφ.(15)It is left as an exercise to show thatv/c <1 for angles satisfyingv2app/c2−1v2app/c2+1<cosφ<1,(16)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1239>>>

and that the smallest possible value ofv/cfor the source isvminc=/radicalBiggv2app/c21+v2app/c2,(17)which occurs at an angleφmingiven bycotφmin=vappc.(18)This minimum value ofv/ccorresponds to a minimum Lorentz factor of thesource ofγmin=1/radicalBig1−v2min/c2≃/radicalBig1+v2app/c2=1sinφmin.(19)Example 3.4.Referring to Example 3.3, since the actual speed of the radio knotejected by 3C 273 must be less thanc, as required by special relativity,φmust be less thanφmin=cot−1/parenleftBigvappc/parenrightBig=7.26◦.That is, the knot must be approaching Earth within 7.26◦of the line of sight. FromEq. ( 17), the lower limit of the knot’s speed isvmin=0.992c. Therefore, from Eq. ( 19),γmin=7.92.The minimum value of the Lorentz factor inferred for other superluminal sources rangesbetweenγmin=4 and 12 forh=[h]WMAP. 3C 273 and similar examples provide compellingevidence that the central cores of AGNs can accelerate material to relativistic speeds.Relativistic Beaming and One-Sided JetsTheheadlighteffectwillbeinvolvedwheneverasourceoflightmoveswitharelativisticspeed(γ≫1).Allofthelightemittedintotheforwardhemispherein the rest frame of the source is concentrated into a narrow cone in the observer’s restframe.Thecone’shalf-angle,θ,isgivenbysinθ=1/γ.ComparingthiswithEq. ( 19) above shows that if the source is approaching Earth with a relativistic velocitywithin the angleφminof the line of sight, this relativistic beaming effect will cause it toappear much brighter than expected and it will appear to be moving with a superluminalspeed across the plane of the sky. Interestingly, nearly all AGNs showing superluminalmotions are surrounded by large, dim halos that may be radio lobes seen end-on. Blazarsmay be quasars or radio galaxies viewed with the jet coming directly (or nearly so) towardthe observer. Their very rapid time variability could then be exaggerated by the relativisticDopplershift.Anyluminosityvariationsduetoasourcewithintherelativisticjet would be observed to occur approximately 2γtimes more rapidly by astronomers onEarth.Conversely, a relativistic source moving away from us will appear unusually dim (recallFig. 6). All of the jets showing superluminal motion are one-sided, even when theActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1240>>>

AGNs exhibit two radio lobes. It is expected that the central engines of AGNs producetwo oppositely directed jets; however, relativistic beaming seems to explain why the jetsappear to be only one-sided.The Roles of Galactic CompanionsThe galactic companions of AGNs may play an important role in supplying them with thefuel. Most Seyferts (at least 90%) are spiral galaxies, and many have close neighbors withwhom they may be interacting. Gravitational perturbations produce the distorted appear-ancefrequentlyseeninthoseSeyfertscloseenoughtobestudied,asevidencedbytheappearanceofbarsand/orouterrings.heseinteractionscouldproducegravitationaltorquesonthegasinaSeyfertgalaxy,drasticallyreducingitsangularmomentum and sending the gas plunging into the galactic center. The result would be thedelivery of a fresh supply of fuel to the Seyfert nucleus to be accreted by the black hole.The concentration of gas could also result in a burst of star formation around the nucleus.Furthermore, if a merger with a galactic companion occurs, the subsequent disruption couldproduce an elliptical galaxy with an active nucleus, resulting in a young radio galaxy.Mergers are certainly important for quasars as well. Some low-redshift quasars showevidence of past interactions (see Fig. 18), and mergers were undoubtedly more commonin the early universe than they are today. Since galaxies are believed to have contained moregas when they were young, mergers may have resulted in the infall of large amounts of gasthat could have contributed to the growth of a central supermassive black hole as the gassimultaneously fueled its activity. In addition, mergers probably resulted in the coalescing ofsupermassive black holes, producing even larger central engines. As the masses of the blackholes grew, so did the number of quasars and their energy output, until the fuel poweringthe engines was largely consumed.AGN EvolutionWhat happens when a quasar runs out of fuel? In broad terms, the diminishing fuel supply ofan energetic object could lead to its transformation into a less luminous form. For example,Cen A has huge radio lobes (see Fig. 11) but is a weak radio source. It was probablymuch more luminous in the past but is now fading away. On the other hand, a lesserluminosity could be explained by a less massive black hole rather than a smaller accretionrate. Our Milky Way does not have a 108M⊙black hole at its center, although there is amoremodestoneof3.7×106M⊙.If,ashasbeenconjectured,everylargegalaxycomparabletotheMilkyWayhasasupermassiveblackholeofatleast106M⊙,then low-level galactic activity may be a common occurrence.One large impediment to understanding the evolution of active galaxies is our current lackof knowledge about their lifetimes. Some researchers ﬁnd that aroundz=2, the number ofluminous AGNs decreases toward the present-day epoch with a characteristic decay time ofτ≃2h−1Gyr. However, this is only anupper limitto the lifetime of an AGN. A single AGNmay remain active this long, or the individual lifetimes may be much shorter, say between107and 108years, the typical timescale needed to radiate away the energy stored in a radiolobe. In this latter case,τwould describe the statistical changes in a population of activegalaxies, rather than the behavior of a single individual. A galaxy may then experience justActive Galaxies
T


<<<PAGE 1241>>>

one, or several, brief episodes of activity during its history as mergers refuel the centralengine.It maybe that Seyfert galaxies experience recurring episodes of activity, for example4USING QUASARS TO PROBE THE UNIVERSEQuasars are among the most distant visible objects in the universe, and so they offer a uniqueopportunity to probe the intervening space. Clouds of gas, galaxies, and dark matter can allaffect the light from a quasar during its journey to Earth. By decoding the clues suppliedby observations of quasars, astronomers can learn a great deal about the perturbing objectsalong the line of sight.Gravitational Lensing and Multiple Images of QuasarsIn1919,thesameyearthatEddingtonmeasuredthebendingofstarlightasitpassedneartheSunandveriﬁedEinstein’sgeneraltheoryofrelativity,SirOliverLodge(1851–1940),anEnglishphysicist,putforththepossibilityofusingagravitationallenstofocusstarlight(recallthediscussionofgravitationallensing).Duringthe1920s,astronomersbegantoconsiderhowlightpassingthroughthecurvedspacetimesurrounding a massive object could produce multiple images of the source. Then, in 1937,Fritz Zwicky (1898–1974) proposed that gravitational lensing by a galaxy would be muchmore likely than gravitational lensing by individual stars. By the 1970s the search was onfor a multiply imaged quasar, and in 1979 the quasar Q0957+561 was discovered to appeartwice in the sky. As shown in Fig. 33, the two images are separated by 6.15′′, and each
FIGURE 33An optical (negative) view of the double quasar Q0957+561. The photo on the leftshows the two gravitationally lensed images. The fuzz extending upward from the bottom image isthe lensing galaxy. On the right, the upper image has been subtracted from the lower image to revealthe lensing galaxy more clearly. (Figure from Stockton,Ap. J. Lett.,242, L141, 1980.)Active Galaxies.


<<<PAGE 1242>>>

–0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Counts s–1
325 350 375 400 425 450 475/H9261 (nm)AB
A – BFIGURE 34Spectra of the images of the quasar Q0142−100 formed by a gravitational lens.The bottom panel shows the difference between the two spectra. (Figure adapted from Smette et al.,Ap. J.,389, 39, 1992.)shows a quasar with a redshift ofz=1.41. The gravitational lens is due to the gravity of anintervening giant cD galaxy withz=0.36 that is between the two images and 0.8′′awayfrom one of them. In addition to having the same redshift, both images have the same twobright emission lines and many absorption features in common. Both images also show thesame radio core and jet structure.Figure 34 shows spectra of the two images of another quasar, Q0142−100, that arealsoformedbyagravitationallens.Likeopticallenses,gravitationallensescanmagnifyandincreaseanobject’sbrightness.ThebrighterofthetwoimagesofQ0142−100 has the appearance of being one of the most luminous quasars known becauseof the gravitational ampliﬁcation of the image. (The difference in the apparent magnitudesof the images of Q0142−100 is aboutτDeltaφmV=2.12.)The Geometry of Gravitational LensingGravitational lensing results when light follows the straightest possible worldline (ageodesic)asittravelsthroughthecurvedspacetimearoundamassiveobject.Itisanalogoustothenormalrefractionoflightbyaglasslensthatoccursasthelightcrosses the lens surface, passing from one index of refraction,n, to another, wheren≡c/vis just the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to its speed,v, in the medium. Outside ofa spherical object of massM(which is equivalent to a point mass), the coordinate speed oflight in the radial direction is given by,drdt=c/parenleftbigg1−2GMrc2/parenrightbiggso the effective “index of refraction” isn=cdr/dt=/parenleftbigg1−2GMrc2/parenrightbigg−1≃1+2GMrc2Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1243>>>

for radially traveling light, assuming that 2GM/rc2≪1. At a distance of 104pc from agalaxy with a mass of 1011M⊙, the effective index of refraction isn=1+9.6×10−7.(Of course, the light passing by the point mass will never be traveling exactly radially. Thiswas merely used to estimate the magnitude of the effect of gravity in a gravitational lens.)Obviously, the deviation of the light from a straight line will be extremely small.Figure 35 shows the path taken by light from a source at pointS, as it is deﬂectedthrough an angle,φ, by the gravitational lens due to a point mass,M, at pointL. The lightarrives at the position of the observer at pointO.heangulardeviationofaphotonpassingadistancer0(verynearlythedistanceofclosestapproach)fromamassMwasφ=4GMr0c2rad(20)[this includes the factor of 2 mentioned in part (c) of that problem]. The distance to thesource isdS/cosβ≃dS, whereβ≪1, anddLis the distance to the lensing mass. It is thena matter of simple trigonometry (left as an exercise) to show that the angleθbetween thelensing mass and the image of the source must satisfy the equationθ2−βθ−4GMc2/parenleftbiggdS−dLdSdL/parenrightbigg=0,(21)whereθandβare measured in radians.The quadratic equation (Eq. 21) indicates that for the geometry shown in the ﬁgure,there will be two solutions forθ, and so two images will be formed by the gravitational lens.Designating these solutions asθ1andθ2, these angles can be measured observationally andthen used to ﬁnd the values ofβandM. The results areβ=θ1+θ2.(22)
LS
O/H9252/H9258/H9278
dLdSr0FIGURE 35The geometry for a gravitational lens. Light from the source,S, passes within adistance of approximatelyr0of a lensing point mass atLon its way to an observer atO. The anglesinvolved are actually just a fraction of a degree, and sor0is very nearly the distance of closestapproach.Active Galaxies
T


<<<PAGE 1244>>>

andM=−θ1θ2c24G/parenleftbiggdSdLdS−dL/parenrightbigg.(23)Referring back to Fig. 35, note that Eq. ( 22) implies thatθ1andθ2have oppositesigns. As a result, the two images are formed on opposite sides of the gravitational lens, soMwill be positive.Example 4.1.For the quasar Q0957+561 shown in Fig. 33,θ1=5.35′′=2.59×10−5rad, andθ2=−0.8′′=−3.88×10−6rad. (Which angle assumes the minus sign isarbitrary.) From the quasar’s redshift ofzS=1.41 and the gravitational lens redshift ofzL=0.36, the Hubble law gives the corresponding distances ofdS=2120h−1Mpc anddL=890h−1Mpc. Then Eq. (23) givesM=−θ1θ2c24G/parenleftbiggdSdLdS−dL/parenrightbigg=8.1×1011h−1M⊙.This is in good agreement with a value ofM=8.7×1011h−1M⊙obtained with a moreaccurate treatment of the mass distribution of the lensing galaxy.Einstein Rings and CrossesIf a quasar or other bright source lies exactly along the line of sight to the lensing mass, thenit will be imaged as anEinstein ringencircling the lens (this phenomenon was describedby Einstein in 1936). In this case,β=0 in Fig. 35, and so Eq. ( 21) can be solvedimmediately for the angular radius of the Einstein ring,θE=/radicalBigg4GMc2/parenleftbiggdS−dLdSdL/parenrightbiggrad.(24)Of course, for a point source, the chance of an exact alignment with the lensing mass isessentially zero. For an extended source, the requirements for an Einstein ring are thatβ<θEand that the line of sight through the lensing mass must pierce the extended source.Figure 36 shows a calculation of a partial ring—the image of a slightly off-center source.The ﬁrst Einstein ring to be discovered, MG1131+0456, was found at radio wavelengthsby the VLA. Figure 37 shows the radio appearance of the ring, which is thought to bethe image of a radio galaxy lensed by an elliptical galaxy.The value ofθEcan be calculated for any gravitational lens, regardless of the alignmentof the lens and the source. Although the image may not be a ring,θEdoes provide a usefulparameter for describing the properties of any gravitational lens. Ifβ<θE, as shown inFig. 35, there will be two images formed by the point mass. Ifβ≫θE, the position andbrightness of the source are only slightly altered, but a secondary image appears close tothe lensing mass that is reduced in angular size by a factor of(θE/β)4.A point mass is clearly a crude representation of an actual galaxy. A better model of thelensing galaxy is provided by an isothermal sphere around a central core, similar to theActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1245>>>

+Source
FIGURE 36A calculation of the image of a slightly off-center spherical galaxy formed by alensing mass located at the cross (“+”). (Figure adapted from Chitre and Narasimha,GravitationalLenses, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.)
–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.52.0Arcsec
2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0–0.5–1.0–1.5–2.0ArcsecFIGURE 37The Einstein ring MG1131+0456. The knot labeled A is produced by the core ofthe imaged radio galaxy, and the knot labeled B represents one of its lobes. (Figure adapted fromHewitt et al.,Nature,333, 537, 1988. Courtesy of J. Hewitt.)Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1246>>>

FIGURE 38The Einstein cross Q2237+031, as observed in August 1991 (left) and August 1994(right). The cross consists of 4 images of the quasar (labeled A–D), with the lensing galaxy (labeledg) at the center. (Courtesy of Geraint Lewis and Mike Irwin.)modelusedforthecentralbulgeoftheMilkyWay.Anotherimprovementistodepartfromsphericalsymmetryanduseanisothermalellipsoid,whichcanproduceeither three or ﬁve images (an extended distribution of mass will produce an odd number ofimages). TheEinstein crossshown in Fig. 38 includes four images of a distant quasar(Q2237+031, atz=1.69) that is lensed by a nearby (z=0.04) spiral galaxy. There isprobably also a ﬁfth faint central image that is overwhelmed by the lensing galaxy at thecenter of the cross. Note that image A has brightened by 0.5 mag in the 3-year intervalbetween the photos.Luminous Arcs in Galaxy ClustersAnother striking example of gravitational lensing is the formation of arcs by light passingthrough a cluster of galaxies. One such arc in the cluster Abell 370 is shown in Fig. 39.Up to 60 additional “arclets” and several distorted distant background galaxies have alsobeen observed in that cluster. The source of the large arc must be a resolved object such as agalaxy rather than the starlike nucleus of a quasar. According to one model of Abell 370, thelensing mass (visible galaxies and dark matter) needed to produce the images in Abell 370is at most about 5×1014M⊙. Taken with the combined luminosity of a few×1011L⊙forthe lensing galaxies, this implies a mass-to-light ratio of at least 1000 M⊙/L⊙, indicatingthe presence of large amounts of dark matter.Abell 370 is an unusual cluster in that it is sufﬁciently centrally condensed to produce sucharcs. The dark matter in most clusters is probably more widely distributed, producing weaklensing effects just strong enough to distort the appearance of distant galaxies seen beyondthe cluster. Figure 40 shows a spectacular example of multiple arclets that are lensedimages of background galaxies produced by the cluster Abell 2218. Such weak lensing canalso cause an apparent bunching of quasars, so statistical studies of the clustering of objectsin the very early universe must take this effect into account.Time Variability of Multiple ImagesAn interesting effect occurs when the source for a pair of images increases its luminosity.Because the light from the source takes different paths on its way to the observer, thereActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1247>>>

FIGURE 39A gravitationally lensed arc, about 20′′long, produced by the cluster Abell 370.(Figure from Lynds and Petrosian,Ap. J.,336, 1, 1989. Courtesy of National Optical AstronomyObservatories/R. Lynds.)
FIGURE 40An HST view of the gravitationally lensed images of background galaxies producedby the cluster Abell 2218. [Courtesy of W. Couch (U. of South Wales), R. Ellis (Cambridge U.), andNASA.]will be a time delay between the brightening of the lensed images. A time delay of about1.4–1.5 yr has been measured for the original double quasar, Q0957+561. Nonperiodiccelestial events usually catch astronomers by surprise, but this time delay puts astronomersin the unique situation of knowing in advance how a lensed quasar will behave.It turns out that the time delay is also inversely proportional to the Hubble constant.This offers a way of determining the value ofH0that is independent of any other distanceActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1248>>>

measurement. At the cosmological distances of quasars, their recessional velocities shouldcompletely dominate their peculiar velocities through space. One study using Q0957+561concluded thatH0=69±21 km s−1Mpc−1, assuming that the lensing galaxy containsa substantial amount of dark matter. The result is in excellent agreement with the WMAPvalue ofH0=71+4−3km s−1Mpc−1.The Lyman-Alpha ForestThe spectra of high-redshift quasars always display a large number of narrow absorptionlines superimposed on the quasar’s continuous spectrum (these lines are in addition to anybroad absorption lines that are associated with the quasar itself). These narrow lines areformed when the light from a quasar passes through material (an interstellar cloud, a galactichalo) that happens to lie along the line of sight. If the absorbing material is far from Earth, itsrecessional motion will cause these absorption lines to be strongly redshifted. Furthermore,if the light passes through more than one cloud or galactic halo during its trip to Earth,different sets of absorption lines will be seen. Each set of lines corresponds to the redshiftof a particular cloud or halo.There are two classes of narrow absorption lines in quasar spectra:• TheLyman-αforestis a dense thicket of hydrogen absorption lines. These linesare believed to be formed in intergalactic clouds and display a variety of redshifts.Absorption by primordial ionized helium (He II) has also been detected.• Lines are also formed byionized metals, primarily carbon (C IV) and magnesium(Mg II), together with silicon, iron, aluminum, nitrogen, and oxygen. The mix of ele-ments is similar to that found in the interstellar medium of the Milky Way, indicatingthat the material has been processed through stars and enriched in heavy elements.These lines are thought to be formed in the extended halos or disks of galaxies foundalong the line of sight to the quasar.Most of these lines are normally found at ultraviolet wavelengths, when the absorbingmaterial is moving at a small fraction of the speed of light relative to Earth (i.e., has asmall redshift). They are rarely seen from the ground because Earth’s atmosphere absorbsmost ultraviolet wavelengths. However, if the absorbing material is receding fast enough,the Doppler effect can shift ultraviolet lines to visible wavelengths, where the atmosphereis transparent. For this reason, these absorption lines are seen from the ground only in thespectra of highly redshifted quasars.Example 4.2.The rest wavelength of the ultraviolet Lyman-αline of hydrogen isλLyα=121.6 nm.Todeterminetheredshiftrequiredtobringthislineintothevisibleregionoftheelectromagneticspectrum,wecanusethedeﬁnitionofz,z=λobs−λrestλrest.continuedActive Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1249>>>

Usingλrest=λLyαandλobs=400 nm for the blue end of the visible spectrum, we requirea redshift ofz>400 nm−121.6 nm121.6 nm≃2.3,just to bring the Lyαline to the edge of the visible spectrum. Actually, some near-ultravioletlight can penetrate Earth’s atmosphere, so the Lyαline can be observed whenz>1.7 forthe absorbing material.Typically, the spectrum of a high-redshift quasar contains a strong Lyman-αemissionline produced by the quasar itself, and perhaps some 50 Lyαabsorption lines at shorterwavelengths (smaller redshifts); see Fig. 41. Each one of these lines is from a differentintergalacticcloudofhydrogen(andpresumablyhelium)encounteredbythequasar’scontinuumradiationonitsjourneytoEarth.heLyαlineproﬁlecanbeusedtocalculatethecolumndensityoftheneutralhydrogenatomsinthecloudthatproduces each line. A typical result is 1018m−2. In other words, a hollow tube having across-sectional area of 1 m2that crossed completely through the cloud would contain 1018neutral hydrogen atoms. Such a cloud would be extremely transparent to the ultravioletradiation that is normally present throughout space. As a result, this ultraviolet backgroundcan penetrate the cloud and keep it almost completely ionized. Calculations indicate thatonly one hydrogen atom in 105remains neutral in the cloud and is capable of absorbing anultraviolet photon.
0500100015002000Light intensityQSO 1215+333
380400420440460Wavelength (nm)FIGURE 41The strong Lyαemission line in the spectrum of QSO 1215+333, with the Lyαforest of absorption lines at shorter wavelengths. (Adapted from a ﬁgure courtesy of J. Bechtold,Steward Observatory, University of Arizona.)Active Galaxies
T


<<<PAGE 1250>>>

We deduce the size of the intergalactic clouds by comparing the Lyαforest in the spectraof pairs of lensed quasars. Many of the absorption lines are seen in both spectra, but someare not. This indicates that the clouds are, on average, about the size of the lensing galaxy.From the total calculated column density of hydrogen (ionized as well as neutral), the massof a typical cloud probably lies between 107and 108M⊙. At the temperature estimatedfor a typical cloud by some astronomers (approximately 3×104K), its self-gravity wouldbe too weak to keep it from dispersing. It may be held together by the pressure of a lessdense (but hotter) external intergalactic medium or by the presence of dark matter withinthe cloud.Ionized Metal Absorption Lines in QuasarsThe narrow absorption lines produced by ionized metals in quasar spectra have a differentorigin. They can be divided into two groups as observed from Earth’s surface, correspondingto two different redshift ranges. Below roughlyz=1.5, the Mg II lines dominate, accom-panied by Si II, C II, Fe II, and Al II, because they fall within the wavelength window thatcan be seen from the ground (the Mg II lines are probably produced in the halos of normalgalaxies or in regions of star formation.). The C IV lines, together with Si IV , N V , and O IV ,are common between aboutz=1.2 andz=3.5, however.The distribution of redshifts of these lines is in general agreement with the expecteddistribution of galaxies at that earlier time when the universe was smaller by a factorof 1+z, assuming that the galactic halos are typically some 30–50 kpc across. In fact,some Mg II systems withz<1 have been clearly identiﬁed with foreground galaxies seenin direct images. The C IV lines probably come from clouds in young galaxies that arestrongly ionized by young, hot OB stars. These narrow metal lines indicate lower-than-solar abundances of heavy elements, consistent with their origin in young galaxies that maystill be in the process of forming.The Density Distribution of Intergalactic CloudsThe comoving space density of intergalactic clouds appears to have been greater in thepast than it is today, so the number of clouds has been decreasing as the universe ages. Astatistical analysis of the clouds’ redshifts reveals little evidence that the clouds tend to begrouped in clusters. Instead, they appear to be distributed randomly throughout space. Inparticular, there do not appear to be large voids in the distribution of these intergalacticclouds(thesigniﬁcanceofthisisnotyetclear).ThedistributionoftheHeIIissimilarlyuncertain.SUGGESTED READINGGeneralCourvoisier, Thierry J.-L., and Robson, E. Ian, “The Quasar 3C 273,”Scientiﬁc American,June 1991.Finkbeiner,Ann, “Active Galactic Nuclei: Sorting Out the Mess,”Sky and Telescope,August1992.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1251>>>

Levi, Barbara Goss, “Space-based Telescopes See Primordial Helium in Spectra of DistantQuasars,”Physics Today, October 1995.Miley, George K., and Chambers, Kenneth C., “The Most Distant Radio Galaxies,”ScientiﬁcAmerican, June 1993.Preston, Richard,First Light, New American Library, New York, 1988.Schild, Rudolph, E., “Gravity Is My Telescope,”Sky and Telescope, April 1991.V oit, G. Mark, “The Rise and Fall of Quasars,”Sky and Telescope, May 1999.TechnicalAntonucci, Robert, “Uniﬁed Models for Active Galactic Nuclei and Quasars,” inAnnualReview of Astronomy and Astrophysics,31, 473, 1993.Balsara, Dinshaw S., and Norman, Michael L., “Three-Dimensional Hydrodynamic Sim-ulations of Narrow-Angle-Tail Radio Sources. I. The Begelman, Rees, and BlandfordModel,”The Astrophysical Journal,393, 631, 1992.Binney James, and Merriﬁeld, Michael,Galactic Astronomy, Princeton University Press,Princeton, 1998.Blandford, R. D., and Narayan, R., “Cosmological Applications of Gravitational Lensing,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,30, 311, 1992.Carvalho, Joel C., and O’Dea, Christopher P., “Evolution of Global Properties of PowerfulRadio Sources. II. Hydrodynamical Simulations in a Declining Density Atmosphere andSource Energetics,”The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,141, 371, 2002.Collin-Souffrin, Suzy, “Observations and Their Implications for the Inner Parsec of AGN,”Central Activity in Galaxies, Aa. Sandqvist and T. P. Ray (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin,1993.Dunlop, J. S., et al., “Quasars, Their Host Galaxies, and Their Central Black Holes,”MonthlyNotices of the Royal Astronomical Society,340, 1095, 2003.Hartwick. F. D.A., and Schade, David, “The Space Distribution of Quasars,”Annual Reviewof Astronomy and Astrophysics,28, 437, 1990.Kembhavi, Ajit K., and Narlikar, Jayant V .,Quasars and Active Galactic Nuclei: An Intro-duction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999.King, Andrew R., Frank, Juhan, and Raine, Derek Jeffery,Accretion Power in Astrophysics,Third Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.Krolik, Julian H.,Active Galactic Nuclei: From the Central Black Hole to the GalacticEnvironment, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1999.Osterbrock, Donald E., and Ferland, Gary J.,Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and ActiveGalactic Nuclei, Second Edition, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2005.Perry, Judith J., “Activity in Galactic Nuclei,”Central Activity in Galaxies, Aa. Sandqvistand T. P. Ray (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993.Peterson, Bradley M.,An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, 1997.Silverman, J. D., et al., “Comoving Space Density of X-Ray-Selected Active GalacticNuclei,”The Astrophysical Journal,624, 630, 2005.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1252>>>

Sloan Digital Sky Survey,http://www.sdss.org.Sparke, Linda S., and Gallagher, John S.,Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction, Cam-bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.Tyson, Anthony, “Mapping Dark Matter with Gravitational Lenses,”Physics Today, June1992.Active Galaxies


<<<PAGE 1253>>>



<<<PAGE 1254>>>

PROBLEM SET1The radio galaxy Centaurus A has a redshift ofz=0.00157. The monochromatic ﬂux of Cen AisFν=912 Jy at a frequency of 1400 MHz. Usingα=0.6 for its spectral index, estimate theradio luminosity of Cen A.2Use Fig. 14 to calculate the spectral index,α, of the quasar 3C 273 at a radio frequency of1400MHz.CompareyouranswerwiththevaluegiveninExample3For a temperature of 7.3×105K,makeagraphofthePlanckfunction,plottinglog10νBν(T )vs. log10νfor log10νbetween 15.5 and 17.5. How does thebehavior of your graph of a blackbody compare with that of Fig . 14 for the continuous speof the quasar3C 273? Active Galaxies”the below equa-tion
810121416Log10 /H9263F/H9263 (Hz–Jy)
10152025Log10 /H9263 (Hz)F/H9263 = constant
FIGURE 14The spectrum of 3C 273, after the Doppler shift of the frequencies due to the Hubbleﬂowhasbeenremoved.Ahorizontallinewouldcorrespondtoaspectralindexofα=1; for reference,the diagonal dashed line shows the slope forFν=constant. The two lines on the right correspondto 3C 273 during quiescence and during an outburst. (Figure adapted from Perry, Ward, and Jones,MNRAS,228, 623, 1987.)-ctrumBν(T )=2hν3/c2ehν/kT−1.1.2 in “Active Galaxies
From Chapter 28 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved..()
,

<<<PAGE 1255>>>

5Use Newtonian physics to calculate the values of the average density and “surface gravity”for a 108M⊙black hole. Compare these values with those for the Sun.6UsetheNewtonianexpressionforthediskluminosity,shown below,toestimatetheefﬁcie-ncy of the accretion luminosity of a disk around a nonrotating black hole (R=3RS). Repeatthis for a maximally rotating black hole (R=0.5RS).7The maximum possible angular momentum for an electrically neutral rotating black hole isLmax=GM2cUse Newtonian physics to make estimates for this problem.(a)What is the maximum angular velocity,ωmax, for aM=108M⊙black hole? UseMR2Sasan estimate of the black hole’s moment of inertia, whereRSis the Schwarzschild radius.4A rough idea of how the population of quasars may have been different in the past can begained by mathematically modeling the dimming of quasars as they age.(a)Consider the case where the total number of quasars has remained constant back toz=2.2,and suppose that the average luminosity,L, of a quasar with a redshiftzhas the formL=L0(1+z)a,whereL0is the luminosity atz=0 (today). Use Fig. 16 to estimate the value of the con-stanta.
(b)From your answer to part (a), how much more luminous is an average quasar atz=2 thanatz=0?
012z = 2.2
z = 0.3–20–22–24–26–28–301038103910401041
567891011Redshift (z)
Look–back time (109 yr)
Absolute magnitude (MB)Luminosity (W)1990
FIGURE 16The dimming of quasars with time. Forz<0.3, there are too few nearby objects toprovide an adequate sample for this ﬁgure. The empty region at the upper left has not been sampled byobservations in this study. (Figure adapted from Boyle,The Environment and Evolution of Galaxies,Shull and Thronson (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993.)Active Galaxies: Problem Set
r1+r2=aandM1r1=M2r2.(3)


<<<PAGE 1256>>>

(b)Consider a straight wire with a lengthℓ=RSthat rotates about one end with angularvelocityωmaxperpendicular to a uniform magnetic ﬁeld ofB=1 T. What is the inducedvoltage between the ends of the wire?(c)If a battery with the voltage found in part (b) were connected to a wire with a resistanceof 30τOmegaφ, how much power would be dissipated by the wire?8Repeat the derivation of below equationfortheStrömgrenradius,includingtheeffectoftheionizedgasﬁllingonlyafraction,ϵ,ofthetotalvolume,andsoarriveatEq.(13)fortheradiusofthe narrow-line region.
9Use the values in Example 2.2to ﬁnd the fraction of all photons inthe continuum (frequencies between 1010Hz and 1025Hz) that are capable of ionizing hydr-ogen in the groundstate.10Starting with Eq. ( 15) for superluminal motion, derive Eqs. ( 16), ( 17), ( 18), and( 19).
11Consider material that is ejected from a quasar directly toward Earth.(a)If the redshift of the quasar iszQand the redshift of the ejecta iszej, show that the speedof the ejecta relative to the quasar is given byvc=(1+zQ)2−(1+zej)2(1+zQ)2+(1+zej)2.(b)Consider a radio-emitting knot ejected from the quasar 3C 273 directly toward Earth. Ifastronomers measure the speed of the approaching knot atv=0.9842c, what is the speedof the knot relative to the quasar? From the frame of reference of the quasar, what is thevalue of the knot’s Lorentz factor?rS≃/parenleftbigg3N4πα/parenrightbigg1/3n−2/3H.rNLR≈/parenleftbigg3N4παqmϵ/parenrightbigg1/31n2/3e.(13)Active Galaxies”in “vc=vapp/csinφ+(vapp/c)cosφ.(15)v2app/c2−1v2app/c2+1<cosφ<1,(16)vminc=/radicalBiggv2app/c21+v2app/c2,(17)cotφmin=vappc.(18)γmin=1/radicalBig1−v2min/c2≃/radicalBig1+v2app/c2=1sinφmin.(19)Active Galaxies: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1257>>>

12Consider a relativistic (γ≫1) blazar jet that is coming directly toward the observer. If thereis a time variationτDeltaφtrestin the rest frame of the jet, use below equation  toshowthatthevariationobserved at Earth is approximatelyτDeltaφtobs≃τDeltaφtrest2γ.13Estimate the effective index of refraction for light passing within 104pc of a spherical clusterof galaxies of a total mass of 1014M⊙.14Verify that Eq. ( 20) gives the correct numerical value for the angular deﬂection of a lightray that grazes the Sun’s surface.15Use the geometry of the gravitational lens shown in Fig. 35 and the value ofφgiven byEq. ( 20) to derive Eqs. ( 21), ( 22), and ( 23).Hint:Start by showing thatsin(θ−β)dS−dL=sinφdSfor the small angles involved in this problem./Delta1tobs=/Delta1trest/radicalbig1−u2/c2[1+(u/c)cosθ].
φ=4GMr0c2rad(20)
φ=4GMr0c2rad(20)θ2−βθ−4GMc2/parenleftbiggdS−dLdSdL/parenrightbigg=0,(21)β=θ1+θ2.(22)M=−θ1θ2c24G/parenleftbiggdSdLdS−dL/parenrightbigg.(23)
LS
O/H9252/H9258/H9278
dLdSr0FIGURE 35The geometry for a gravitational lens. Light from the source,S, passes within adistance of approximatelyr0of a lensing point mass atLon its way to an observer atO. The anglesinvolved are actually just a fraction of a degree, and sor0is very nearly the distance of closestapproach.Active Galaxies: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1258>>>

16Two images of the quasar Q0142−100 (also known as UM 673) are formed by a gravitationallens. The redshift of the quasar isz=2.727, and the redshift of the imaging galaxy isz=0.493.The images are separated by 2.22′′, and the lensing galaxy is along the line between the twoimages, 0.8′′from one of them. Estimate the mass of the lensing galaxy.17The Einstein ring MG1654+1346 has a diameter of 2.1′′. The redshift of the source isz=1.74,and the redshift of the lensing galaxy isz=0.25. Estimate the mass of the lensing galaxy.18Large MagellanicCloud was described. Assume that a MACHO with a mass ten times that ofJupiter orbitshalfway between Earth and the LMC and that it moves perpendicular to our lineof sight to theLMC. How much time will it take for the MACHO to move through an angleThe detection of a MACHO by its gravitational microlensing of a star in theof 2θEacross alensed star in the LMC? Take the distance to the LMC to be 52 kpc and the orbital velocityof the MACHO to be 220 km s−1. Neglect the motion of Earth and the LMCin this problem.Comment on a comparison of your answer with the time shown in.the below figure  
a
b
cblue
redAmax = 6.86t = 33.9
00.511.524602468
0Ared/AblueAredAblue
400 420 440 460Days from 2 January 1992FIGUREThe light curve of a star in the LMC brightened over a period of 33 days, apparentlybecause a MACHO passed through the line of sight. The data are shown for (a) blue light, (b) redlight, and (c) the ratio of blue light to red light. (Figure adapted from Alcock et al.,Nature,365, 621,1993. Reprinted with permission, © 1993, Macmillan Magazines Limited.)19When a small object approaches a much more massive object, the smaller object can be tidallydisrupted. The distance of closest approach before being tidally disrupted is the Roche limitis given byrR=2.4/parenleftbiggρBHρ⋆/parenrightbigg1/3RS,Active Galaxies: Problem Set
hole,theRochelimit(see below equation).If the small object is a star and the large object is a supermassive black

<<<PAGE 1259>>>

whereRSis the Schwarzschild radius,ρBHis the density of the black hole, andρ⋆is the averagedensity of the star.(a)Setting the average density of the supermassive black hole equal to its mass divided bythe volume contained within the Schwarzschild radius, derive an expression for the massof a black hole that would haverR=RS.(b)If the Sun were to fall into a supermassive black hole, what maximum mass could theblack hole have if the Sun would be tidally disrupted before crossing the event horizon?Compare your answer to the mass estimates of typical supermassive black holes in galacticnuclei.(c)If the supermassive black hole exceeded the mass found in part (b), what would be theimplications in terms of liberating the gravitational potential energy of the infalling star?Could infalling stars effectively power AGNs in this case?COMPUTER PROBLEM20Table 28.2 gives values of the monochromatic ﬂux for Cygnus A at several radio wavelengths.(a)Make a graph of log10Fνvs. log10ν, and determine the value of the spectral index atlog10ν=8 for the power law given by Eq. ( 1).(b)Use a simple trapezoid rule to integrate the area under the curve ofFνvs.ν(notlog10Fνvs. log10ν!) for the data given, and use your answer to estimate the radio luminosity ofCygnus A.TABLE 28.2Cygnus A Data for Problem 20.log10νlog10Fν(Hz) (W m−2Hz−1)7.0−21.887.3−21.557.7−21.678.0−21.868.3−22.098.7−22.389.0−22.639.3−22.969.7−23.4310.0−23.79Active Galaxies: Problem Setr<fR/parenleftbiggρpρm/parenrightbigg1/3Rp,(4)
Fν∝ν−α(1)


<<<PAGE 1260>>>

Cosmology
From Chapter 29 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright © 2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s ,

<<<PAGE 1261>>>

Cosmology1Newtonian Cosmology2The Cosmic Microwave Background3Relativistic Cosmology4Observational CosmologyNEWTONIAN COSMOLOGYOn December 27, 1831, a ship sailed out of Plymouth, England, on a voyage around theworld that would last nearly ﬁve years. Only 90 feet long, theBeaglewas crowded with74 people, one of whom was Charles Darwin. During stops in South America, the Gala-pagos Islands, Tahiti, New Zealand, and Australia, he exercised his formidable powers ofobservation. In 1859, after two decades of careful study and reﬂection, Darwin publishedOn the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of FavoredRaces in the Struggle for Life. For the ﬁrst time, people began to comprehend their ownorigins.Other discoveries followed during the next one hundred years, with careful observationsand brilliant deductions uncovering more about our beginnings. The elucidation of DNAand plate tectonics revealed the mechanisms by which we and our planet evolved. Theideas of stellar nucleosynthesis explained the manufacture of the chemical elements bystars, implying the origin of our corporeal bodies and the ground on which we walk. Eventhe universe itself was found to be expanding. Then, in 1964, two researchers at BellLaboratories measured the afterglow of the Big Bang, conﬁrming the explosive origin ofeverything in existence. It is difﬁcult to imagine a more breathtaking leap from ignoranceto self-knowledge than that which occurred during this century of discovery.Cosmology, taken as a whole, is the study of the origin and evolution of the universe.In this chapter, cosmology will be considered from several different perspectives. To helpdevelop our intuition, this section will discuss the expansion of the universe from thepoint of view of Newtonian mechanics, without the complications (or insights) provided bygeneral relativity or the modern ideas of particle physics. The discovery and implicationsof the cosmic microwave background radiation are described in Section 2, followed, inSection 3, by an introduction to the geometry of the universe as explained by generalrelativity. Section 4 describes how some of the key parameters of cosmology may bemeasured observationally.1


<<<PAGE 1262>>>

Olbers’s ParadoxNewton believed in an inﬁnite static universe ﬁlled with a uniform scattering of stars. If thedistribution of matter did not extend forever, he realized, then it would collapse inward dueto its own self-gravity. However, Newton’s contemporary, Edmund Halley, worried about asky ﬁlled with an inﬁnite number of stars. Why then, asked Halley, is the sky dark at night?This question was put in its strongest form by a German physician, Heinrich Olbers(1758–1840). Olbers argued in 1823 that if we live in an inﬁnite, transparent universe ﬁlledwith stars, then in any direction one looks in the night sky, one’s line of sight will fall onthe surface of a star. (Similarly, if standing in an inﬁnite forest, in every direction you lookyou will see a tree.) This conclusion is valid regardless of whether the stars are uniformlydistributed, as Newton believed, or grouped in galaxies. Olbers’s argument was so strongthat its disagreement with the obvious fact that the night sky is indeed dark became knownasOlbers’s paradox.Olbers believed that the answer to this paradox was that space is not transparent. The ideasof thermodynamics were still being developed at that time, and Olbers could not appreciatethat his explanation was incorrect. The ﬂaw was that any obscuring matter hiding the starsbeyond would be heated up by the starlight until it glowed as brightly as a stellar surface.Surprisingly, the ﬁrst essentially correct answer came from American poet and author EdgarAllan Poe (1809–1849). Poe proposed that because light has a ﬁnite speed and the universeis not inﬁnitely old, the light from the most distant sources has not yet arrived. This solutionwas independently put on a ﬁrm scientiﬁc foundation by William Thomson (Lord Kelvin,1824–1907). In more modern terms, the solution to Olbers’s paradox is that our universe issimply too young for it to be ﬁlled with light.Developing Our Intuition: A Newtonian ApproachYou will soon discover that this chapter contains more mathematics than the precedingmaterial. The reward for the necessary effort is aquantitativedescription of how the uni-verse unfolded that is much more satisfying than qualitative storytelling. Although generalrelativity is required for a complete understanding of the structure and evolution of theuniverse, it is useful to develop some intuition by ﬁrst considering the expansion of theuniverse from a Newtonian point of view.The Cosmological PrincipleIt has beenarguedthatHubble’slawisanaturaloutcomeofanexpandinguniversethatisbothisotropicandhomogeneous, appearing the same in alldirectionsandatalllocations.Thiscrucialassumptionofanisotropicandhomogeneousuniverseiscalledthecosmological principle.ToshowthattheexpansionoftheuniverseIt is sometimes argued that the cosmological redshift caused by the expansion of the universe is responsible forthe darkness of the night sky because it shifts starlight out of the visible spectrum. In fact, this effect is much toosmall to contribute signiﬁcantly to a dark night sky.In some derivations, many of the intermediate steps have been omitted. Filling in these mathematical gaps hasbeen relegated to several of the end-of-chapter problems.12
12Cosmology
appearsthesame


<<<PAGE 1263>>>

EarthABrBrArB – rA
FIGURE1The expansion of the universe, with Earth at the origin.toallobserversatalllocations,letEarthbeattheoriginofthecoordinatesystemshowninFig.1,andconsidertwogalaxies,AandB, located at positionsrAandrB,respectively.AccordingtotheHubblelaw,therecessionalvelocitiesofthetwogalaxiesaredescribedbythevectorsvA=H0rAandvB=H0rB.The recessional velocity of GalaxyBas seen by an observer in GalaxyAis thereforevB−vA=H0rB−H0rA=H0(rB−rA),so the observer in GalaxyAsees all of the other galaxies in the universe moving away withrecessional velocities described by thesameHubble law as on Earth.Although the value of the Hubble “constant,”H0, is assumed to be the same for allobservers, it is actually a function of time,H(t). If the present time ist0, thenH0≡H(t0).A Simple Pressureless “Dust” Model of the UniverseTo develop an understanding of how the expansion of the universe varies with time, imaginea universe ﬁlled with a pressureless “dust” of uniform density,ρ(t), and choose an arbitrarypoint for the origin. Unlike the actual universe, this model universe is both perfectly isotropicand homogeneous at all scales. The pressureless dust represents all of the matter in theuniverse after being homogenized and uniformly dispersed. It should not be confused withthe physical dust grains found throughout the interstellar medium. There are no photons orneutrinos in this single-component model of the universe.As the universe expands, the dust is carried radially outward from the origin. Letr(t)be the radius of a thin spherical shell of massmat timet; see Fig. 2. This shell of massCosmology


<<<PAGE 1264>>>

Dust
Mass mr
FIGURE2Spherical mass shell in a dust-ﬁlled universe.expands along with the universe with recessional velocityv(t)=dr(t)/dt, so it alwayscontains the same dust particles. Then the mechanical energyEof the shell isK(t)+U(t)=E.As the shell expands, the gravitational pull from the mass inside causes the kinetic energy,K, to decrease while the gravitational potential energy,U, increases. However, by con-servation of energy, the total energy,E, of the shell does not change as the shell movesoutward. For future convenience, the total energy of the shell is written in terms of twoconstants,kandϖ, such thatE=−12mkc2ϖ2. The constantkhas units of(length)−2;its meaning will be explored in Section 3. The other constant,ϖ(“varpi”), labels thisparticular mass shell and may be thought of as thepresentradius of the shell, sor(t0)=ϖ.The statement of the conservation of the mass shell’s energy is then12mv2(t)−GMrmr(t)=−12mkc2ϖ2.(1)Intheleft-handsideofEq.(1),Mris the mass interior to the shell,Mr=43πr3(t)ρ(t).Although the radius of the shell and the density of the dust are continually changing, thecombinationr3(t)ρ(t)does not vary because the mass interior to a speciﬁc shell remainsconstant as the universe expands. Cancelingmand substituting forMrin Eq. ( 1) givesv2−83πG ρr2=−kc2ϖ2.(2)The mass outside the shell does not contribute to the gravitational force on the shell.3
3Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1265>>>

The constantkdetermines the ultimate fate of the universe:• Ifk>0, the total energy of the shell is negative, and the universe isbounded,o rclosed. In this case, the expansion will someday halt and reverse itself.• Ifk<0, the total energy of the shell is positive, and the universe isunbounded,o ropen. In this case, the expansion will continue forever.• Ifk=0, the total energy of the shell is zero, and the universe isﬂat, neither opennor closed. In this case, the expansion will continue to slow down, coming to a haltonly ast→∞and the universe is inﬁnitely dispersed.The Newtonian cosmology of this section always takes place in a ﬂat spacetime.The termsclosed,open, andﬂatabove should be understoodas describing thedynamicsof the universal expansion. In Section 3, these terms will bereinterpreted to describe the geometry of spacetime.The cosmological principle requires that the expansion proceed in the same way for allshells; for example, the time required for every shell to double its distance from the originis assumed to be the same. This means that the radius of a particular shell (identiﬁed byϖ)at any time can be written asr(t)=R(t)ϖ.(3)In this expression,r(t)is called thecoordinate distance. Becauseϖlabels a shell andfollows it as it expands,ϖis referred to as acomoving coordinate; see Fig. 3.R(t)is adimensionlessscale factor(thesameforallshells)thatdescribestheexpansion;R(t0)=1corresponds tor(t0)=ϖ.ThescalefactorRisequaltoRemitted/Robs.Thus
Mass m
r(t1) < r(t2)but/H9275– = constant
r(t1)r(t2)
FIGURE 3An expanding mass shell seen at two different times,t1<t2. As the mass shellexpands, its comoving coordinate,ϖ, is the same at timest1andt2, whiler(t1)<r ( t2).Cosmology
Randthe


<<<PAGE 1266>>>

redshiftzare related byR=11+z,(4)For example, looking back to a redshift ofz=3 implies a universe for which the scalefactor wasR=1/4.The previous statement thatr3ρdoes not vary for a speciﬁc shell means thatR3ρremainsconstant forallshells. That is, sinceR(t0)=1,R3(t)ρ(t)=R3(t0)ρ(t0)=ρ0,(5)whereρ0is the density of the dust-ﬁlled universe at the present time. Using Eq. ( 4), thiscan also be written asρ(z)=ρ0(1+z)3,(6)which gives the average density of the universe as observed at redshiftz. You are cautionedthat Eqs. ( 5) and ( 6) are valid only for a universe consisting of pressureless dust. Themore general counterpart of Eq. ( 5) will be derived at the end of this section.The Evolution of the Pressureless ”Dust” UniverseThe evolution of our Newtonian universe, which can be described by the time behavior ofthe scale factorR(t), will be investigated in the next few pages.Abrief ﬂurry of mathematicswill produce the needed tools. The ﬁrst step is to write the Hubble parameter,H(t), in termsof the scale factor. The Hubble law isv(t)=H(t)r(t)=H(t)R(t)ϖ.(7)Becausev(t)is the time derivative ofr(t), Eq. ( 3) givesv(t)=dR(t)dtϖ.ComparingthiswithEq.7) shows thatH(t)=1R(t)dR(t)dt.(8)InsertingEqs.(3)and(7)intoEq.(2)andcancelingtheϖ2results in/parenleftbiggH2−83πG ρ/parenrightbiggR2=−kc2,(9)or, employing Eq. ( 8),/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG ρ/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.(10)Cosmology
(


<<<PAGE 1267>>>

The left-hand sides of Eqs. ( 9) and ( 10) apply toall shellsand involve the functions oftimeH(t),ρ(t), andR(t), while the right-hand sides are constant (the same for all positionsand times). Using Eq. ( 5), Eq. ( 10) can be written in terms ofRandtonly:/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2−8πG ρ03R=−kc2.(11)This result, along with Eqs. ( 9) and ( 10), will be used to describe the expansion ofthe universe.Now we are ready to examine the motion of mass shells in the three cases of a ﬂat, closed,or open universe. First, consider the case of a ﬂat universe (k=0), corresponding to eachshell expanding at exactly its escape velocity. The value of the density that will result in avalue ofk=0 is known as thecritical density,ρc(t). From Eq. ( 9),ρc(t)=3H2(t)8πG.(12)Toevaluatethisatthepresenttime,itisusefultoknowthattheHubbleconstantinconventionalunitsisH0=100hkm s−1Mpc−1=3.24×10−18hs−1(13)which, using the WMAP value of[h]WMAP=0.71,is[H0]WMAP=71 km s−1Mpc−1=2.30×10−18s−1.(14)The present value of the critical density,ρc,0, is thenρc,0=3H208πG=1.88×10−26h2kg m−3,(15)with a WMAP value ofρc,0=9.47×10−27kg m−3.(16)This is equivalent to about six hydrogen atoms per cubic meter. However, the WMAP valueof the average density ofbaryonic matterin the universe is about 4% of the critical density,ρb,0=4.17×10−28kg m−3(forh=0.71),(17)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1268>>>

or 1 hydrogen atom per 4 m3of space. By “baryonic matter,” we mean matter made ofbaryons(e.g., protons and neutrons); hence the “b” subscript designating baryonic matter inEq. ( 17). As will be explained in Section 2, this value is consistent with that obtainedfrom comparing the theoretical and observed abundances of light elements, such as helium-3 and lithium-7, that were formed in the early universe. The density of nonbaryonic darkmatter, which is of unknown composition, is not included in the value ofρb,0. Nonbaryonicdark matter is revealed only by its gravitational inﬂuence on baryonic matter. Presumably itinteracts very weakly (if at all) with photons and charged particles via the electromagneticforce, so it does not absorb, emit, or scatter appreciable amounts of light. Our model universeof pressureless dust includes both types of matter, baryonic and nonbaryonic, luminous anddark.The ratio of a measured density to the critical density is an important parameter incosmology. Accordingly, it is useful to deﬁne thedensity parameter,χOmegaφ(t)≡ρ(t)ρc(t)=8πGρ(t)3H2(t),(18)which has a present value ofχOmegaφ0=ρ0ρc,0=8πG ρ03H20.(19)Table 1 shows the mass-to-light ratios of a variety of astronomical systems and thedensity parameters derived for them. With the exception of Big Bang nucleosynthesis, thesevalues were obtained by studying gravitational effects and thus include both baryonic anddark matter. There is a signiﬁcant trend that more extensive systems have larger mass-to-light ratios and density parameters, but, as shown in Fig. 4, for the largest systems thedensity parameters seem to reach a “ceiling” at a maximum value ofχOmegaφ0≃0.3. This isconsistent with the WMAP result for the value of the average density of all types of matter,baryonic and dark:[χOmegaφm,0]WMAP=(0.135+0.008−0.009)h−2=0.27±0.04 (forh=0.71).(20)This corresponds to a mass density ofρm,0=2.56×10−27kg m−3(forh=0.71)(21)The “m” subscript, which stands for “mass,” anticipates models of the universe with morethan one component. This subscript will be suppressed for the present one-componentmodel.Actually, anything made of known particles whose density obeys Eq. ( 5) counts as baryonic matter. Thisexcludes photons and neutrinos because, as we shall see in Section 2, a gas of either of these particles does notobey Eq. ( 5). Such a gas exerts a pressure and therefore is inconsistent with our model universe of pressurelessdust.4
4Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1269>>>

TABLE1Mass-to-Light Ratios and Density Parameters, Measured for a Variety of Systems.The complicated dependence onhfor the values from the X-ray halo of M87 and Local Grouptiming is not shown. (Adapted from Binney and Tremaine,Galactic Dynamics, Princeton UniversityPress, Princeton, NJ, 1987, and Schramm,Physica Scripta,T36, 22, 1991.)M/LMethod(M⊙/L⊙)χOmegaφ0Solar neighborhood30.002h−1Elliptical galaxy cores 12h0.007Local escape speed30 0.018h−1Satellite galaxies30 0.018h−1Magellanic Stream>80>0.05h−1X-ray halo of M87>750>0.46h−1Local Group timing 100 0.06h−1Groups of galaxies 260h0.16Clusters of galaxies 400h0.25Gravitational lenses — 0.1–0.3Big Bang nucleosynthesis — 0.065±0.045The WMAP value of the density parameter for baryonic matter is[χOmegaφb,0]WMAP=(0.0224±0.0009)h−2=0.044±0.004 (forh=0.71). (22)Thus, according to the WMAP results, baryonic matter accounts for only about 16% of thematter in the universe; the other 84% is some sort of nonbaryonic dark matter.The general characteristics of the expansion of our model universe composed of pres-sureless dust can now be determined. First note that, from Eqs. ( 6) and ( 19),χOmegaφχOmegaφ0=ρρ0H20H2=(1+z)3H20H2,soχOmegaφH2=(1+z)3χOmegaφ0H20.(23)Another relation betweenχOmegaφandHcomes from combining the density parameter,Eq. ( 18), with Eq. 9):H2(1−χOmegaφ)R2=−kc2(24)As a special case att=t0,H20(1−χOmegaφ0)=−kc2.(25)This conﬁrms that:• IfχOmegaφ0>1, thenk>0 and the universe is closed.Cosmology
(


<<<PAGE 1270>>>

H0 = 100W = 1W = 0.3
ESpRich clusters (med)Morgan groups (med)Hickson groups (med)CFA groups (med)X-ray groupsThe Local GroupM101, M31, Milky WaySpirals (med)Ellipticals (med)Cor Bor superclusterShapley superclusterCosmic virial theoremLeast action methodVirgo infall (range)Bulk flows (range)1101001000M/LB (M /L  )
0.01 0.1 1 10Characteristic size (Mpc)FIGURE4The mass-to-light ratio as a function of the characteristic size of a variety of systems.H0was taken to be 100 km s−1Mpc−1for this ﬁgure prior to publication of the WMAP results. (Figureadapted from Dodelson,Modern Cosmology, Academic Press, New York, 2003, with permission fromElsevier. Data from Bahcall et al.,Ap. J., 541, 1, 2000.)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1271>>>

• IfχOmegaφ0<1, thenk<0 and the universe is open.• IfχOmegaφ0=1, thenk=0 and the universe is ﬂat.Remember that we are now dealing with a simple model of a one-component universe ofpressureless dust. Later we will study more realistic multicomponent models, which willshow that a measurement of the mass density parameter alone is not enough for us to drawany conclusions about the ultimate fate of our physical universe.Equating Eqs. ( 24) and ( 5), and using ( 4), we ﬁndH2(1−χOmegaφ)=H20(1−χOmegaφ0)(1+z)2.(26)Thus we have two equations, Eqs. ( 23) and ( 26), with the two unknownsχOmegaφandH.These may be easily solved to ﬁndH=H0(1+z) (1+χOmegaφ0z)1/2(27)andχOmegaφ=/parenleftbigg1+z1+χOmegaφ0z/parenrightbiggχOmegaφ0=1+χOmegaφ0−11+χOmegaφ0z.(28)Equation ( 27) implies that at very early times, asR→0 andz→∞, the Hubble pa-rameterH→∞. Equation ( 28) shows that the sign ofχOmegaφ−1 does not change, and inparticular that ifχOmegaφ=1 at any time, thenχOmegaφ=1 at all times. The character of the universedoes not change as the universe evolves; it is either always closed, always open, or alwaysﬂat. Equation ( 28) also shows that at very early times, asz→∞, the density parameterχOmegaφ→1 regardless of today’s value ofχOmegaφ0.Therefore, the early universe was essentially ﬂat;see Fig. 5. The assumption of a ﬂat early universe will greatly simplify the descriptionof the ﬁrst few minutes of the universe.Example1.1.Later we will ﬁnd that when the universe was about 3 minutes old,protons and neutrons combined to form helium nuclei. This occurred at a redshift ofz=3.68×108. Using the WMAP value of[χOmegaφm,0]WMAP=0.27 forχOmegaφ0, we ﬁnd that at the timeof helium formation, the value ofχOmegaφwasχOmegaφ=1+χOmegaφ0−11+χOmegaφ0z=1+0.27−11+(0.27)(3.68×108)=0.99999999265.(29)At even earlier times the value ofχOmegaφcontains a much longer string of nines. During the latetwentieth century, it appeared absurd to theoreticians that a mechanism would exist to ﬁne-tuneχOmegaφto a value so very close to unity without having an exactly ﬂat universe withχOmegaφ=1.And yet, observational measurements of the value of the density parameter continued tohover aroundχOmegaφ0≃0.3. The solution to this puzzle will be described in Section 3, wherewe will ﬁnd that the theoreticians and the observers werebothcorrect.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1272>>>

012345R
–10 123 456(Dt)/tH from presentW0 = 2(closed)W0 = 1(flat)W0 = 0.5(open)
FIGURE5The evolution of the scale factor,R, for three model universes—open (χOmegaφ0=0.5),ﬂat (χOmegaφ0=1), and closed (χOmegaφ0=2)—as a function of time, measured from the present. The dottedlines locate the position of today’s universe on the three curves. At the present time (R=1) all threeuniverses have the same value ofH0, as exhibited by the curves having the same slope. For the earlyuniverse (R<1) there is little difference among the kinematic behaviors of a ﬂat, a closed, and anopen universe because the early universe was essentially ﬂat. The elapsed timeχDeltaφtis in units of theHubble time,tH.The expansion of a ﬂat, one-component universe of pressureless dust as a function oftime may be found by solving Eq. (11) withk=0 (soρ0=ρc,0andχOmegaφ0=1):/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2=8πG ρc,03R.Taking the square root of each side and integrating (withR=0 att=0) gives/integraldisplayR0√R′dR′=/radicalbigg8πG ρc,03/integraldisplayt0dt′orRﬂat=(6πG ρc,0)1/3t2/3(30)=/parenleftbigg32/parenrightbigg2/3/parenleftbiggttH/parenrightbigg2/3(forχOmegaφ0=1),(31)where the last expression was obtained by using Eq. ( 15), andtH≡1/H0for the Hubbletime.The increase inRforχOmegaφ0=1i ss h o w ni nF i g . 5 ,w i t ht i m ei nu n i t softheHubbletime.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1273>>>

IfχOmegaφ0̸=1, the density is not equal to the critical density and Eq. ( 11) is more difﬁcultto solve. IfχOmegaφ0>1, the universe is closed and the solution can be expressed in parametricform asRclosed=4πG ρ03kc2[1−cos(x)](32)=12χOmegaφ0χOmegaφ0−1[1−cos(x)](33)andtclosed=4πG ρ03k3/2c3[x−sin(x)](34)=12H0χOmegaφ0(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2[x−sin(x)],(35)where the variablex≥0 merely parameterizes the solution. [This may be easily veriﬁed bydirect substitution into Eq. ( 11).]The behavior of this solution withχOmegaφ0=2isshowninFig.5.The“bounce”thatoccursafterthecontractionoftheuniverseisamathematicalRopen=4πG ρ03|k|c2[cosh(x)−1](36)=12χOmegaφ01−χOmegaφ0[cosh(x)−1](37)andtopen=4πG ρ03|k|3/2c3[sinh(x)−x](38)=12H0χOmegaφ0(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2[sinh(x)−x].(39)Recall that the hyperbolic cosine is deﬁned as cosh(x)≡(ex+e−x)/2≥1. Similarly, thehyperbolic sine is given by sinh(x)≡(ex−e−x)/2≥x,s oRopenincreases monotonicallywitht. See Fig. 5 for the appearance of the solution withχOmegaφ0=0.5. IfχOmegaφ0≤1, then theuniverse will continue to expand forever.The Age of the Pressureless “Dust” UniverseWe are now ready to calculate the age of the universe as a function of the redshiftz. Beforecontinuing, a note of caution should be sounded about referring to any timetas the “age ofthe universe.” The laws of physics, as we presently understand them, cannot remain validunder the extreme conditions that must prevail ast→0. In usingtas a measure of thetime since the Big Bang, we must always keep in mind that this is anextrapolated timeandcannot be taken literally at the earliest instants (t<10−43s).Cosmology
On the other hand, ifχOmegaφ0<1, the universe is open and the parametric form of the solutionof Eq. ( 11) isartifactanddoesnotimplyanendlesssequenceofoscillatinguniverses.


<<<PAGE 1274>>>

Keeping this admonition in mind, we now proceed by using Eq. ( 4) to replaceRby1/(1+z)in Eq. ( 31) for a ﬂat universe. The age of a ﬂat universe (in units of the Hubbletime) that is observed at redshiftzis then found to betﬂat(z)tH=231(1+z)3/2(forχOmegaφ0=1).(40)ReplacingRby 1/(1+z)in Eq. ( 33) for a closed universe and using Eq. ( 35) toeliminatexleads totclosed(z)tH=χOmegaφ02(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2/bracketleftbiggcos−1/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0z−χOmegaφ0+2χOmegaφ0z+χOmegaφ0/parenrightbigg−2√(χOmegaφ0−1)(χOmegaφ0z+1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0>1).(41)Following a similar procedure using Eq. ( 37) for an open universe and using Eq. ( 39)to eliminatexresults intopen(z)tH=χOmegaφ02(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2/bracketleftbigg−cosh−1/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0z−χOmegaφ0+2χOmegaφ0z+χOmegaφ0/parenrightbigg+2√(1−χOmegaφ0)(χOmegaφ0z+1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0<1).(42)In the limit of large redshift, Eqs. ( 40) through 42) all reduce tot(z)tH=231(1+z)3/2χOmegaφ1/20,(43)where the higher-order terms may be neglected forχOmegaφ0̸=1.Becausetheearlyuniversewasﬂattoaverygoodapproximation,preciseobservationsarerequiredtodeterminewhethertheuniverseisﬂat,closed,oropen.InSection4,theobservationalaspectsofcosmologywillbeconsideredinmoredetail.The current age of the universe,t0, may be easily found by settingz=0 in Eqs.(40– 42) to ﬁndtﬂat,0tH=23(forχOmegaφ0=1)(44)for a ﬂat universe,tclosed,0tH=χOmegaφ02(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2/bracketleftbiggcos−1/parenleftbigg2χOmegaφ0−1/parenrightbigg−2√χOmegaφ0−1χOmegaφ0/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0>1) (45)for a closed universe, andtopen,0tH=χOmegaφ02(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2/bracketleftbigg−cosh−1/parenleftbigg2χOmegaφ0−1/parenrightbigg+2√1−χOmegaφ0χOmegaφ0/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0<1) (46)for an open universe.Cosmology
(todetermine


<<<PAGE 1275>>>

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.50.50.60.70.80.91.0
78910111213t0/tH
W0
t0 (Gyr) for h = 0.71
FIGURE6The age of the universe as a function of the density parameter,χOmegaφ0. The age isexpressed as a fraction of the Hubble time,tH≃1010h−1yr. The right axis shows the age in billionsof years forh=0.71.The age of the universe for these models, expressed as a fraction of the Hubble time,is shown in Fig. 6.According to the inﬂation scenariotheuniverseshouldbeessentiallyﬂat,ascenariosupportedbyrecentobservations.Iftheaveragedensityoftheuniverseisequaltothecriticaldensity,thentheageoftheuniverseistwo-thirdsoftheHubbletime.UsingtheWMAPvalueof[h]WMAP=0.71givesanageofabout9.2Gyr.Althoughthisresultislessthanthecurrentlyacceptedvalueof13.7Gyr,itismodelofanexpandinguniverseofpressurelessdustproducesagesthatareinroughaccordancewiththemeanageoftheoldestglobularclusters,11.5billion years.Piecing together the history of the universe is a bit like working a jigsaw puzzle. Asprogress is made and the pattern begins to emerge, the shapes of the missing pieces aredeﬁned by those already in place. For our simple model of a pressureless dust universe,the pieces overlap a bit; the age of the oldest stars is greater than the age of the universe.However, there is more to the universe than pressureless dust. For example, the universeis ﬁlled with photons—about two billion photons for every baryon. Photons, baryons, andother constituents will play a role in resolving the discrepancy between the age of the oldestglobular clusters and the age of the universe.The Lookback TimeThelookback time,tL, is deﬁned as how far back in time we are looking when we viewan object with redshiftz. This is just the difference between the present age of the universeand its age at timet(z),tL=t0−t(z).(47)A more accurate comparison between the age of the universe and the ages of globular clusters will be made inSection 3.5
5Cosmology
remarkablethatthissimple


<<<PAGE 1276>>>

0123450.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
0246810120.10.51.02.5
ztL/tH
tL (Gyr) for h = 0.71W0 = 0.05
FIGURE7The lookback time as a function of the redshift,z, for a range of values of the densityparameter,χOmegaφ0. The lookback time is expressed as a fraction of the Hubble time,tH≃1010h−1yr. Theright axis shows the lookback time in billions of years ifh=0.71.For example, for a ﬂat universe, Eqs. ( 40) and ( 44) show that the lookback time is,in units of the Hubble time,tLtH=23/bracketleftbigg1−1(1+z)3/2/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0=1).(48)Figure 7 shows the lookback times for ﬂat, closed, and open models of the universe.Example1.2.The redshift of the quasar SDSS 1030+0524 wasfoundtobez=6.28.Assumingaﬂatuniverseofpressurelessdust,Eq.(48)showsthatthelookbacktimetothisquasaristLtH=23(1−0.0509)=0.633.Since the age of a ﬂat universe ist0=2tH/3,tLt0=0.949.This means that only 5% of the history of the universe had unfolded when the light leftthis quasar. At that time the universe was smaller by about a factor of 7 when, according toEq. ( 4), the scale factor wasR=11+z=0.137.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1277>>>

Extending Our Simple Model to Include PressureLet’s take stock of the basic equations we have derived so far and generalize them a bit,anticipating some features of the equations of general relativity we will encounter in Sec-tion 3. We start with Eq. ( 10),/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG ρ/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.With a nod toward Einstein’sErest=mc2, we broaden the meaning of the densityρtoinclude matter in all of its forms. For nonrelativistic particles,ρis the usual mass density.For relativistic particles, such as photons and neutrinos,ρis theequivalent mass density—that is, the energy density divided byc2.Equation ( 5),R3ρ=ρ0, describes the conservation of mass within the expandingshell. Again acknowledging the equivalence of mass and energy, this equation is also astatement of the conservation of energy for a pressureless dust universe.A thermodynamic argument supplies the generalization of Eq. ( 5) for models of theuniverse that incorporate pressure-producing components. Imagine a universe ﬁlled with aﬂuid (dust, photons, etc.) of uniform densityρ, pressureP, and temperatureT, and choosean arbitrary point for the origin. Letrbe the radius of a comoving spherical surface, centeredon the origin. We will employ the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, which applies the law ofconservation of internal energy,U, to the ﬂuid within the expanding sphere:dU=dQ−dW.(49)First note that the entire universe has the same temperature, so there can be no heat ﬂow:dQ=0. That is, the expansion of the universe is adiabatic. Any change in internal energymust be produced by work done by the ﬂuid. Writing the result as a time derivative,dUdt=−dWdt=−PdVdt.and substitutingV=43πr3, we obtaindUdt=−43πPd(r3)dt.If we deﬁne the internal energy per unit volumeuasu=U43πr3,then we ﬁndd(r3u)dt=−Pd(r3)dt.We need not worry about photons leaving the sphere, because the cosmological principle assures us that the samenumber of equivalent photons will enter the sphere.6
6Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1278>>>

Writinguin terms of the equivalent mass densityρ,ρ=uc2,givesd(r3ρ)dt=−Pc2d(r3)dt.Finally, usingr=Rϖ(Eq. 3), we obtain theﬂuid equation,d(R3ρ)dt=−Pc2d(R3)dt.(50)For a universe of pressureless dust,P=0s oR3ρ=constant, in agreement with Eq. ( 5).An equation describing the acceleration of the universal expansion can be obtained bymultiplying Eq. ( 10) byRand then taking a time derivative. Using Eq. ( 50) to replaced(ρR3)/dtand using Eq. ( 10) to eliminate the−kc2, we arrive at theaccelerationequationd2Rdt2=−43πG/parenleftbiggρ+3Pc2/parenrightbiggR.(51)Note that the effect of the pressurePis to slow down the expansion (assumingP>0).If this seems counterintuitive, recall that because the pressure is the same everywherein the universe, both inside and outside the shell, there is no pressure gradient to exerta net force on the expanding sphere. The answer lies in the motion of the particles thatcreates the ﬂuid’s pressure. The equivalent mass of the particles’ kinetic energy creates agravitational attraction that slows down the expansion just as their actual mass does. In fact,the assumption thatP=0 is valid for much of the history of the universe. For instance,youwillﬁndthatρ≫P/c2in today’s universe.Equation ( 51) is an illustration ofBirkhoff’s theorem. In 1923 the American mathe-matician G. D. Birkhoff (1884–1944) proved quite generally that for a spherically symmetricdistribution of matter, Einstein’s ﬁeld equations have a unique solution. As a corollary, theacceleration of an expanding shell in our ﬂuid universe is determined solely by the ﬂuidlying within the shell. Equation ( 51) shows that the acceleration does not depend onany factors other thanρ,P, andR. Because Birkhoff’s theorem holds even when generalrelativity is included, it is quite important in the study of cosmology.Equations ( 10), ( 50), and ( 51) have three unknowns:R,ρ, andP. However,the equations are not independent; any two may be used to derive the third. To solve thesetwo equations forR,ρ, andP, we need a third relation, anequation of state, that links thevariables. Such an equation of state can be written generally asP=wu=wρc2,(52)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1279>>>

wherewis a constant. In words, the pressure is proportional to the energy density of theﬂuid. For example, for mass in the form of pressureless dust,wm=0, and for blackbodyradiation,withtheequationofstatePrad=urad/3,wehavewrad=1/3.Insertingthegeneralequationofstate,Eq.(52),intotheﬂuidequation,Eq.(50),quicklyproduces the relationR3(1+w)ρ=constant=ρ0,(53)whereρ0is the present value of the mass density (or equivalent mass density). For pres-sureless dust (wm=0), we recover Eq. ( 5),R3ρm=ρm,0.The Deceleration ParameterFinally, we introduce a useful dimensionless quantity that describes the acceleration of theuniversal expansion: thedeceleration parameter,q(t), which is deﬁned asq(t)≡−R(t)[d2R(t)/dt2][dR(t)/dt]2.(54)Both the name and the minus sign (to ensure thatq>0 for a deceleration) betray the cer-tainty of twentieth-century astronomers that the expansion of the universe must be slowingdown with time.For a pressureless dust universe,q(t)=12χOmegaφ(t),(55)and so at the present time,q0=12χOmegaφ0.(56)Thus, for a pressureless dust universe,q0=0.5 for a ﬂat universe, whileq0>0.5 andq0<0.5 correspond to a closed and an open universe, respectively.THE COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUNDIn 1946 George Gamow was pondering the cosmic abundances of the elements. Realizingthat the newborn, dense universe must have been hot enough for a burst of nuclear reactionsto occur, he proposed that a sequence of reactions in the very early universe could explainthemeasuredcosmicabundancecurve.Gamow,togetherwithRalphAlpher,publishedthisideatwoyearslater.Stilllater,however,detailedcalculationsbyIn Section 3 this sense of certainty will be toppled.Gamow, a Russian émigré, was famous for his Puckish sense of humor. When this paper ﬁrst appeared, Gamowadded Hans Bethe as a co-author (without Bethe’s knowledge). Gamow thought it would be appropriate that apaper on cosmic beginnings be authored by Alpher (α), Bethe (β), and Gamow (γ), a play on the ﬁrst three lettersof the Greek alphabet.7
878Cosmology
2


<<<PAGE 1280>>>

Alpher and Robert Herman (1914–1997) showed that Gamow’s idea was ﬂawed becausethere were roadblocks to assembling succeedingly heavier nuclei simply by adding protonsor neutrons. There are no stable nuclei with ﬁve or eight nucleons, leaving42He as theheaviest element that can be formed as Gamow proposed. (A small amount of an isotope oflithium,73Li, is also formed in the early universe by the nuclear fusion of42He with31H andthe fusion of42He with32He. The latter produces74Be, which radioactively decays to73Li.)At that time, there was also a large problem with the idea of a hot, dense universe cominginto existence approximately one Hubble time ago. Edwin Hubble’s original value of hisconstantwasH0=500 km s−1Mpc−1,whichcorrespondstotH=1/H0=109yrfortheageoftheuniverse.ThisisonlyafractionofEarth’sage,whichin1928hadbeenradioactivelydatedasseveralbillionyears.Bythelate1940sfurthermeasurementsindicated that 1/H0=1.8×109yr, which was still embarrassingly short. It was certainlyhard to understand how Earth could be older than the universe.The Steady-State Model of the UniverseIn 1946 at Cambridge University, Hermann Bondi (1919–2005), Thomas Gold (1920–2004), and Fred Hoyle (1915–2001) attempted to ﬁnd an alternative to Gamow’s unpalat-able Big Bang universe. In papers published in 1948 and 1949, they proposed their modelof asteady-state universe. It extended the cosmological principle to include time, statingthat, in addition to the universe being isotropic and homogeneous, it also appears the sameat all times. A steady-state universe has no beginning and no end. It is inﬁnitely old, and asit expands, a continuous creation of matter is required to maintain the average density ofthe universe at its present level. This changes the interpretation of the Hubble time; ratherthan the characteristic age of the universe,tHbecomes a characteristic time for the creationof matter. If the universe roughly doubles in size in timetH, then its volume becomes eighttimes greater, and so the rate of matter creation required to maintain the universe as it istoday is approximately 8ρ0/tH=8H0ρ0. Just a few hydrogen atoms per cubic meter ofspace would need to be created every ten billion years, a rate far too small to be mea-sured experimentally. In the original steady-state models, the “when,” “where,” and “how”of the spontaneous appearance of new matter (in violation of the law of conservation ofmass–energy) were questions left unanswered. The appeal of the steady-state universe wasits resolution of the timescale problem.10Just as Gamow and his collaborators tried to explain the cosmic abundance curvebyusingthenuclearreactionsthatwouldaccompanyaBigBang,Hoylesoughtanexplanationinthenuclearreactionsthattookplaceinsidestars.HejoinedforceswithtwoEnglishcolleagues,GeoffreyandMargaretBurbidge(atheoreticalphysicistandanastronomer, respectively), and William Fowler (1911–1995), an American physicist. InIronically, it was Fred Hoyle who came up with the termBig Bang. He used it derisively in a 1950 BBC radiobroadcast when he said, “This big bang idea seemed to me to be unsatisfactory even before examination showedthat it leads to serious difﬁculties. For when we look at our own Galaxy there is not the smallest sign that such anexplosion ever occurred.”10The solution to the short Hubble time appeared in 1952, when Walter Baade discovered that there were twotypes of Cepheid variable stars. This revised the period–luminosity relation that forms the foundation of the cosmicdistance scale.9
9Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1281>>>

1957 they published their seminal paper, referred to as B2FH, that laid out the theory ofstellar nucleosynthesis.The B2FH analysis was a success, and its results were compatible with both the BigBang and steady-state cosmologies. During the 1950s both theories had their supportersand detractors. However, in addition to the unanswered questions about the continuous cre-ation of matter, the steady-state theory had a serious problem explaining the large amountof helium observed in the universe. Astronomers had established that about one-quarter(0.274±0.016) of the baryonic mass of the universe is in the form of helium. Whencompared to the cosmic abundances of the heavier elements, it was clear that stellar nucle-osynthesis could not account for the amount of helium observed, especially considering thatcarbon, nitrogen, and oxygen are the results of exhaustively burning the star’s helium core.Gamow,Alpher,andHermanhadshownthattheBigBangcouldatleast explain the abundance of helium, but where was the proof that such a violent event hadever occurred? To invoke an event that was apparently beyond the reach of investigationseemed unscientiﬁc to many astronomers.The Cooling of the Universe after the Big BangA key idea of theα–β–γpaper was that the dense, early universe must have been very hot.In this hot, dense universe, the mean free path of photons would have been short enough tomaintain thermodynamic equilibrium. Although an expanding universe cannot be preciselyin equilibrium, this assumption of thermodynamic equilibrium is extremely good.In 1948 Alpher and Herman published their description of how this blackbody radiationwould have cooled as the universe expanded, and they predicted that the universe shouldnow be ﬁlled with blackbody radiation at a temperature of 5 K.The cooling of the blackbody radiation can be derived by considering its energy den-sityu=aT4.Accordingtotheﬂuidequation(Eq.53)withwrad=1/3forblackbodyradiationandR(t0)=1,R3(1+wrad)urad=R4urad=urad,0.(57)The energy density today,urad,0, is smaller than the earlier valueuradby a factor ofR4;afactor ofR3is due to the fact that the volume of the universe has increased since then, andthe other factor ofRcomes from the lesser energy of today’s longer-wavelength photons(Ephoton=hc/λ), a result of the cosmological redshift. ThusR4aT4=aT40,and we ﬁnd that the present blackbody temperature must be related to the temperature at anearlier time byRT=T0.(58)That is, the product of the scale factor and the blackbody temperature remains constant asthe universe expands. When the universe was half as large, it was twice as hot.Undertheseconditionstheradiationﬁeldhasablackbodyspectrum.Cosmology
blackbody


<<<PAGE 1282>>>

An order-of-magnitude estimate of the present blackbody temperature of the universemay be calculated by considering the temperature and baryonic mass density that must haveprevailed in the early universe when helium was being formed. The fusion of hydrogen nu-clei requires roughly thatT≃109K andρb≃10−2kg m−3. If the temperature were anyhigher, the deuterium nuclei involved in the fusion chain would have undergone photodis-sociation due to the presence of energetic blackbody radiation, whereas a lower temperaturewould have made the Coulomb barrier between the nuclei too difﬁcult to overcome. Thequoted density is needed to produce the observed amounts of32He and other nuclei. FromEqs. ( 5) and ( 17), the value of the scale factor at the time of the helium formationwas roughlyR≃/parenleftbiggρb,0ρb/parenrightbigg1/3=3.47×10−9.At that time, the universe was only a few billionths of its present size. Combining thescale factor withT (R)=109K, the present temperature of the blackbody radiation can beestimated from Eq. ( 58) asT0=RT (R)≃3.47 K,similar to Alpher and Hermann’s original estimate of5Ki n1948. Wien’s law then givesthe peak wavelength of the blackbody spectrum asλmax=0.00290 m KT0≃8.36×10−4m.The Discovery of the Cosmic Microwave BackgroundSixteen years after Alpher and Herman predicted that the universe had cooled to5Ka n dwas ﬁlled with blackbody radiation, Robert Dicke (1916–1997) of Princeton University andhis postdoctoral student P. J. E. Peebles unknowingly followed in their footsteps. In 1964Peebles calculated that the blackbody radiation left over from the Big Bang should havea temperature of about 10 K. Unlike Alpher and Herman, however, Dicke was interestedin searching for the relic radiation. He didn’t realize that this cosmic background radiationhad just been found by two radio astronomers working a few miles away at Bell Labora-tories in Holmdel, New Jersey.11Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson were working with ahuge horn reﬂector antenna (shown in Fig. 8) that had been used to communicate withthe new Telstar satellite. Despite a year of effort, the two men had been unable to get ridof a persistent hiss in the signal. The hiss came continually from all directions in the skyand remained even after Penzias and Wilson had scrubbed their antenna clean, taped overseams and rivets, and removed two pigeons that had nested inside the horn.12They knewthat a 3 Kblackbody would produce their interference but were unaware of any possiblesource until Penzias learned of Peeble’s calculation of a 10-K background. Penzias called11Interestingly, it was in Holmdel that Karl Jansky built his ﬁrst radio telescope.12The pigeons were freed 60 miles away. Unfortunately, they proved to be homing pigeons and had to be removedagain.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1283>>>

FIGURE8Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias standing in front of the antenna used to ﬁrst identifythe cosmic microwave background. (Courtesy of AT&T Archives.)Dicke and invited him to Holmdel, and in 1965 the pieces of the puzzle ﬁnally fell together.Penzias and Wilson had detected the blackbody radiation that ﬁlls the universe, with a peakwavelength ofλmax=1.06 mm in the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum.This afterglow of the Big Bang is now known as thecosmic microwave background, oftenabbreviated as the CMB. Dicke, Peebles, and their co-workers at Princeton immediatelywrote a note for theAstrophysical Journal Lettersdetailing the theory of the cosmic mi-crowave background that strongly supported the Big Bang cosmology, while Penzias andWilson wrote an accompanying letter, discreetly titled “A Measurement of Excess AntennaTemperature at 4080 Megacycles per Second,” that described their discovery.The discovery of the CMB was a death knell for steady-state cosmology. As furthermeasurements at other wavelengths conﬁrmed that the shape of the CMB spectrum wasthat of a blackbody, the number of astronomers supporting the Big Bang theory swelledwhile those favoring a steady-state universe dwindled. In 1991 a striking measurement ofthe cosmic microwave background was obtained by the COBE satellite.The COBE measurement of the spectrum of the CMB is shown in Fig. 9. The datapoints (whose errors are smaller than the points themselves) fall almost perfectly on thetheoretical spectrum of a 2.725-K blackbody. The Planck functionBν(T )in Fig. 9 peaksat a frequency of 160 GHz, corresponding to the frequency version of Wien’s law,13νmaxT=5.88×1010Hz K−1.(59)The WMAP value for the CMB is[T0]WMAP=2.725±0.002 K,(60)remarkably close to our estimate of 3.47 K obtained from the simple estimate.13ThisversionofWien’slawmaybefoundbysettingdBν(T )/dν=0.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1284>>>

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Brightness (10–7 w/m2/steradian/cm–1)
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 202 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Frequency (cycles/centimeter)The smooth curve is the bestfit blackbody spectrum
FIGURE9The COBE measurement of the spectrum of the cosmic microwave background,which is that of a blackbody with a temperature of 2.725 K. The horizontal axis (Frequency) isactually 1/λ(cm−1); the spectrum peaks at a frequency of 160 GHz (5.35 cycles per centimeter).(Figure adapted from Mather et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,354, L37, 1990. Courtesy of NASA/GSFC and theCOBE Science Working Group.)The Dipole Anisotropy of the CMBThe cosmic microwave background suffuses the entire universe. It does not emanate fromany object but, rather, originated in the Big Bang, when the entire universe was essentiallylocated at a single point (or event) of spacetime. For this reason, all observers at rest withrespect to the Hubble ﬂow (no peculiar velocity) see the same spectrum for the CMB, withthe same intensity in all directions (the CMB is isotropic). In particular, two observers indifferent galaxies that are being carried apart by the Hubble ﬂow see the same blackbodyspectrum.14However, there is a Doppler shift of the CMB caused by an observer’s peculiar velocitythrough space, relative to the Hubble ﬂow. Using Wien’s law, a shift in wavelength can beexpressed as a change in the temperature of the blackbody radiation. For example, a slightblueshift (smallerλmax) would correspond to a slightly higher temperature. Suppose an ob-server at rest relative to the Hubble ﬂow determines that the cosmic microwave backgroundhasatemperatureTrest. Then,thetemperaturemeasuredbyanobserverwithapeculiarvelocityvrelative to the Hubble ﬂow isTmoving=Trest/radicalbig1−v2/c21−(v/c)cosθ,(61)14It is assumed that the two observers agree on the age of the universe when their measurements are made. Ofcourse, each galaxy views the other as it appeared at an earlier time.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1285>>>

whereθis the angle between the direction of observation and the direction of motion.Both observers see a blackbody spectrum, but the moving observer measures a slightlyhotter temperature in the forward direction (θ=0) and a slightly cooler temperature in theopposite direction. If the peculiar velocity isv≪c, thenTmoving≃Trest/parenleftBig1+vccosθ/parenrightBig(62)(the proof is left as an exercise). The second term on the right-hand side, called thedipoleanisotropyof the CMB, has been detected and measured; see Fig. 10. The temperaturevariation indicates that the peculiar velocity of the Sun relative to the Hubble ﬂow is 370.6±0.4k ms−1in the direction(α, δ)=(11.2h,−7◦), between the constellations of Leo andCrater. Of course, the Sun is orbiting the Galaxy, and the Milky Way is moving within theLocal Group of galaxies. When these motions are accounted for, the peculiar motion of theLocal Group relative to the Hubble ﬂow is about 627 km s−1toward(α, δ)=(11.1h,−27◦),in the middle of the constellation Hydra. From this observation and measurements of thevelocities of other galaxies and clusters of galaxies, astronomers have discovered a large-scale streaming motion of thousands of galaxies at∼600 km s−1in the direction of(α, δ)=(13.3h,−44◦)in the constellation Centaurus. The Hydra–Centaurus supercluster is alsobeing carried along in this riverlike perturbation of the Hubble ﬂow.After the dipole anisotropy has been subtracted from the CMB, the remaining radiationis incredibly isotropic, having nearly equal intensity in all directions. Sensitive instruments,however, have revealed that the CMB does have hotter and cooler areas. The CMB appearsas a patchwork of small regions, about 1◦degree or less in diameter, where the temperaturedeparts from the average value (T0) by about one part in 105. Careful observations andanalyses of these regions by WMAP and various ground-based and balloon-borne experi-ments have produced the ﬁrst precision measurement of cosmological parameters.
FIGURE10The dipole anisotropy in the CMB caused by the Sun’s peculiar velocity, shownin Galactic coordinates. The ﬁgure is a combination of observations made at 53 GHz and 90 GHz.Lighter shades are somewhat hotter, and darker shades are somewhat cooler, than the 2.725-K CMB.The horizontal bright feature is due to Galactic sources. (Figure from Smoot et al.,Ap. J. Lett.,371,L1, 1991.)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1286>>>

WewillcontinuetousetheWMAPvaluesoftheseparametersthroughoutthischapter.The Sunyaev–Zel’dovich EffectIt should be emphasized that an observer in a galaxy being carried along with the Hubbleﬂow (no peculiar velocity) does not measure a Doppler shift of the CMB. An observer in adistant galaxy receding from us at an appreciable fraction of the speed of light sees the sameCMB spectrum that we do. Evidence of this is produced when low-energy photons of theCMB pass through the hot (≃108K) ionized intracluster gas in a rich cluster of galaxies.A small fraction (typically 10−3to 10−2) of the photons are scattered to higher energiesby the high-energy electrons in the gas. Thisinverse Compton scatteringincreases thefrequency of a scattered photon by an average amountχDeltaφνofχDeltaφνν=4kTemec2,(63)whereTeisthetemperatureoftheelectrongas.TheresultingdistortionoftheCMBspectrum,showninFig.11,iscalledthethermalSunyaev–Zel’dovicheffect[named for two Russians, astrophysicist Rashid Sunyaev and physicist Yakov Zel’dovich(1914–1987)].15Although the spectrum no longer has the precise shape of a blackbody,its translation to higher frequencies may be used to deﬁne an effective decreaseχDeltaφTin thetemperatureT0of the CMB of approximately16χDeltaφTT0≃−2kTemec2τ(64)whereτis the optical depth of the intracluster gas along the line of sight. Typical valuesofχDeltaφT /T0are a few times 10−4. Observations of the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect for manyclusters of galaxies conﬁrm that it is independent of the cluster’s redshift, as expected if theCMB spectrum observed at a cluster is not affected by the cluster’s recessional velocity.Figure 12 shows the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect surrounding two clusters of galaxies. Inaddition to conﬁrming the cosmological nature of the CMB, the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effectis a promising probe of the properties and evolution of rich clusters of galaxies in the earlyuniverse.Does the CMB Constitute a Preferred Frame of Reference?It may seem to you that the frame of reference in which the CMB appears isotropic is apreferred frame of reference that istruly motionless, in violation of the postulates of specialrelativity.Weshouldremember,however,thatgeneralrelativityisconcernedwithlocalinertial reference frames.There is no single frame15If the cluster has a peculiar velocity, the bulk motion of the intracluster gas produces an additional Doppler shiftof the scattered photons. This smaller perturbation of the CMB spectrum is called the kinetic Sunyaev–Zel’dovicheffect.16The leading coefﬁcient in Eq. ( 64) is equal to−2 only on the Rayleigh–Jeans (long-wavelength) side of thespectrum.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1287>>>

102050100200500Intensity (MJy sr–1)10 52 1 0.5Wavelength (mm)
20 50 100 200 500Frequency (GHz)FIGURE11The undistorted CMB spectrum (dashed line) and the spectrum distorted by theSunyaev–Zel’dovich effect (solid line). In a rich cluster of galaxies, CMB photons may be scatteredto higher frequencies by colliding with the electrons in the hot intracluster gas. For frequencies lessthan the peak frequency, more photons are scattered out of a frequency interval than into it, so theintensity at that frequency decreases. Similarly, for frequencies greater than the peak frequency, fewerphotons are scattered out of a frequency interval than into it, so the intensity at that frequency increases.The net result is a shift of the CMB spectrum to higher frequencies. The calculated distortion has beenexaggerated by employing a ﬁctional cluster 1000 times more massive than a typical rich cluster ofgalaxies. (Figure adapted from Carlstrom, Holder, and Reese,Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,40, 646,2002. Reproduced with permission from theAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, V olume40, ©2002 by Annual Reviews Inc.)of reference that is capable of covering the entire universe. Although we can deﬁne a localreference frame at rest relative to the glow of the CMB, we can also deﬁne a local referenceframe at rest relative to the motions of nearby stars (the local standard of rest).Both of these local inertial reference frames measure velocities relative toan arbitrary standard of rest and do not violate the tenets of relativity.A Two-Component Model of the UniverseRecall that in Section 1 we considered the expansion of a universe with a single compo-nent, pressureless dust, that was slowing down due to its own self-gravity. According to therelativistic equivalence of mass and energy, however, the effect of the cosmic microwavebackground on the expansion must also be included. In fact, we now know that the gravita-tional effect of the CMB photons dominated the dynamics of the early universe, althoughtheir effect is completely negligible in the present universe.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1288>>>

17181920222123242536º26'
0809111012141315161766º18'Declination (J2000)
Declination (J2000)08h43m15s00 42m45s16h34m45s30 15 0030 1535m45sRight ascension (J2000)Right ascension (J2000)1020300100200
FIGURE12Radio contours showing the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect superimposed on ROSATimages of the clusters Abell 697 (χDeltaφT=1047µK,z=0.282) and Abell 2218 (χDeltaφT=797µK,z=0.171). The contour interval is 60µJy (left) and 80µJy (right). The dashed contours indicatea decrease in the received radio ﬂux density. (Figure adapted from Jones et al.,MNRAS,357, 518,2005.)To incorporate this new feature, we introduce a two-component model of the universe,one that includes both the total density of matter (baryonic and dark),ρm, and the equiv-alent mass density of relativistic particles (such as neutrinos and CMB photons),ρrel.I tis the equation of stateP=wu(Eq. 52) that determines whether we count a particleas matter (wm=0), a relativistic particle (a photon or neutrino, for whichwrel=1/3), or(in Section 3) dark energy (wχLambdaφ=−1). (The gravitational effect of the neutrinos’ massclearly persists; however, we will neglect the neutrinos’ contribution to the value ofχOmegaφm,0of roughly 0.003.)Equation ( 53) shows that particles belonging to different categories are diluted dif-ferently by the expansion of the universe. Of course, at earlier epochs when the universewas much hotter, even massive particles were relativistic. For example, an electron gas atT>6×109K haskT > mec2, implying that the electron gas is relativistic and its equa-tionofstateisdescribedbywrel=1/3.However,wewillignoresuchcomplicationsfortheremainderofthischapterandwillconsiderphotonsandneutrinosasouronlyrelativisticparticles.With both matter and relativistic particles included, Eq. ( 10) becomes/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG(ρm+ρrel)/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.(65)The equivalent mass density of the CMB photons comes from the energy density of black-body radiation,urad=aT4,(66)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1289>>>

whereais the radiation constant. We will rewrite this in the formurad=12gradT4,(67)wheregradis the number ofdegrees of freedomof a photon. The value ofgreﬂects thenumber of spin statesnspinand the possible existence of an antiparticle (nanti=1 or 2). Aphoton is its own antiparticle (nanti=1) and can exist innspin=2 spin states, correspondingto its two possible polarizations with its spin parallel or antiparallel to its motion. Thusgrad=2(68)for photons, as expected.Neutrino DecouplingWe will neglect the small mass of the other relativistic particle we are considering, the neu-trino, and treat it as a massless particle. The very early universe was sufﬁciently dense thatneutrinos attained thermal equilibrium, with a spectrum very similar to that of blackbodyradiation,exceptthe“−1”inthedenominatorofthatequationbecomesa“+1”forneutrinos.Thisoccursbecausephotonsarebosons,describedbyBose–Einsteinstatis-tics, while neutrinos are fermions, described by Fermi–Dirac statistics.Although the cosmic neutrino background has yet to be observed (not surprising given thechallenge of detecting solar neutrinos), we have conﬁdence that it exists.Recall that there are three types (or ﬂavors) of neutrinos—electron neutrinos, muonneutrinos, and tau neutrinos—and that each neutrino has a corresponding antineutrino. Thetotal energy density of all three ﬂavors is given byuν=3×78×aT4ν=2.625aT4ν,(69)where the 7/8 derives from the “+1” in the expression for Fermi–Dirac statistics, andTνis the temperature of the neutrinos. As before, we write this asuν=12/parenleftbigg78/parenrightbigggνT4ν,(70)wheregν=6(71)for neutrinos.In general,g=(# types)nantinspin.(72)There is an antineutrino for each of the three types of neutrino sonanti=2, and neutrinoshave one spin state (all neutrinos are left-handed) sonspin=1. We therefore recovergν=3×2×1=6.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1290>>>

The usualTin cosmology is always taken to be the temperature of the blackbodyphotons. However, theTνin Eq. ( 70) is the temperature of the neutrinos. ForT>3.5×1010K, these temperatures are the same, andT=Tν. However, as the temperaturedropped below about 3.5×1010K, the expansion of the universe diluted the number densityof neutrinos, and the neutrinos ceased to interact with other particles. Essentially, the cosmosexpanded faster than the neutrino interaction rate, and the neutrinos decoupled from theother constituents of the universe. Since the time ofneutrino decoupling, the neutrinoshave expanded and cooled at their own rate, independently of the CMB.The Energy Density of Relativistic ParticlesBecause the annihilation of electrons with positrons continued to supply energy to the pho-tons (viae−+e+→γ+γ) but not to the neutrinos, the neutrino temperature is somewhatless than the temperature of the CMB photons. Although it is beyond the scope of this book,it can be shown thatTνis related to the temperatureTof the CMB photons byTν=/parenleftbigg411/parenrightbigg1/3T.(73)The total neutrino energy density is thereforeuν=12/parenleftbigg78/parenrightbigggν/parenleftbigg411/parenrightbigg4/3aT4=0.681aT4.(74)Thus the energy density for relativistic particles, both photons and neutrinos, isurel=12g∗T4,(75)whereg∗=grad+/parenleftbigg78/parenrightbigggν/parenleftbigg411/parenrightbigg4/3=3.363(76)is theeffective number of degrees of freedomof the relativistic particles. We also deﬁnethe equivalent mass density of relativistic particles asρrel=urelc2=g∗T42c2.(77)This value ofg∗is valid back to the end of electron–positron annihilation, at aboutt=1.3s .For the higher temperatures of the very early universe (t<1 s),however, we will encounter a greater number of relativistic particles, and the value ofg∗will grow accordingly.The factors of 7/8 and(4/11)4/3do not describe degrees of freedom, and therefore we separate them from thedeﬁnition ofgν.17
17Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1291>>>

Employing Eq. ( 8), Eq. ( 65) becomesH2[1−(χOmegaφm+χOmegaφrel)]R2=−kc2,(78)whereχOmegaφm=ρmρc=8πG ρm3H2(79)is the density parameter for matter (both baryonic and dark), andχOmegaφrel=ρrelρc=8πG ρrel3H2=4πGg∗aT43H2c2(80)is the density parameter for relativistic particles (both photons and neutrinos). Note thatEq. ( 78) implies that for a ﬂat (k=0) two-component universe,χOmegaφm+χOmegaφrel=1. InsertingT0=2.725 K, we ﬁnd thatχOmegaφrel,0=8.24×10−5,which is very small compared with[χOmegaφm,0]WMAP=0.27.Transition from the Radiation Era to the Matter EraRecalling thatwrel=1/3 for relativistic particles, Eq. ( 53) yieldsR4ρrel=ρrel,0,(81)which shows how the equivalent mass density of relativistic particles varies with the scalefactorR. By comparing this with Eq. ( 5),R3ρm=ρm,0,(82)for massive particles, we notice thatρrelincreases more rapidly than the mass densityρmas the scale factor becomes smaller. AsR→0 in the early universe, therefore, there musthave been an early era when the radiation (i.e., all relativistic particles, not just photons andneutrinos) dominated and governed the expansion of the universe. The transition from thisradiation erato the presentmatter eraoccurred when the scale factor satisﬁedρrel=ρm,orχOmegaφrel=χOmegaφm.FromEqs.(79–82),theequalityofχOmegaφrelandχOmegaφmoccurredwhenthescalefactorwasRr,m=χOmegaφrelχOmegaφm,0=4.16×10−5χOmegaφ−1m,0h−2,with a WMAP value ofRr,m=3.05×10−4.This corresponds to a redshift (Eq. 4) ofzr,m=1Rr,m−1=2.41×104χOmegaφm,0h2,Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1292>>>

which for WMAP values iszr,m=3270.This is in very good agreement with the WMAP result,[zr,m]WMAP=3233+194−210,for the redshift when the the universe passed from being radiation-dominated to beingmatter-dominated.UsingRT=T0(Eq. 58), the temperature at this transition wasTr,m=T0Rr,m=6.56×104χOmegaφm,0h2K,orTr,m=8920 Kusing WMAP values. Thus, when the universe had cooled to 8920 K and typical separationswere some 4×10−5of their present extent, relativistic particles ceased to govern the cosmicexpansion, and matter assumed a dominant role.Expansion in the Two-Component ModelWe are now ready to determine how the early universe expanded with time. To discover howthe scale factor,R, behaved during the radiation era, we begin by substituting Eqs. ( 81)and ( 82) into Eq. ( 65) to ﬁnd/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG/parenleftBigρm,0R+ρrel,0R2/parenrightBig/bracketrightBigg=−kc2.(83)Because the early universe was essentially ﬂat, we can setk=0 and use a bit of algebra toobtain/integraldisplayR0R′dR′/radicalbigρm,0R′+ρrel,0=/radicalbigg8πG3/integraldisplayt0dt′.Integrating this eventually yields an expression for the age of the universe as a function ofthe scale factorR:t(R)=23R3/2r,mH0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/bracketleftBigg2+/parenleftbiggRRr,m−2/parenrightbigg/radicalBiggRRr,m+1/bracketrightBigg,(84)where23R3/2r,mH0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0=5.51×1010h−4χOmegaφ−2m,0s=1.75×103h−4χOmegaφ−2m,0yr.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1293>>>

The timetr,mof the transition from a radiation-dominated to a matter-dominated universemay be found by settingR/Rr,m=1 and using WMAP values ofh=0.71 andχOmegaφm,0=0.27to obtaintr,m=1.74×1012s=5.52×104yr.(85)The form of Eq. ( 84) becomes simpler deep in the radiation era, whenR≪Rr,m.I tis left for youto show that in this limit the factors ofχOmegaφm,0cancel, resultingR(t)=/parenleftbigg16πGg∗a3c2/parenrightbigg1/4T0t1/2(86)=(1.51×10−10s−1/2)g1/4∗t1/2.(87)This shows that during the radiation era,R∝t1/2. UsingT=T0/Rquickly reveals thetemperature deep in the radiation era:T (t)=/parenleftbigg3c216πGg∗a/parenrightbigg1/4t−1/2(88)=(1.81×1010Ks1/2)g−1/4∗t−1/2.(89)At the other extreme, forR≫Rr,m, Eq. ( 84) becomest(R)=23R3/2H0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0(90)soR(t)=/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/parenrightbigg2/3=/parenleftBigg3/radicalbigχOmegaφm,02/parenrightBigg2/3/parenleftbiggttH/parenrightbigg2/3,(91)usingtH=1/H0for the Hubble time. As expected, this displays theR∝t2/3dependencewe found earlier in Eq. ( 30) for a ﬂat universe of pressureless dust. Equation ( 90) canbe expressed in terms ofzusingR=1/(1+z)to obtaint(z)tH=231(1+z)3/2/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0,(92)which may be compared with Eq. ( 40) for a ﬂat universe of pressureless dust. Evaluatingthese forR=1(z=0) and using WMAP values gives the age of the universe as 12.5 billionyears, a billion years more than the mean age of the oldest globular clusters.However, as we will see later, this estimate of the age of the universe is still about one billionyears too short, as determined by a full analysis of the WMAP results.Cosmology
in


<<<PAGE 1294>>>

Big Bang NucleosynthesisThe process that manufactured the lightest elements in the early universe is known asBigBang nucleosynthesis. We are now prepared to ask, why is approximately one-quarterof the mass of the universe in the form of helium? The temperature at timetduring theradiation era is given by Eq. ( 89). At a temperature just below 1012K(t∼10−4s),the universe contained a mixture of photons (γ), electron–positron pairs, and electron andmuon neutrinos and their antiparticles (νe,νµ,νe,νµ). There were also a smaller numberof protons and neutrons, about ﬁve for every 1010photons, that were constantly beingtransformed into each other via the reactionsn/harpoonleftrightp++e−+νe(93)n+e+/harpoonleftrightp++νe(94)n+νe/harpoonleftrightp++e−.(95)These constant conversions were easily accomplished because the mass difference betweena proton and a neutron is only(mp−mn)c2=1.293 MeV,while the characteristic thermal energy of particles at 1012Ki skT≃86 MeV . The Boltz-mann equation gives the equilibrium ratio of the number density of neutrons,nn,to the number density of protons,np, asnnnp=e−(mp−mn)c2/kT.(96)At 1012K, this ratio is 0.985. The numbers of neutrons and protons were nearly equalbecause the mass difference between the protons and neutrons is negligible at such a hightemperature.As the universe expanded and the temperature fell, the ratio of the number densities con-tinuedtobegivenbyEq.(96)aslongasreactions(93–95)proceededfastenoughto reach equilibrium. Detailed calculations show, however, that when the temperature haddeclined to about 1010K, the timescale for these reactions exceeded the characteristictimescale of the expansion given by 1/H(t)=2t.At a bit above 1010K, the reaction rates decreased signiﬁcantly, for two reasons. First,the expansion had reduced the energy of the neutrinos until they were unable to participatein reactions (93–95). Also, shortly thereafter, the characteristic thermal energy of thephotons,kT, fell below the 1.022-MeV threshold for creating electron–positron pairs viathepair-productionprocessγ→e−+e+.Asaresult,theelectronsandpositronsannihilatedeachotherwithoutbeingreplaced,leavingonlyasmallremainderofexcesselectrons.Forthesereasons,theneutronscouldnotbereplenishedasfastastheywere destroyed, and there was not enough time for these reactions to reach equilibrium.In a sense, the creation of new neutrons could not keep up with the rate of expansionCosmology


<<<PAGE 1295>>>

of the universe. The ratio of the number densities then became “frozen” at its value ofnn/np=0.223 whenT≃1010K.At this point, there were 223 neutrons for every 1000 protons (or 446 neutrons for every2000 protons, which will be used in what follows), and essentially no more neutrons werebeing created. The beta decay reaction [the forward reaction in Eq. ( 93)] continuedto operate, however, converting neutrons into protons with a half-life ofτ1/2=614 s=10.2 min. It was not yet possible for the protons and neutrons to combine to form deuteriumnuclei (21H) viap++n/harpoonleftright21H+γ,because at temperatures exceeding 109K, the energetic radiation quickly dissociated thenuclei.Asaresult,theneutronsandprotonsremainedseparateduntilthetemperaturehaddroppedfrom1010Kt o1 09K.AccordingtoEq.(89)withg∗=3.363,thistookapproximatelyt(109K)−t(1010K)=178 s−1.78 s≈176 s.From the law of radioactive decay,in this amount of time the 446 neutronsmentionedpreviouslydeclinedto366,andthenumberofprotonsroseto2080.Below109Ktheneutronsandprotonsreadilycombinedtoformasmanydeuteriumnucleiaspossible.Anumberofreactionsthenledtotheformationof42He, the most tightlyboundnucleusinvolvedinBigBangnucleosynthesis.Themostefﬁcientreactionsleadingto42He include21H+21H/harpoonleftright31H+11H31H+21H/harpoonleftright42He+nand21H+21H/harpoonleftright32He+n32He+21H/harpoonleftright42He+11H.[Note that these reactions differ from those of the pp chain,whichproduceheliuminthecoresofstars.]Noothernucleiwereformedwithabundancesapproachingthatof42He, although there were traces of21H,32He, and73Li(fromthereaction42He+31H→73Li+γ).Figure13showsthenetworkofreactionsinvolvedinBigBangnucleosynthesis.Oursampleof366neutronsand2080protonscouldform18342He nuclei,with1714protons(11H)leftover.Becausea42Henucleusisfourtimesmoremassivethana11Hnucleus,theprecedinganalysisshowsthatthemassfractionof42Heintheuniverseshould have been about4(183)1714+4(183)=0.299.The most obvious route to helium-4 is21H+21H/harpoonleftright42He+γ. However, this is a “forbidden” reaction and has anegligibly small cross section.18
18Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1296>>>

1H2Hn3H3He4He7Be7Li
1254891011127631. p ¨ Æ n2. p(n, /H9253)d3. d(p, /H9253)3He4. d(d, n)3He5. d(d, p)t6. t(d, n)4He7. t(/H9251, /H9253)7Li8. 3He(n, p)t9. 3He(d, p)4He10. 3He(/H9251, /H9253)7Be11. 7Li(p, /H9251)4He12. 7Be(n, p)7LiFIGURE13The reaction network that is responsible for Big Bang nucleosynthesis. The letter“d” stands for deuterium, and “t” stands for tritium. (Figure adapted from Nollett and Burles,Phys.Rev. D,61, 123505, 2000.)This rough estimate is consistent with the primordial percentage of helium inferred fromobservations, between 23% and 24%.Because essentially all of the available neutrons were incorporated in the helium-4 (42He)nuclei, the abundance of helium-4 was insensitive to the density of the universe at the time.However, the amounts of deuterium, helium-3, and lithium-7 manufactured in this waydepend sensitively on the density of ordinary matter at the time of the reactions. Figure 14shows the abundances of these nuclei as a function of the prevailingpresentdensity ofbaryonic matter. Comparing the theoretical curves with the observations makes it apparentthat the present density of baryonic matter probably lies between 2 and 5×10−28kg m−3,only a few percent of the critical density of 1.88×10−26h2kg m−3. This explanation of theabundances of the light elements that were not manufactured by stars is one of the greatestachievements of the Big Bang theory.The Origin of the Cosmic Microwave BackgroundNow that we have described the nature of the universal expansion, let’s return to the questionof the origin of the CMB. When we observe the cosmic microwave background, what are weactually viewing? The copious electrons in the hot environment of the very early universeobstructed the photons of the cosmic microwave background, allowing them to travel onlyrelatively short distances before being scattered. The scattering of photons by free electronskept the electrons and photons in thermal equilibrium, meaning that they had the sametemperature. However, as the expansion of the universe diluted the number density ofThe CMB photons are also scattered by free protons, but the cross section for photon–proton scattering issmallerthantheThomsoncrosssectionforelectrons,byafactorofm2e/m2p,soitcanbeneglected.TheCoulombinteractionbetweentheelectronsandprotonskepttheprotonsinthermalequilibriumwiththeelectronsandphotons.1919Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1297>>>

10–1010–910–710–810–610–510–410–310–210–1Abundances7Li3He4HeD
Critical density forH0 = 71 km s–1 Mpc–1
0.001 0.01 0.1 1Wbh2FIGURE14The calculated mass abundances of helium-4, deuterium, helium-3, and lithium-7 as a function of the present density of baryonic matter in the universe. The wide bar delineatesthe consistency interval, the range of values ofχOmegaφb,0h2that agree with the observed abundances.The narrow dark stripe at the right edge of the consistency interval corresponds to the abundancesof primeval deuterium measured using the Lyman-αforest of absorption lines in high-zmolecularclouds observed in front of quasars. The WMAP value ofχOmegaφb,0h2=0.0224 runs down the center ofthe dark stripe, and the WMAP value of the critical density (χOmegaφb,0h2=1h2=0.504) is shown at theright. Note that the agreement between the theoretical and observed abundances spans nine orders ofmagnitude. (Figure adapted from Schramm and Turner,Rev. Mod. Phys.,70, 303, 1998.)free electrons, the average time between scatterings of a photon by an electron graduallyapproached the characteristic timescale of the universal expansion,τexp(t)≡/parenleftbigg1R(t)dR(t)dt/parenrightbigg−1=1H(t).This expression is analogous to that of the pressure scale height.As the time ofdecouplingapproached, the photons became increasingly disengaged from the electrons.If the electrons had remained free, decoupling would have occurred when the universewasabout20millionyearsold.However,whentheuniversewasonlysomeonemillionyearsold(1013s),anotherimportanteventalteredtheopacityoftheCosmology
universeand


<<<PAGE 1298>>>

renderedittransparent.Theindependentevolutionofradiationandmatterbeganwhenthetemperaturehadcooledsufﬁcientlytoallowthefreeelectronstocombinewithnucleiofhydrogenandhelium.Thisformationofneutralatomsissometimesreferredto asrecombination, an oddly inappropriate term since the electrons and nuclei had neverbeen previously combined into atoms! The loss of free electrons and the resulting dropin opacity completed the decoupling of radiation and matter, freeing the photons to roamunhindered throughout a newly transparent universe. The photons of the cosmic microwavebackground that we observe today were last scattered during the time of recombination.The Surface of Last ScatteringWe deﬁne thesurface of last scatteringas a spherical surface, centered on the Earth, fromwhich the CMB photons just now arriving at Earth were last scattered before beginningtheir unimpeded journey to us. (Of course, other observers in the universe are at the centersof their own surfaces of last scattering.) The surface of last scattering is the farthest redshiftwe can possibly observe at this moment in time. More accurately, because recombinationdid not happen all at once, the surface of last scattering has a thicknessχDeltaφz. Just as the lightfrom the Sun was last scattered from somewhere within its photosphere, the CMB photonsoriginated within a layer, the “surface” of last scattering.20The surface of last scatteringcan therefore be thought of as a curtain that screens everything prior to decoupling fromthe direct view of astronomers. The earliest moments of the universe are hidden behind thisveil and must be investigated indirectly.The Conditions at RecombinationThe temperature at recombination can be estimated through use of the Saha equation,NIINI=2ZIIneZI/parenleftbigg2πmekTh2/parenrightbigg3/2e−χI/kT.Assuming (incorrectly) a composition of pure hydrogen for simplicity, we useZI=2 andZII=1.It is useful to deﬁnefto be the fraction of hydrogen atomsthat are ionized, sof=NIINI+NII=NII/NI1+NII/NI,(97)orNIINI=f1−f.(98)20The difference between the Sun’s photosphere and the surface of last scattering is that the photosphere has aspatial thickness, while the surface of last scattering has a thickness in terms of redshift or, equivalently, time.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1299>>>

For ionized hydrogen there is one free electron for every proton,ne=np, so the numberdensity of free electrons depends onfasne=np=f (np+nH)=fρbmH,(99)whereρbis the density of baryonic matter. Note that in obtaining Eq. ( 99) fromEq. ( 97),NIcorresponds tonH, the number density of neutral hydrogen atoms, andNIIcorresponds tonp, the number density of protons (ionized hydrogen atoms). UsingEq. ( 82), we can write this asne(R)=fρb,0mHR3,(100)Substituting Eqs. ( 98) and ( 100) into the Saha equation, together with Eq. ( 58) forthe blackbody temperature, we ﬁndf1−f=mHR3fρb,0/parenleftbigg2πmekT0h2R/parenrightbigg3/2e−χIR/kT0,(101)whereT0=2.725 K andχI=13.6 eV . This can be solved numerically to ﬁnd that theuniverse had cooled sufﬁciently for one-half of its electrons and protons to combine toform atomic hydrogen (f=0.5) when the value of the scale factor was approximatelyR≈7.25×10−4(z≈1380), corresponding to a temperature of about 3760 K [again fromEq. ( 58)].More precisely, the WMAP value for the redshift at the time of decoupling (i.e., thesurface of last scattering) is[zdec]WMAP=1089±1.We will adopt this as the value of the redshift for both recombination and decoupling. UsingEqs. ( 4) and ( 58) yields a temperature at recombination ofTdec=T0(1+zdec)=2970 K.This is lower than our estimate of 3760 K because the photons created by the formationof some atoms were then absorbed by other atoms, putting these atoms into excited statesfrom which they were easier to ionize. Thus a slightly cooler temperature was neededto complete the recombination process. It is important to remember that at times earlierthan recombination, the radiation and matter shared a common temperature, whereas afterrecombination, the temperatures of the radiation and matter must be distinguished. For theremainder of the text, it is the radiation temperature (the temperature of the CMB) that willbe of interest after recombination.The WMAP value for the time at which recombination and decoupling occurred is[tdec]WMAP=379+8−7kyr.(102)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1300>>>

Of course, these events did not occur at a single instant of time; the WMAP value of thedecoupling time interval is[χDeltaφtdec]WMAP=118+3−2kyr.This corresponds to the surface of last scattering having a thickness (in redshift) of[χDeltaφzdec]WMAP=195±2.The Dawn of Precision CosmologyBefore ending this section, it is worth taking a few moments to reﬂect on the power ofsimple mathematics to illuminate the earliest stages of the universe. Before the discovery ofthe cosmic microwave background, theorizing about the early universe was not consideredto be legitimate science by many physicists. The point is well made by Steven Weinberg inhis bookThe First Three Minutes:This is often the way it is in physics—our mistake is not that we take ourtheories too seriously, but that we do not take them seriously enough. It isalways hard to realize that these numbers and equations we play with at ourdesks have something to do with the real world....The most important thingaccomplished by the ultimate discovery of the 3◦K radiation background in1965 was to force us all to take seriously the idea that therewasan earlyuniverse.The results of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe have now taken cosmology toa level that was hardly imaginable when the ﬁrst edition ofAn Introduction to ModernAstrophysicswas published in 1996. In remarks made at the WMAP press conference onFebruary 11, 2003, astrophysicist John Bahcall said,Every astronomer will remember where he or she was when they ﬁrst heard theWMAP results. I certainly will....For cosmology, the formal announcementtoday represents a “rite of passage” from speculation to precision science.RELATIVISTIC COSMOLOGYThe appearance of objects at truly cosmological distances is affected by the curvature of thespacetime through which the light travels on its way to Earth. The geometrical propertiesof the universe as a whole will be best understood by starting with simple analogies beforeproceeding to the more comprehensive description that only Einstein’s general theory ofrelativity can provide.Euclidean, Elliptic, and Hyperbolic GeometriesThe foundations of plane geometry (appropriate for a ﬂat universe) were laid by Euclidsometime around 300b.c.Euclid’sElementsconsists of 13 “books” (chapters) that contain465 theorems. These theorems, in turn, are derived from just ﬁve postulates that embodyself-evident truths and so are stated without proof. In Euclid’s words,Cosmology
3


<<<PAGE 1301>>>

1. It is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any point.2. It is possible to produce [extend] a ﬁnite straight line continuously in a straight line.3. It is possible to describe a circle with any center and distance [radius].4. All right angles are equal to one another.Euclid’s statement of his ﬁfth postulate is awkward and opaque:5. If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the sameside less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indeﬁnitely, meeton the side on which the angles are less than the two right angles.A moment’s thought will show that Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate concerns the behavior of parallellines.21It is equivalent to the following statement, due to an English mathematician, JohnPlayfair (1748–1819):5a. Given, in a plane, a lineLand a pointPnot onL, then throughPthere exists oneand only one line parallel toL.Figure 15(a) illustrates Playfair’s version of the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry.The cumbersome statement of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate led some mathematicians to sus-pect that it might be derived from the ﬁrst four. In the nineteenth century, mathematiciansmounted an attack on the parallel postulate by denying it, in hopes that they would reach acontradiction. Such a proof by contradiction would make the ﬁfth postulate dependent on therest of geometry and so abolish its stature as an independent postulate. To their astonishment,instead of arriving at a contradiction as they expected, several renowned mathematiciansrealized that they had developedalternativegeometries, each as self-consistent as Euclid’s.
PPPLLL(a)(b)(c)FIGURE15The parallel postulate, illustrated for three alternative geometries: (a) Euclidean,(b) elliptic, and (c) hyperbolic.21Euclid deﬁnes parallel lines as “straight lines which, being in the same plane and being produced indeﬁnitely inboth directions, do not meet one another in either direction.”Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1302>>>

Foremost among these mathematicians were Carl Frederich Gauss (1777–1855), NikolaiLobachevski (1793–1856), János Bolyai (1802–1860), and Bernhard Riemann (1826–1866). There arethreedifferent ﬁfth postulates, each of which leads to a perfectly well-behaved geometry. In 1868 it was proved that the two additional, non-Euclidean geometriesare as logically consistent as Euclid’s original version. In addition to Playfair’s version ofthe parallel postulate given above for Euclidean geometry, there is the ﬁfth postulate of theelliptic geometry developed by Riemann:5b. Given, in a plane, a lineLand a pointPnot onL, then throughPthere existsnolineparallel toL.As Fig. 15(b) shows, this describes the geometry of the surface of a sphere, where twolines that both start out perpendicular to the sphere’s equator meet at its poles. In ellipticgeometry, the angles of a triangle add up tomorethan 180◦, and the circumference of acircle is less than 2πr.On the other hand, the ﬁfth postulate of the hyperbolic geometry, developed indepen-dently by Gauss, Bolyai, and Lobachevski, is more generous than Euclid’s:5c. Given, in a plane, a lineLand a pointPnot onL, then throughPthere existat leasttwo linesparallel toL.Figure 15(c) shows this geometry applied to a saddle-shaped hyperboloid. Neither ofthe two lines shown passing through pointPintersects the lineL, and it is possible to draw(in this example) inﬁnitely many more. In hyperbolic geometry, the angles of a triangle addup tolessthan 180◦, and the circumference of a circle exceeds 2πr.The logical independence of the parallel postulate means that it cannot be derived fromEuclid’s earlier postulates. Which geometry to adopt is an arbitrary choice, since all threeare equally valid from a mathematical viewpoint. Which of these three geometries describesthe spatial structure of the physical universe is a question that must be answeredempirically,by observation. Gauss himself conducted such an experiment beginning in 1820, when hedirected a survey of the Germanic state of Hanover. After carefully measuring the distancesbetween three mountaintops that formed a huge triangle (the longest side was 107 km),he determined that the sum of the triangle’s angles was 180◦—within experimental error.Gauss’s experiment was not sensitive enough to measure the curvature of space near Earth’ssurface.The Robertson–Walker Metric for Curved SpacetimeThe spacetime surrounding any massive object is indeed curved.ThespatialcurvatureisrevealedintheradialtermoftheSchwarzschildmetricHowever, the Schwarzschild metric is valid only outside matter. We will haveto ﬁnd another metric to describe the spacetime of the dust-ﬁlled universe of Section 1.Although a derivation of this metric is beyond the scope of this book, the following ar-gument should help elucidate some of its properties. Our search for the metric is madesomewhat easier by the cosmological principle. In a homogeneous and isotropic universe,although the curvature of space may change with time, the curvature must have the samevalue everywhere at a given time since the Big Bang.Cosmology
.


<<<PAGE 1303>>>

Let’s begin by considering the curvature of a two-dimensional surface. “Curvature” hasa precise mathematical meaning; for example, a sphere of radiusRhas a constant curvature,K, that is deﬁned to beK≡1/R2. Gauss realized that the curvature of any surface can bedeterminedlocally, on an arbitrarily small patch of its surface. It is instructive to imaginehow the curvature of a sphere of radiusRmight be measured by a tiny (but talented) anton the sphere’s surface. It is free to roam about the sphere’s surface but is unable to gain anoutside perspective and view the sphere as a whole. How could the inquisitive ant determinethe sphere’s curvature?Starting at the north pole of the sphere (call this pointP; see Fig. 16), the ant couldmark a series of other points all of which are a distanceDfromP. When connected, thesepoints form a circle withPat its center. The ant now measures the circumference,Cmeas,of the circle and compares it with the expected value ofCexp=2πD. However, the twovalues do not agree; sinceD=Rθ,Cexp=2πRθwhileCmeas=2πRsinθ=2πRsin(D/R).When the ant divides the fractional discrepancy between these two values of the circumfer-ence by the expected area of the circle,Aexp=πD2, and then multiplies by 6π, the result(in the limitD→0) is the curvature of the sphere. That is, the ant starts with6π·Cexp−CmeasCexpAexp=6π·2πD−Cmeas(2πD)(πD2)=3π2πD−CmeasD3.
R/H9258DPR sin /H9258
FIGURE16A local measurement of the curvature of a sphere.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1304>>>

Substituting forCmeas, the clever ant then uses a Taylor series for sin(D/R),3π2πD−2πRsin(D/R)D3=6D3/braceleftBiggD−R/bracketleftBiggDR−13!/parenleftbiggDR/parenrightbigg3+15!/parenleftbiggDR/parenrightbigg5+···/bracketrightBigg/bracerightBigg=1R2−120D2R4+···.In the limitD→0, this is 1/R2, the curvature of the sphere. In fact, the prescriptionK=3πlimD→02πD−CmeasD3(103)can be used to calculate the curvature at any point on a two-dimensional surface; seeFig. 17. For a ﬂat plane,K=0, while for a saddle-shaped hyperboloid,Kisnegativebecause the measured circumference exceeds 2πD.22The next step toward the spacetime metric that describes a uniform dust-ﬁlled universecomes from considering how a small distance is measured in two dimensions. For a ﬂatplane, polar coordinates are an appropriate choice of variables, and the differential distancedℓbetween two nearby pointsP1andP2on the plane [see Fig. 18(a)] is given by(dℓ)2=(dr)2+(r dφ)2.Polar coordinates can also be used to measure the differential distance between twonearby points on the surface of a sphere. As an example, we will return to the surface of the
C = 2/H9266DC < 2/H9266DC > 2/H9266DZero curvaturePositive curvatureNegative curvature(a)(b)(c)
FIGURE17Calculating the curvature of a surface in three geometries: (a) a ﬂat plane, (b) thesurface of a sphere, and (c) the surface of a hyperboloid.22Unfortunately, it is not possible to visualize the negative curvature of the hyperboloid because its surface (unlikea sphere’s) has inﬁnite area. We cannot “step back” to view it as a whole.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1305>>>

xydrr
/H9278/H9258xyz
rRdP2P1P1P2d/H5129d/H9278r d/H9278d/H9258d/H9278r d/H9278R d/H9258 = dDR/H9258 = D
(a)(b)d/H5129
FIGURE18dℓas measured for (a) a ﬂat plane and (b) the surface of a sphere.sphere of radiusRand curvatureK=1/R2considered previously. Then, as shown inFig. 18(b), the distancedℓbetween two pointsP1andP2on the sphere is now given by(dℓ)2=(dD)2+(r dφ)2=(R dθ)2+(r dφ)2.Butr=Rsinθ, sodr=Rcosθd θandRdθ=drcosθ=Rdr√R2−r2=dr/radicalbig1−r2/R2.The differential distance on the sphere’s surface may therefore be written as(dℓ)2=/parenleftBiggdr/radicalbig1−r2/R2/parenrightBigg2+(r dφ)2,in terms of the plane polar coordinatesrandφ. More generally, in terms of the curvatureKof a two-dimensional surface,(dℓ)2=/parenleftbiggdr√1−Kr2/parenrightbigg2+(r dφ)2.The extension to three dimensions is accomplished simply by making a transition frompolar to spherical coordinates,(dℓ)2=/parenleftbiggdr√1−Kr2/parenrightbigg2+(r dθ)2+(rsinθd φ )2,(104)wherernow measures the radial distance from the origin.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1306>>>

Equation ( 104) shows the effect of the curvature of our three-dimensional universeon spatial distances. Although the curvature of a two-dimensional spherical surface can beseen by stepping back from the sphere and viewing it immersed in its three-dimensionalsurroundings, there is unfortunately no fourth spatial dimension into which we can stepback to view the curvature of our universe.The ﬁnal step toward the spacetime metric comes from recalling that by “distance,” wemean theproper distancebetween two spacetime events that occur simultaneously accord-ing to an observer. In an expanding universe, the positions of two points must be recordedat the same time if their separation is to have any meaning. In an isotropic, homogeneousuniverse, there is no reason why time should pass at different rates at different locations;consequently, the temporal term should simply becdt.23If we take(ds)2=(c dt)2−/parenleftbiggdr√1−Kr2/parenrightbigg2−(r dθ)2−(rsinθd φ )2asthemetricforanisotropic,homogeneousuniverse,thenfortheproperdistanceagreeswithEq.(104).Thatis,thedifferentialproperdistanceisjustdL=/radicalbig−(ds)2withdt=0.All that remains is to express this metric in terms of the dimensionless scale factor,R(t),deﬁned byr(t)=R(t)ϖ(Eq. 3). Because the expansion of the universe affects all ofits geometric properties, including its curvature, it is useful to deﬁne the time-dependentcurvature in terms of a time-independent constant,k, asK(t)≡kR2(t).(105)These substitutions forrandKresult in(ds)2=(c dt)2−R2(t)/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggdϖ√1−kϖ2/parenrightbigg2+(ϖ dθ)2+(ϖsinθd φ )2/bracketrightBigg,(106)which is known as theRobertson–Walker metric. The Robertson–Walker metric deter-mines the spacetime interval between two events in an isotropic, homogeneous universe,justastheSchwarzschildmetricisusedtomeasuretheintervalbetweentwoeventsinthecurvedspacetimesurroundingamassiveobject.ThenamehonorsHowardPercyRobertson(1903–1961)andArthurGeoffreyWalker(1909–2001),whoindependentlydemonstrated,inthemid-1930s,thatthisisthemostgeneralmetricpossiblefordescribinganisotropicandhomogeneousuniverse.In fact, we will use the same technique to deﬁneϖfor a curved spacetimetospecifytheradialcoordinater.F r o mt h eR o b e r t s o n – W a l k e rm e t r i c ,t h ea r e atoday (t=t0soR(t0)=1)ofasphericalsurfacecenteredonthepointϖ=0i s4πϖ2.Bydeﬁnition,thissurfaceislocatedatthecoordinateϖ.Itisimportanttorememberthat23You should compare this with the Schwarzschild metric,where the presence of a central massproducesamorecomplicatedtimedependence.Cosmology
theϖinEq.(106)isa


<<<PAGE 1307>>>

comovingcoordinatethatfollowsagivenobjectastheuniverseexpands.Furthermore,thetime,t,i sauniversal timethat essentially measures the time thathaselapsedsincetheBigBang.Thisisnotanabsolutetime,butmerelyreﬂectsachoiceofhowtheclocksofdistantobserversaretobesynchronized.Forexample,observersatvariouslocationsthroughouttheuniversecould,theoretically,synchronizetheirclocksusingthecosmologicalprinciplebynotingtheprecisetemperatureofthecosmicmicrowavebackgroundortheexactvalueoftheHubbleconstant.The Friedmann EquationSolvingEinstein’sﬁeldequationsforanisotropic,homogeneousuniverseleadstoadescriptionofthedynamicevolutionoftheuniverseintheformofadifferentialequationfor the scale factor,R(t). This is known as theFriedmann equation,/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG ρ/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2,(107)named for the Russian meteorologist and mathematician Aleksandr Friedmann (1888–1925).24In 1922 Friedmann solved Einstein’s ﬁeld equations for an isotropic, homogeneousuniverse to obtain this equation for a nonstatic universe. The same equation was derivedindependently in 1927 by the Belgian cleric Abbé Georges Lemaître (1894–1966).The Cosmological ConstantEinstein realized that, as originally conceived, his ﬁeld equations could not produce a staticuniverse. Hubble’s discovery of the expanding universe had not yet been made, so in 1917Einstein modiﬁed his equations by adding an ad hoc term that contained thecosmologicalconstant,χLambdaφ. With this addition, the general solution of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations is/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG ρ−13χLambdaφc2/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.(108)Except for the cosmological constant, this is the same as the Friedmann equation. Theadditional term containingχLambdaφwould result from the Newtonian cosmology of Section 1if a potential energy term,UχLambdaφ≡−16χLambdaφmc2r2,24According to general relativity, the densityρincludes the equivalent mass density of photons and neutrinos, asin Eq. ( 77).Lemaître was the ﬁrst person to propose that the present universe evolved from a highly dense beginning andso is sometimes called “the father of the Big Bang.”Some authors incorporate a factor ofc2into the deﬁnition ofχLambdaφ; in this text,χLambdaφhas units of(length)−2.25
26
2526Cosmology-


<<<PAGE 1308>>>

were added to the left-hand side of Eq. ( 1). The conservation of mechanical energyapplied to an expanding shell of massmthen becomes12mv2−GMrmr−16χLambdaφmc2r2=−12mkc2ϖ2.The force due to this new potential isFχLambdaφ=−∂UχLambdaφ∂rˆr=13χLambdaφmc2rˆr(109)which is radially outward forχLambdaφ>0. In effect, a positive cosmologicalconstant produces a repulsive force on the mass shell. This allowed Einstein to achieve hisgoal of balancing his static, closed universe against a gravitational collapse in an (unsta-ble) equilibrium. Later, after the expansion of the universe had been discovered, Einsteinexpressed his regret at including theχLambdaφ-term in his ﬁeld equations and has been quoted asreferring to it as “the biggest blunder of my life.”A nonzero cosmological constant implies that space would be curved even in an emptyuniverse that is devoid of matter, an idea that Einstein disliked because it conﬂicted withhis ideas concerning mass as the cause of spacetime curvature. Ironically,WillemdeSitterusedEinstein’sﬁeldequationswiththeχLambdaφ-term to describeanexpanding,emptyuniverse,withtheexpansionpoweredbythecosmologicalconstant,andHubbleviewedthedistance-dependentredshiftofdeSitter’suniverseastheoreticalsupportforanexpandinguniverseinhis1929paper.The Effects of Dark EnergyNature has the ﬁnal say, and in the late 1990s, observations forced astronomers to recognizea nonzero cosmological constant. Although we will defer a discussion of the physical originof the cosmological constant to the next chapter, for the sake of discussion we will give thephysical source of the cosmological constant a name:dark energy.We begin by rewriting the Friedmann equation (including theχLambdaφ-term) in a form thatmakes it explicit that we are dealing with a three-component universe of mass (baryonicand dark), relativistic particles (photons and neutrinos), and dark energy,/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG(ρm+ρrel)−13χLambdaφc2/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.(110)Theﬂuid equation(Eq. 50) also emerges from solving Einstein’s ﬁeld equations withthe cosmological constant included, asd(R3ρ)dt=−Pc2d(R3)dt,(111)whereρandPare the density and pressure due to every component of the universe (includ-ing, as we shall see, dark energy). Note that althoughχLambdaφwas included in the ﬁeld equations,The termdark energyoriginated with cosmologist Michael Turner.27
27Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1309>>>

it does not appear in the ﬂuid equation. As was done in Section 1, the Friedmann andﬂuid equations can be combined to produce theacceleration equation,d2Rdt2=/braceleftbigg−43πG/bracketleftbiggρm+ρrel+3(Pm+Prel)c2/bracketrightbigg+13χLambdaφc2/bracerightbiggR.(112)(AlthoughPm=0 for a pressureless dust universe, it is included in the acceleration equationfor the sake of completeness.)If we deﬁne the equivalent mass density of the dark energy to beρχLambdaφ≡χLambdaφc28πG=constant=ρχLambdaφ,0,(113)then the Friedmann equation becomes, in parallel with Eq. ( 65),/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg1RdRdt/parenrightbigg2−83πG(ρm+ρrel+ρχLambdaφ)/bracketrightBiggR2=−kc2.(114)BecauseρχLambdaφremains constant as the universe expands, more and more dark energy mustcontinually appear to ﬁll the increasing volume.The pressure due to dark energy, as calculated from Eq. ( 111), isPχLambdaφ=−ρχLambdaφc2.(115)ThuswχLambdaφ=−1 in the general equation of stateP=wρc2(Eq. 52). This equation ofstate is unlike any other we have encountered.Apositive cosmological constant correspondsto a positive mass density and a negative pressure! Substituting the expressions forρχLambdaφandPχLambdaφinto Eq. ( 112), the acceleration equation, yieldsd2Rdt2=/braceleftbigg−43πG/bracketleftbiggρm+ρrel+ρχLambdaφ+3(Pm+Prel+PχLambdaφ)c2/bracketrightbigg/bracerightbiggR.(116)With the inclusion ofρχLambdaφandPχLambdaφ, these equations have the same form as their Newtoniancounterparts, Eqs. ( 10), ( 50), and ( 51). However, the interpretation of the constantkhas changed. In Section 1,kwas related to the mechanical energy of an expandingmass shell by Eq. ( 1). Here, it is seen to be the present value of the curvature of theuniverse [Eq. ( 105) withR=1].Using Eq. ( 8) and recalling from Eq. ( 12) that 3H3/8πG=ρc, the Friedmannequation can be written asH2[1−(χOmegaφm+χOmegaφrel+χOmegaφχLambdaφ)]R2=−kc2,(117)There are more general models in which the cosmological constant,χLambdaφ, is not really constant. In these models,dark energy is replaced byquintessence(“ﬁfth element”), a time-dependent energy density. We will not pursuethese models.In some texts, the comoving coordinate,ϖ, is scaled so thatktakes on the values of 0,+1, or−1 for a ﬂat,closed, or open universe.28
29
2829Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1310>>>

whereχOmegaφχLambdaφ=ρχLambdaφρc=χLambdaφc23H2.(118)We deﬁne thetotal density parameteras30χOmegaφ≡χOmegaφm+χOmegaφrel+χOmegaφχLambdaφ.(119)The Friedmann equation then becomesH2(1−χOmegaφ)R2=−kc2,(120)so for a ﬂat universe (k=0), we must haveχOmegaφ(t)=1. It is useful to note that, as a specialcase att=t0,H20(1−χOmegaφ0)=−kc2.(121)Using Eqs. ( 120) and ( 121) along with Eqs. ( 79), ( 80), and ( 118), the Hubbleparameter as a function of the redshiftzis found to beH=H0(1+z)/bracketleftbiggχOmegaφm,0(1+z)+χOmegaφrel,0(1+z)2+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0(1+z)2+1−χOmegaφ0/bracketrightbigg1/2(122)(cf. Eq. 27).The WMAP values forχOmegaφm,0,χOmegaφrel,0, andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0are[χOmegaφm,0]WMAP=0.27±0.04,χOmegaφrel,0=8.24×10−5,[χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0]WMAP=0.73±0.04,where the value ofχOmegaφrel,0was obtained from Eq. ( 80). Adding these results from theWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe reveals thatχOmegaφ0=χOmegaφm,0+χOmegaφrel,0+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=1;that is, the universe is ﬂat (k=0), and dark energy now dominates the expansion of theuniverse. More precisely, the WMAP result is[χOmegaφ0]WMAP=1.02±0.02,which isconsistentwithχOmegaφ0=1. We can never prove theχOmegaφ0isexactly1 because anymeasurement will necessarily be accompanied by a small (we hope) uncertainty.30The symbol “χOmegaφ” without a subscript “m,” “rel,” or “χLambdaφ” always denotes the total density parameter for all of thecomponents of that particular model.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1311>>>

The deceleration parameter (Eq. 54) may be written asq(t)=12/summationdisplayi(1+3wi)χOmegaφi(t),(123)wherewis the coefﬁcient from the equation of statePi=wiρic2and the “i” subscriptidentiﬁes one of the components of the universe (i.e., pressureless dust, relativistic particles,or dark energy). Usingwm=0,wrel=1/3, andwχLambdaφ=−1, we obtainq(t)=12χOmegaφm(t)+χOmegaφrel(t)−χOmegaφχLambdaφ(t).(124)With WMAP values we ﬁnd that the current value of the deceleration parameter isq0=−0.60.The minus sign indicates that expansion of the universe is now accelerating!31AssumingχLambdaφ>0, the equivalent mass density of dark energyρχLambdaφadds to the effect of theother densities in the Friedmann equation (Eq. 114) on the curvature of the universe,k.However, in the acceleration equation, the negative pressurePχLambdaφopposes the gravitationaleffect of a positiveρχLambdaφand acts toincreasethe acceleration of the universe, as seen bythe positive termχLambdaφc2/3 added to the acceleration equation, Eq ( 112). The presence ofa cosmological constant therefore decouples the geometry of the universe (open, closed,ﬂat), which is described byk, from the dynamics of the universe, which are governed bythe interplay ofρm,ρrel, andρχLambdaφ. As we shall see, our universe may be ﬂat (k=0), yet itmay have an accelerating expansion—a combination that is not possible within the morerestricted model of a one-component universe of pressureless dust.The/Lambda1EraTheχLambdaφ-terms in Eqs. ( 114) and ( 116) became dominant as the scale factorRincreasedbecauseρχLambdaφis constant while the mass densityρm∝R−3andρrel∝R−4. Just as the radiationera yielded to the mass era when the universe was about 55,000 years old (Eq. 85), themass era has segued into the/Lambda1era. Dark energy now governs the expansion of the universe.The transition from the matter era to the presentχLambdaφera occurred when the scale factor satisﬁedρm=ρχLambdaφ. SinceρχLambdaφis constant, Eq. ( 82) can be used to show that the transition value ofRisRm,χLambdaφ=/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,0χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3.Inserting WMAP values givesRm,χLambdaφ=0.72,(126)31By “accelerating,” we meand2R/dt2>0.Cosmology
(125)


<<<PAGE 1312>>>

which corresponds to a redshift ofzm,χLambdaφ=1Rm,χLambdaφ−1=0.39.(127)TheaccelerationequationwithWMAPvaluesshowsthattheaccelerationoftheuniversechangedsign(fromnegativetopositive)whenthescalefactorwasRaccel=2−1/3Rm,χLambdaφ=0.57,corresponding tozaccel=0.76,meaning that the acceleration became positivebeforetheχLambdaφ-term dominated the Friedmannequation. AsR→0 we can deduce that the effects of the cosmological constant are negli-gible in the early universe becauseρm∝R−3andρrel∝R−4(Eqs. 81 and 82) whileρχLambdaφremains constant. The happy outcome is thatall of the results for the early universeobtained in Sections 1 and 2 are valid for the present relativistic cosmology as wellThe behavior of the scale factorRfor a ﬂat universe can be found by settingk=0i nthe Friedmann equation (Eq. 114). A little algebra and Eqs. ( 79) and ( 118) lead tot=/radicalbigg38πG/integraldisplayR0R′dR′/radicalbigρm,0R′+ρrel,0+ρχLambdaφ,0R′4.(128)Although this can be integrated numerically, it has no simple analytic solution. Figure 19displays a numerical solution of Eq. ( 128) using WMAP values, showing the differentbehaviors of the scale factor in the radiation, matter, andχLambdaφeras.To make further progress, we will neglect the reign of relativistic particles during theﬁrst 55,000 years or so of the universe by settingρrel,0=0. Integrating eventually yields,fork=0,t(R)=231H0/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0ln/bracketleftBigg/radicalBigg/parenleftbiggχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0χOmegaφm,0/parenrightbiggR3+/radicalBigg1+/parenleftbiggχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0χOmegaφm,0/parenrightbiggR3/bracketrightBigg.(129)The present age of the universe may be obtained by substitutingR=1 into Eq. ( 129).Using the WMAP values forχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0, we obtaint0=4.32×1017s=1.37×1010yr.This is in good agreement with the best determination of the age of the universe currentlyavailable, the published WMAP value of32[t0]WMAP=13.7±0.2 Gyr.32When the ﬁrst edition of this text was written, the authors could not have anticipated that the age of the universe,to this precision, would be included in the second edition!.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1313>>>

Radiation era Matter eraL era–13–12–11–10–9–8–7–6–5–4–3–2–10 12–7–6–5–4–3–2–101
Log10 (t/tH)Log10 (R)
FIGURE19A logarithmic graph of the scale factorRas a function of time. During the radiationera,R∝t1/2; during the matter era,R∝t2/3; and during theχLambdaφera,Rgrows exponentially.The acceleration of the universe changed sign (from negative to positive) whenR=Raccel=0.57. According to Eq. ( 129), the expansion of the universe began to speed upwhen its age wastaccel=2.23×1017s=7.08 Gyr.Thus the expansion of the universe has been accelerating for approximately the second halfof its existence. For this reason,t0is very nearly equal to the Hubble time:t0=0.993tH.At the present epoch, the effects of deceleration during the radiation and matter eras andacceleration during theχLambdaφera nearly cancel, so the age of the universe is what we wouldhave calculated for a constant rate of expansion.Equation ( 129) can be inverted to obtain, fork=0,R(t)=/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,04χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3/parenleftBige3H0t√χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/2−e−3H0t√χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/2/parenrightBig2/3(130)=/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,0χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3sinh2/3/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg(131)Figure 20 shows the evolution of the scale factor as a function of time. In the limit of3H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/2≪1 (essentially whent≪tH), Eq. ( 131) reduces to Eq. ( 91),R(t)≃/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/parenrightbigg2/3=/parenleftBigg3/radicalbigχOmegaφm,02/parenrightBigg2/3/parenleftbiggttH/parenrightbigg2/3,(132)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1314>>>

0123R
–1.0–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5WMAPWm,0 = 1, Wrel,0 = 0, WL,0 = 0
(Dt)/tH from presentFIGURE20The scale factorRas a function of time, measured from the present, for a WMAPuniverse witht0≃tH, and a ﬂat, one-component universe of pressureless dust witht0=2tH/3(Eq. 44). The dotted lines locate the position of today’s universe on the two curves.as appropriate for a matter-dominated universe. But whent≫tH, the second exponentialin Eq. ( 131) can be neglected, leavingR(t)≃/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,04χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3eH0t√χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.(133)When the cosmological constant dominates the Friedmann equation, the scale factorRgrows exponentially with a characteristic time oftH//radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0. As we will discover in thenext section, an exponentially expanding universe has profound implications for the long-term future of observational astronomy.Model Universes on the/Omega1m,0–/Omega1/Lambda1,0PlaneEvery model of a three-component universe (matter, relativistic particles, and dark energy) isspeciﬁed by the values of the three density parametersχOmegaφm,0,χOmegaφrel,0, andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0. At the presentepochχOmegaφrel,0is negligible, so we can consider a two-dimensional plot ofχOmegaφm,0vs.χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0,a sshown in Fig. 21. TheχOmegaφm,0–χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0plane is divided into several regions. The Friedmannequation (Eq. 117) shows that the lineχOmegaφm,0+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=1 determines the sign ofkand sodivides theχOmegaφm,0–χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0plane into open and closed universes. The sign of the decelerationparameter (Eq. 123) is determined by the sign of the quantityχOmegaφm,0−2χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0, so thelineχOmegaφm,0−2χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=0 divides theχOmegaφm,0–χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0plane into accelerating and deceleratinguniverses.Although it seems that our universe will expand forever, driven by dark energy, it iseasy to conceive of other model universes that will eventually recollapse. This includes anyuniverse withχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0<0, as well as universes withχOmegaφλ,0>0 but containing enough matterCosmology


<<<PAGE 1315>>>

ExpandsforeverRecollapses–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0Closed universeOpen universeAcceleratingDeceleratingNo Big BangWL,0
Wm,0FIGURE21Model universes on theχOmegaφm,0–χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0plane. Every point on this plane represents apossible universe. The point (χOmegaφm,0=0.27,χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=0.73) is indicated by the circle.to bring the expansion to a halt before dark energy dominates. When the expansion stops,dR/dt=0. Equation ( 114), together with Eqs. ( 81), ( 82), ( 113), and ( 15),can be used to expressdR/dtas/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2=H20/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,0R+χOmegaφrel,0R2+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0R2+1−χOmegaφm,0−χOmegaφrel,0−χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg.(134)Setting the left-hand side equal to zero, canceling theH20, and neglecting the radiation era,we have a cubic equation for the scale factorR.χOmegaφm,0R+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0R2+1−χOmegaφm,0−χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=0.(135)We want to know when this cubic equation forRhas a positive, real root. It turns outthat ifχOmegaφm,0<1 andχOmegaφλ,0>0, Eq. ( 135) has no positive, real root, and we conclude thatthese universes will expand forever.33But a universe withχOmegaφm,0>1 will expand foreveronly ifχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0>4χOmegaφm,0/braceleftbiggcos/bracketleftbigg13cos−1/parenleftbigg1χOmegaφm,0−1/parenrightbigg+4π3/bracketrightbigg/bracerightbigg3.33You are referred to Felten and Isaacman 1986 for a complete analysis of this diagram.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1316>>>

On this diagram, lines of constant aget0are roughly diagonal from the lower left to theupper right, andt0increases from lower right to upper left. In fact,t0becomesinﬁniteaswe approach a line across the upper-left corner of the diagram where there is an (unstable)equilibrium between the inward pull of gravity and the outward push of dark energy. Modelson this line are inﬁnitely old, meaning that they never unfolded from a hot, dense Big Bang.This line is given byχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=4χOmegaφm,0/braceleftbiggcos/bracketleftbigg13cos−1/parenleftbigg1χOmegaφm,0−1/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg/bracerightbigg3,ifχOmegaφm,0>0.5; otherwise, “cos” should be replaced by “cosh.” Models beyond this linerepresent “bounce” universes that are now on the rebound from an earlier collapse. Wemerely state the result that these “bounce” models have a maximum redshift (at the bounce)that satisﬁeszbounce≤2 cos/bracketleftbigg13cos−1/parenleftbigg1−χOmegaφm,0χOmegaφm,0/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg−1(136)ifχOmegaφm,0>0.5; otherwise, “cos” should be replaced by “cosh.” Because objects are observedbeyond this maximum redshift, these “bounce” models may be rejected.Astronomers have the task of determining which point on Fig. 21 representsouruniverse. This task is possible because the dynamics of the expansion of the universedeterminesq0=χOmegaφm,0/2−χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0, and the geometry of the universe determinesχOmegaφ0=χOmegaφm,0+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0. In the next section we will learn howq0is measured.OBSERVATIONAL COSMOLOGYMost of the key parameters of cosmology encountered in the previous section, such asH0,q0, and the variousχOmegaφ0’s, are not quantities that can be directly measured by astronomers.Observers are primarily limited to measuring the spectrum, redshift, radiant ﬂux, and po-larization of the starlight from a distant object. We now proceed to link these observablesto the theoretical framework we have erected.The Origin of the Cosmological RedshiftLet’s begin by uncovering the origin of the cosmological redshift. We start with theRobertson–Walkermetric,Eq.(106),withds=0foralightray,anddθ=dφ=0foraradialpathtraveledfromthepointofthelight’semissionatcomoving coordinateϖetoitsarrivalatEarthatϖ=0.Takingthenegativesquareroot(soϖdecreaseswithincreasingtime)gives−cdtR(t)=dϖ√1−kϖ2.Cosmology
4


<<<PAGE 1317>>>

Integrating this from a largerϖfarat an initial timetito a smallerϖnearat timetf, we have/integraldisplaytfticdtR(t)=−/integraldisplayϖnearϖfardϖ√1−kϖ2=/integraldisplayϖfarϖneardϖ√1−kϖ2.(137)A moment’s thought reveals that the same result describes an outwardly moving light ray.Suppose that one crest of the light wave was emitted at timeteand received att0, and the nextwave crest was emitted atte+χDeltaφteand received att0+χDeltaφt0. These times, which describehow long it takes for the successive crests of the light wave to travel to Earth, satisfy therelations/integraldisplayt0tecdtR(t)=/integraldisplayϖe0dϖ√1−kϖ2(138)for the ﬁrst crest and/integraldisplayt0+χDeltaφt0te+χDeltaφtecdtR(t)=/integraldisplayϖe0dϖ√1−kϖ2(139)for the next. The right-hand sides are the same, since the comoving coordinate of an objectdoes not change as the universe expands (assuming its peculiar velocity is negligible).Subtracting Eq. ( 138) from Eq. ( 139) produces/integraldisplayt0+χDeltaφt0te+χDeltaφtedtR(t)−/integraldisplayt0tedtR(t)=0.(140)But/integraldisplayt0+χDeltaφt0te+χDeltaφtedtR(t)=/integraldisplaytete+χDeltaφtedtR(t)+/integraldisplayt0tedtR(t)+/integraldisplayt0+χDeltaφt0t0dtR(t),so/integraldisplayt0+χDeltaφt0t0dtR(t)−/integraldisplayte+χDeltaφtetedtR(t)=0.Any change inR(t)during the time intervalsχDeltaφteandχDeltaφt0between the emission of the twosuccessive wave crests can safely be neglected. This allows us to treatR(t)as a constantwith respect to the time integration, so that, usingR(t0)=1,χDeltaφt0=χDeltaφteR(te).(141)The timesχDeltaφteandχDeltaφt0are just the periods of the emitted and received light waves and arerelated to their wavelengths byλ=cχDeltaφt. Making this substitution into Eq. ( 141) andusing the deﬁnition of the redshiftzresults in the expression for the cosmologicalredshift,1R(te)=λ0λe=1+z.(142)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1318>>>

This derivation shows that the cosmological redshift is due to the wavelength of a photonexpanding along with the space through which the photon moves during its journey to Earth.Equation(142)isjustEq.(4)discussedpreviously.CombiningEqs.(141)and(142)results in the formula forcosmological time dilation,χDeltaφt0χDeltaφte=1+z.(143)Note that these relations for the cosmological redshift and time dilation hold regardless of thefunctional form of the scale factor,R(t). Experimental conﬁrmation of cosmological timedilation has been frustrated by the lack of a reliable natural clock located at cosmologicaldistances. However, a measurement of cosmological time dilation has been made using thetemporal changes in the spectrum of a moderate-redshift (z=0.361) Type Ia supernova.The results were consistent with Eq. ( 143). [See Foley et al. (2005) for details of thismeasurement of cosmological time dilation.]Distances to the Most Remote Objects in the UniverseTo make further progress in our quest to survey the universe and determine its geometry anddynamics, we must next learn how to measure the distance to objects in the most remoteregions of the universe. The proper distance of an object from Earth can be found fromtheRobertson–Walkermetric.Recallthatthedifferentialproperdistanceisjust/radicalbig−(ds)2withdt=0. Furthermore, if the comoving coordinate of the object isϖ(withEarth atϖ=0), thendθ=dφ=0 along a radial line from Earth to the object. Insertingthese into the Robertson–Walker metric (Eq. 106), we can ﬁnd the proper distance,dp(t),to the object at timetby integratingdp(t)=R(t)/integraldisplayϖ0dϖ′√1−kϖ′2.(144)Using Eq. ( 138), this becomesdp(t)=R(t)/integraldisplayt0tecdt′R(t′).(145)The physical meaning of this is readily apparent. As the photon moves in fromϖe, in eachinterval of timedtit travels a small distance ofcdt. These intervals cannot simply be addedup, because the universe expands as the photon travels. Dividingcdtby the scale factorat the time,R(t), converts this small distance to what it would be at the present time,t0.Integrating then yields the proper distance fromϖetoϖ=0 today, at timet0. Multiplyingby the scale factorR(t)then converts this to the distance at some other timet. It is worthemphasizing that the current value of the proper distance,dp,0≡dp(t0), to an object is howfar away it istoday, and not its distance when its light was emitted. As long as the object haszero peculiar velocity (constant comoving coordinateϖ), it sufﬁces to ﬁnddp,0becauseCosmology


<<<PAGE 1319>>>

the proper distance at any other time can be obtained fromdp(t)=R(t)dp,0.(146)In particular, if the object’s redshift isz, then its distance at timete, when its light wasemitted, isdp(te)=dp,0R(te)=dp,01+z.(147)Integrating Eq. ( 144) and usingR(t0)=1 shows that the expression for the presentproper distance in a ﬂat universe isdp,0=ϖ(fork=0),(148)the expression for a closed universe isdp,0=1√ksin−1(ϖ√k)(fork>0),(149)and the expression for an open universe isdp,0=1√|k|sinh−1(ϖ/radicalbig|k|)(fork<0).(150)In a ﬂat universe, the present proper distance to an object is just its coordinate distancedc,0=ϖ(cf. Eq. 3). However, the coordinate distance will not agree with the properdistance ifk̸=0. Because sin−1(x)≥x, in a closed universe (k>0) the proper distanceto an object isgreaterthan its coordinate distance. Similarly, sinh−1(x)≤x, so in an openuniverse (k<0) the proper distance to an object islessthan its coordinate distance. Laterwe will ﬁnd expressions for the proper distancedp,0and the comoving coordinateϖasfunctions of the redshiftz. First, however, we pause to examine the above equations fordp,0because measuring distances in an expanding universe has some interesting aspects.Distances in a closed universe (k>0) are especially interesting. Solving Eq. ( 149)forϖgivesϖ=1√ksin(dp,0√k).(151)Note that in a closed universe there is a maximum value of the comoving coordinate ofϖmax=1/√k. Also, there are an inﬁnite number of distances along a radial line to the samepointXin space, located, say, atϖX.I fdp,0is one value of the present proper distance toXat timet, then for any integern,dp,0+2πn/√kwill also bring us back toX, with the samevalue ofϖX. The extra multiples of 2π/√kcorrespond to traversing the circumference ofthe universentimes before stopping atX. However, such a journey, running circles aroundthe universe, would not be physically possible. As it happens, a photon emitted att=0i na closed, matter-dominated universe withχLambdaφ=0 would return to its starting point just asthe universe ended in a Big Crunch.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1320>>>

In a similar manner, our tiny ant that lives on the surface of a sphere could walk from poleto pole to pole, encircling the spherentimes before proceeding on to its ﬁnal destination.This illustrates that although there is no boundary to a closed universe, it contains onlya ﬁnite amount of space, like the unbounded surface of a sphere. Furthermore, a closeduniverse curves back on itself; moving outward from Earth (or from any other choice oforigin), the farthest you can get from home is a point whereϖ=1/√k. From that point,a step inanydirection brings you closer to where you started.You should be warned that suggestive phrases like “the circumference of the universe”and “curves back on itself” do not imply a curved path through three-dimensional space,since there is no deviation from a radial line asϖincreases. Despite these caveats, we candeﬁne the circumference of a closed universe (including the time-dependence) asCuniv(t)=2πR(t)√k(152)which is the proper distance along a radial line that brings you back to your starting point.This expression for the circumference is consistent with our deﬁnition of curvature since,from Eq. ( 105), the radius of curvature of a closed universe at timetis 1/√K(t)=R(t)/√k. Nevertheless, the radius of curvature must not be thought of as the radius of anactual circular path.The Particle Horizon and the Horizon DistanceAs the universe expands and ages, photons from increasingly distant objects have more timeto complete their journey to Earth. This means that as time increases, we might expect thatmore of the universe will come into causal contact with the observer. The proper distance tothe farthest observable point (called theparticle horizon) at timetis thehorizon distance,dh(t). Note that two points separated by a distance greater thandhare not in causal contact.Thusdhmay be thought of as thediameterof the largest causally connected region.We will now derive an expression fordh(t), the size of the observable universe as afunction of time. (It is important to note that because the farthest observable point movesoutward through increasingly larger values ofϖ,dh(t)isnotproportional toR(t).) Consideran observer at the origin (ϖ=0), and let the particle horizon for this observer be locatedatϖeat timet. This means that a photon emitted atϖeatt=0 would reach the origin attimet. With an appropriate change of limits in Eq. ( 145), the horizon distance at timetis found to bedh(t)=R(t)/integraldisplayt0cdt′R(t′).(153)First we consider distances in the early universe, when the effect of dark energy wasnegligible (soχLambdaφmay be set equal to zero). During the radiation era, the universe wasessentially ﬂat and the scale factor was of the formR(t)=Ct1/2, whereCis a constant(see Eq. 87). Inserting this into Eq. ( 153) givesdh(t)=2ct(radiation era).(154)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1321>>>

After the radiation era, the expansion of the universe was governed by the effects of matterand, later, dark energy.For the matter era, assuming a ﬂat universe, the scale factor is given by Eq. ( 91), whichis of the formR(t)=Ct2/3, where againCis a constant. (Since the radiation era lastedonly 55,000 years following the Big Bang, for the purposes of the following calculationswe will ignore radiation and set the lower limit tot=0.) Substituting this into Eq. ( 153)results indh(t)=3ct(fork=0).(155)Using Eqs. ( 4) and ( 90), this expression can be rewritten in terms of the redshift asdh(z)=2cH0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,01(1+z)3/2(fork=0).(156)We can obtain a rough estimate for the present horizon distance by settingz=0 to obtaindh,0≈2cH0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0=5.02×1026m=16,300 Mpc=16.3 Gpc (157)using WMAP values.Finally, in theχLambdaφera, we substitute Eq. ( 131) for the scale factor into Eq. ( 153) forthe horizon distance to get, fork=0,dh(t)=/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,0χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3sinh2/3/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg/integraldisplayt0cdt′/parenleftBigχOmegaφm,0χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightBig1/3sinh2/3/parenleftbig32H0t′/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbig.(158)This has no simple analytic solution and must be integrated numerically. Usingt0=13.7 bil-lion years, we calculate that at the present time, the distance to the particle horizon in a ﬂatuniverse isdh,0=4.50×1026m=14,600 Mpc=14.6 Gpc (159)Figure 22 uses WMAP values and showsdh, the size of the observable universe, as afunction of time. Of course, when viewing an object near the particle horizon, astronomerssee it as it was when the light was emitted, not as it would appear in today’s universe.Note that the distance to the particle horizon in Eqs. ( 154) and ( 155) is proportionaltot, while the scale factor in the radiation and matter eras is proportional tot1/2andt2/3,respectively. This means that during those eras the size of the observable universe increasedmore rapidly than the universe expanded, so the universe became increasingly causallyconnected as it aged. However, the integral in Eq. ( 158)—without the term in front—isjust the present distance to the point that will be at the particle horizon at timet,a sw ec a nsee by comparing Eq. ( 153) with Eq. ( 145), evaluated att0withte=0. Ast→∞,this integral converges to 19.3 Gpc. This means that the proper distancetodayto the farthestCosmology


<<<PAGE 1322>>>

012345678910
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.00510152025303540dh/(ctH)
t/tH
dh (Gpc)
FIGURE22The proper distance from Earth to the particle horizon as a function of time, usingWMAP values. The horizon distance is expressed as a fraction ofctH. The right axis showsdhinbillions of parsecs.object that willeverbe observable in the future is 19.3 Gpc. Everything within a sphere,centered on Earth, of radius 19.3 Gpc will eventually become visible, while everythingbeyond will be forever hidden. In the future, the particle horizon and the scale factor willboth grow exponentially aseH0t√χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0(Eq. 133).Ultimately, an object located at the particle horizon will remain at the particle horizon asthe universe expands. The particle horizon will never catch up to any object that is presentlymore than 19.3 Gpc away, and so its light willneverreach us. What will we observe whenlooking at an object at the ultimate (t→∞) particle horizon? Although photons from theobject will continue to arrive, they will be increasingly deeply redshifted, and their arrivalrate will decline toward zero due to cosmological time dilation (Eq. 143). Thus the objectwill fade from view, apparently frozen in time, as its redshift diverges to inﬁnity. This bearsas t r i k i n gs i m i l a r i t yt ot h ed e s c r i p t i o nofhowwewouldviewanastronautfallingintoablackhole,althoughthephysicsofthetwosituationsiscompletelydifferent.Example4.1.Helium nuclei were being formed when the temperature was roughly109K andt=178 s. From Eq. ( 58), the scale factor at that time wasR=2.73×10−9.From Eq. ( 154), the horizon distance was then aboutdh(t)=2ct=1.07×1011m=0.7 AU.This is the diameter of a causally connected region, which we callC, when the universewas 178 s old.The regionC(which has a comoving boundary, so it always contains the same mass)has been expanding along with the rest of the universe sincet=178 s. How large isCcontinuedCosmology


<<<PAGE 1323>>>

today? Assuming a ﬂat universe, Eq. ( 146) shows thatChas expanded by a factor of1/R=3.66×108, with a present diameter ofdh(t)R(t)=3.92×1019m,about 1.3 kpc. In other words, the largest region that was causally connected att=178 sis now just over a kiloparsec across, roughly 8.7×10−8of the present horizon distance,dh,0. This illustrates that as the early universe aged, the amount of material that is in causalcontact increased dramatically. Today’s causally connected universe extends far beyondCbecause, sincet=178 s, light from more distant regions has had time to arrive and causallyconnect those regions withC. The comoving boundary ofCcannot keep up with the morerapid recession of the particle horizon.The Arrival of PhotonsYou may be wondering, if the scale factorRwas zero at the Big Bang and everything wasright next to everything else, then why has it taken the age of the universe for a Big Bangphoton to reach Earth? What is the path followed by the photon?In the following discussion, the actual complications of the Big Bang will be neglected.Instead, we will consider a perfectly transparent, expanding, ﬂat universe where a singlephoton is emitted at comoving coordinateϖeat timet=0. What, then, is the proper distanceof that photon from our position (ϖ=0) at a later timet? The coordinate,ϖ, of the photonat timetmay be found from Eq. ( 137) withk=0,/integraldisplayt0cdt′R(t′)=/integraldisplayϖeϖdϖ′.(160)To simplify the calculation, we will ignore theχLambdaφera and adopt a ﬂat, matter-dominateduniverse with a scale factor given by Eq. ( 132),R(t)=/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/parenrightbigg2/3.(161)SettingR=1, the age of this model universe is found to bet0=23H0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0,(162)so the scale factor is simplyR(t)=/parenleftbiggtt0/parenrightbigg2/3.Integrating Eq. ( 160) yieldsϖ=ϖe−3ct0/parenleftbiggtt0/parenrightbigg1/3.(163)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1324>>>

We can evaluateϖeby noting that att=t0,ϖ=0; thusϖe=3ct0,(164)the present horizon distance for this model (Eq. 155). Inserting this value for the photon’sstarting point into Eq. ( 163) and multiplying both sides by the scale factorR(t)showsthat the proper distance of the photon from Earth is, as a function of time,dp(t)=3ct0/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggtt0/parenrightbigg2/3−/parenleftbiggtt0/parenrightbigg/bracketrightBigg(165)for our model ﬂat universe.Since the Big Bang, the entire system of comoving coordinates has been stretching outfrom its compact beginning. Indeed, the “Big Stretch” would be a more appropriate termthan the “Big Bang” for this event! As shown in Fig. 23, the initial expansion of theuniverse actually carried the photonawayfrom Earth. Although the photon’s comovingcoordinate was always decreasing from an initial value ofϖetoward Earth’s position atϖ=0, the scale factorR(t)increased so rapidly that at ﬁrst the proper distance betweenthe photon and Earth increased with time. This means that a photon emitted from the presentparticle horizon att=0 is only now reaching Earth. Photons emitted from a greaterϖ,beyond the present particle horizon, have yet to arrive—and in fact mayneverarrive ifϖis sufﬁciently large that the exponential expansion of the universe ultimately carries thephoton away from Earth.
0.000.050.100.15
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0d/(3ct0)
t/t0FIGURE23The proper distance from Earth of a photon emitted from the present particle horizonat the time of the Big Bang. The photon’s proper distance is expressed as a fraction of 3ct0.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1325>>>

The Maximum Visible Age of a SourceThe previous calculation assumes that the photon was emitted att=0. Is it possible thatthe exponential expansion of space could carry a presently visible object away from Earthso fast that the object would never again be seen in the sky from some future time forward?To answer this, consider an object (say, a galaxy) that is now visible, meaning that its lightwas emitted at an earlier timeteand it arrives today att0. Assuming that the galaxy is stillvisible at some time in the future, we will let the time of the emission of its future photonsbetiand their arrival time here betf, wherete<tiandt0<tf. Applying these conditionsto Eq. ( 140) gives/integraldisplayt0tedtR(t)=/integraldisplaytftidtR(t),(166)where the scale factorRis given by Eq. ( 131) for a ﬂat universe (k=0). Because thescale factor increases monotonically, it may be, for sufﬁciently largeti, thatnovalue oftfcan satisfy this equality. In that case, a photon emitted at timetiwill never reach Earth. Thelatest time of emission,tmva, for photons to eventually reach us (themaximum visible ageof the source) may be found by settingtf=∞.33Just like an object located at the ultimate particle horizon, as photons from this galaxycontinue to arrive, they will be increasingly deeply redshifted and their ﬂux will drop towardzero. The galaxy will fade from view, apparently frozen in time, as its redshift diverges toinﬁnity. The farther a source is, the sooner it will fade away. This places a fundamentallimit on extragalactic astronomy. We will never be able to watch galaxies continue to ageand evolve through the millenia. Figure 24 shows that if the redshift of an object isroughly larger than 1.8, thentmva<tH, and we will never see it even as it appearstoday.That is, the light emitted by the object today will never reach Earth because those photonswill eventually be carried away from us by the accelerating Hubble ﬂow. Objects witha redshift in the range 5–10 can be observed only as they appeared when the universe
00.20.40.60.81Maximum visible age/H–10
05101520Current source redshiftFIGURE24The maximum visible age of a source, in units oftH=1/H0, as a function of itscurrent redshift. (Figure adapted from Loeb,Phys. Rev. D,65, 047301, 2002.)33Actually,tmvais the age of the universe when the source emitted the last photons to reach Earth.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1326>>>

was approximately 4 to 6 billion years old. As more light is carried away from Earth by theexpansion of the universe, the observable sky will become increasingly empty. Similarly,any signal we send toward a galaxy withz≈1.8 or more will never arrive. Because therecan be no contact between that galaxy and Earth anytime in the future, we are no longer incausal contact with it. As the universe ages, it is becoming causally fragmented, with oneregion no longer capable of inﬂuencing another.The Comoving Coordinateϖ(z)ReturningtoEqs.(148–150),wewanttoexpressthecomovingcoordinateϖas afunction of the redshiftz. We begin by using Eq. ( 145) to ﬁnd another expression for thepresent proper distancedp,0. Writingdt=dR/(dR/dt), Eq. ( 145) may be written asdp,0=/integraldisplayR(t0)R(te)cdRR(dR/dt).It is useful to useR(t0)=1,R(te)=1/(1+z),dR=−R2dz[from differentiatingEq. ( 4),R=1/(1+z)] and Eq. ( 8) to deﬁne the dimensionless integralI (z)=H0/integraldisplay111+zdRR(dR/dt)=H0/integraldisplayz0dz′H(z′).(167)Using Eq. ( 122), we obtainI (z)≡/integraldisplayz0dz′/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0(1+z′)3+χOmegaφrel,0(1+z′)4+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0+(1−χOmegaφ0)(1+z′)2.(168)With this deﬁnition of the integralI (z), the present proper distance isdp,0(z)=cH0I (z).(169)ComparingthiswithEqs.(148–150)andusingEq.(121)fork,weﬁndourexpressionsforthecomovingcoordinateϖ(z):ϖ(z)=cH0I (z)(χOmegaφ0=1)(170)=cH0√χOmegaφ0−1sin/bracketleftBigI (z)/radicalbigχOmegaφ0−1/bracketrightBig(χOmegaφ0>1) (171)=cH0√1−χOmegaφ0sinh/bracketleftBigI (z)/radicalbig1−χOmegaφ0/bracketrightBig(χOmegaφ0<1). (172)andGalaxywillnotbecomecausallyfragmented.35
35Cosmology
Gravitationallyboundsystemsdonotparticipateintheexpansionoftheuniverse,soourSolarSystem


<<<PAGE 1327>>>

These exact expressions must be evaluated numerically. For later reference, we deﬁneS(z)≡I (z)(χOmegaφ0=1)(173)≡1√χOmegaφ0−1sin/bracketleftBigI (z)/radicalbigχOmegaφ0−1/bracketrightBig(χOmegaφ0>1) (174)≡1√1−χOmegaφ0sinh/bracketleftBigI (z)/radicalbig1−χOmegaφ0/bracketrightBig(χOmegaφ0<1), (2175)so we may simply writeϖ(z)=cH0S(z).(176)Note that because sin(x)=x−x3/3!+x5/5!+···and sinh(x)=x+x3/3!+x5/5!+···we have the useful approximation (to second order inz) thatS(z)≃I (z). Thusϖ(z)≃cH0I (z).(forz≪1)(177)Because the comoving coordinateϖis so important in observational cosmology, it willbe helpful to ﬁnd an approximate expression for the integralI (z). (Again we will ignore thebrief radiation era, soχOmegaφrel,0=0 andχOmegaφ0=χOmegaφm,0+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.) The integrand may be expressedas a Taylor series aboutz=0 asI (z)=/integraldisplayz0/braceleftbigg1−(1+q0)z′+/bracketleftbigg12+2q0+32q20+12(1−χOmegaφ0)/bracketrightbiggz′2+···/bracerightbiggdz′(178)where we have used (Eq. 124) for the deceleration parameter,q0=12χOmegaφm,0−χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0. In-tegrating gives our result,I (z)=z−12(1+q0)z2+/bracketleftbigg16+23q0+12q20+16(1−χOmegaφ0)/bracketrightbiggz3+···.(179)Eqs.(170–172)thenprovideseriesexpressionsforthecomovingcoordinateϖof anobjectobservedataredshiftz.Note that the squared term in Eq. ( 179) involves onlyq0and thus depends only on thedynamics of the expanding universe, while the cubed term involves bothq0andk(throughEq. 121) and so depends on both the dynamics and the geometry of the cosmos. A furthersimpliﬁcation comes from using only the ﬁrst two terms of the series expression forI (z)along with Eq ( 177) to obtain, to second order inz,ϖ≃czH0/bracketleftbigg1−12(1+q0)z/bracketrightbigg(forz≪1).(180)Equation ( 180) is valid regardless of whether or not the universe is ﬂat and whetheror not the cosmological constant,χLambdaφ, is nonzero. In fact, Eq. ( 180) can be derived verygenerally, without reference to the Friedmann equation or any speciﬁc model of the universe.Theprocedureuses the fact that the decelerationparameterisdeﬁnedasasecondtimederivativeofthescalefactor;recallEq.(54).Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1328>>>

The Proper DistanceWe have arrived at our goal, an approximate expression for the proper distance of an objectat the present time. According to Eq. ( 169), this isdp,0≃czH0/bracketleftbigg1−12(1+q0)z/bracketrightbigg(forz≪1). (181)The ﬁrst term is just the Hubble law, after applyingfor the redshift. Sinceq0=χOmegaφm,0/2−χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0, we see from the second term that larger values ofχOmegaφm,0implysmallerdistances(moremasstoslowdowntheexpansionoftheuniverse),asdosmallervaluesofχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0(less dark energy pressure to speed up the expansion). As we shall see, the secondterm involves a departure from the linearity of the Hubble law that can be used to determinethe deceleration parameter,q0. Forq0=−0.6, the second term is 10% of the ﬁrst whenz=0.13.The Luminosity DistanceNow we are ready for the concept of the luminosity distance (as measured by the inversesquarelaw).Thenwewillbepreparedtodescribesomeoftheclassicobservationaltestsofcosmologicalmodels.First,weassociatethesourceoftheemittedphotonswiththerateatwhichenergyarrivesatatelescope’sdetectors.SupposethataradiantﬂuxFis measured for a source of light with a known luminosityL. (For now, we will assumethatFis a bolometric ﬂux, measured over all wavelengths.) Then the inverse square lawcan be used to deﬁne theluminosity distance,dL, of the star byd2L≡L4πF.(182)Let a source of light be located at the origin (ϖ=0) of a comoving coordinate system.The source emits photons that arrive at a spherical surface around the origin for whichϖ=constant>0. From the Robertson–Walker metric, Eq. ( 106), the surface area ofthe sphere at the present time (R=1) is 4πϖ2; see Fig. 25. After traveling out toϖfrom the source, the photons will be spread over this surface area, and so the radiant ﬂuxwill diminish as 1/ϖ2. Two effects, in addition to the inverse square law, act to furtherreduce the value of the radiant ﬂux measured at this sphere. The cosmological redshift,Eq. ( 142), shows that the energy of each photon,Ephoton=hc/λ, is reduced by a factorof 1+z. Also, cosmological time dilation, Eq. ( 143), affects the average time intervalbetweenphotons emitted by the source. This means that the rate at which the photons arriveat the sphere is less than the rate at which they leave the source by another factor of 1+z.Combining these effects, the radiant ﬂux at the sphere’s surface isF=L4πϖ2(1+z)2.We emphasize that although the surface area of a sphere centered at the origin is 4π[R(t)ϖ]2, the proper distanceof the surface from the origin isnotR(t)ϖwhenk̸=0; see Eqs. ( 149) and ( 150).36
36Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1329>>>

/H9278/H9258xyzdd/H9258d/H9278R(t)/H9275– sin /H9258 d/H9278R(t)/H9275– d/H9258
FIGURE25An element of area on the surface of a sphere centered atϖ=0. Integrating overthe anglesθandφshows that the surface area of the sphere is 4π[R(t)ϖ]2.Substituting this into Eq. ( 182), we ﬁnd thatdL=ϖ(1+z),(183)whereϖmustbeevaluatednumericallyusingEq.168)andEqs.(170–172).Theluminosity distance,dL, is the distance actually measured by the distance modulusm−M.Although the luminosity distance isnotthe same as either the present proper distance(Eqs.148–150)orthecoordinatedistance(Eq.3),thethreedistancesdoagreeforz≪1.Equation ( 176) shows that the luminosity distance is exactly given bydL(z)=cH0(1+z)S(z).(184)Using our approximation to second order inz, Eq. ( 180),dL(z)≃czH0/bracketleftbigg1+12(1−q0)z/bracketrightbigg(forz≪1). (185)Comparing this with Eq. ( 181), we see that the luminosity distance is approximatelyequal to the proper distance only whenzis very small and the ﬁrst term in each expansiondominates. For larger values ofz,dp(z) < dL(z). Ultimately, the exact expressions for bothdp(z)anddL(z)are the most useful: Eqs. ( 169) and ( 184), respectively, evaluated bynumerical integration.The Redshift–Magnitude RelationWe are ﬁnally in a position to describe some of the most exciting observational tests ofcosmology. Theredshift–magnitude relationcomes from using the luminosity distancefor the distance modulus,m−M=5 log10(dL/10 pc)(186)Cosmology
(


<<<PAGE 1330>>>

Equation ( 184), along withH0=100hkm s−1Mpc−1(Eq. 13), quickly producesm−M=5 log10/bracketleftbiggc(100 km s−1Mpc−1)(10 pc)/bracketrightbigg−5 log10(h)+5 log10(1+z)+5 log10[S(z)]=42.38−5 log10(h)+5 log10(1+z)+5 log10[S(z)].(187)In the same manner, using the approximate Eq. ( 185) for the luminosity distance withEq. ( 186) leads to, forz≪1,m−M≃5 log10/bracketleftbiggc(100 km s−1Mpc−1)(10 pc)/bracketrightbigg−5 log10(h)+5 log10(z)+5 log10/bracketleftbigg1+12(1−q0)z/bracketrightbigg(forz≪1).Expanding the last term on the right in a Taylor series aboutz=0 and keeping only theﬁrst-order terms inzresults inm−M≃42.38−5 log10(h)+5 log10(z)+1.086(1−q0)z(forz≪1). (188)Figure 26 shows the redshiftzplotted on a logarithmic scale as a function ofm−M.Forz≪1, the redshift–magnitude relation is linear. Observations conﬁrm the linearity ofthe log10(z)term (which is just the Hubble law) for smallz. Then, at largerz, the fourth termon the right-hand side of Eq. ( 188), 1.086(1−q0)z, will cause the line to curve upward.Accurately measuring this departure from a straight line allows the value of the deceleration
343638404244
0.010.11zm – MWm,0 = 0.3, WL,0 = 0.7Wm,0 = 0.3, WL,0 = 0Wm,0 = 1.0, WL,0 = 0FIGURE26The redshift–magnitude relation forh=0.71 and several values ofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1331>>>

parameter to be determined. At still largerz, the curve is sensitive to the individual valuesofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.The cosmological redshift affects the measurement of an object’s spectrum becausethese observations are usually made within a speciﬁc wavelength region. For example,observations made in theV-band at 550 nm can be affected as the cosmological redshiftbrings shorter-wavelength radiation into theVband. This effect can be corrected for byadding a compensating term called theK-correctionto Eq. ( 188) if the spectrum,Iλ,o fthe object is known.In the mid-1990’s two rival teams of astronomers—the Supernova Cosmology Project(SCP, led by Saul Perlmutter) and the High-Z Supernova Search Team (HZSNS Team,headed by Brian Schmidt)—made observations of Type Ia supernovae at cosmological dis-tances. Both teams were astonished to discover that supernovae observed with a redshift ofz≈0.5 were about 0.25 magnitudedimmerthan expected for a universe withχOmegaφm,0≃0.3andχLambdaφ=0. The supernovae were farther away than they would be in this canonical decel-erating universe. The possibility of an accelerating universe and a nonzero cosmologicalconstant immediately leapt to their minds, but it took nearly a year of intense work to elim-inate several plausible alternative explanations. For example, about 20% of the light froma distant supernova could be absorbed at highzby a hypothetical“gray dust.”Or perhapsevolutionary effects were misleading the astronomers, since at highzwe observe a youngergeneration of supernovae, formed in a younger galactic environment where heavy elementswere less abundant. One by one, these possibilities were considered and eliminated. Theredshift–magnitude diagram in Fig. 27 shows a more recent compilation of the resultsof these two teams. Both groups found that their analyses ruled out aﬂat universe withχOmegaφm,0=1 andχLambdaφ=0 (the scenario championed by most theorists at the time) and were alsoincompatible with an open universe havingχOmegaφm,0≃0.3 andχLambdaφ=0. Instead, theirﬁndingsfavored a universe withχOmegaφm,0≃0.3 andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=0.7. Figure 28 shows, for each team,the location on theχOmegaφm,0–χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0plane of the most likely set of values that are consistentwith the high-zsupernovae results. Their evidence for a nonzero cosmological constant ispersuasive.If we look at supernovae beyondzaccel=0.76, when the universe started accelerating,we shouldﬁnd the signature of a decelerating universe. Figure 29 shows further results ofobservations of high-zsupernovae, including six withz>1.25. It includes SN 1997ff, themost distant supernova yet observed atz=1.7. SN 1997ff and others in this high-zsampleappearbrighterthan they would if the universe had expanded at a constant rate (i.e., withχOmegaφ=0), as expected for the deceleration phase of the early universe. These observationsrule out the alternative explanations of acceleration,“gray dust”and evolutionary effects,as indicated in theﬁgure. Clearly, astronomers will have to grapple with the implicationsof an accelerating universe whose dynamics are dominated by dark energy.It is perhaps surprising that the values of the Hubble constant obtained from the redshift–magnitude diagrams (H0∼70±10 km s−1Mpc−1) are not better determined. The spreadin the values ofH0obtained by various groups using supernovae is due to their differentcalibrations of Cepheid distances. This systematic uncertainty does not affect the valuesA“gray dust”of large grains would absorb light nearly equally at all wavelengths and so would produce nodetectable reddening of a supernova’s spectrum.37
37Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1332>>>

341.00.50.0–0.53638404244Distance modulus (m – M)(m – M) – (m – M)WM=0.3,WL=0.0
0.010.101.00zHigh-redshift (z > 0.15) SNe:High-Z SN Search TeamSupernova Cosmology ProjectLow-redshift (z < 0.15) SNe:CfA & other SN follow-upCalan/Tololo SN SearchWM = 0.3, WL = 0.7WM = 0.3, WL = 0.0WM = 1.0, WL = 0.0
FIGURE27The redshift–magnitude relation measured for high-zsupernovae. TheK-correctionhas been applied to the apparent magnitudes. The lower graph shows the data after subtracting thetheoretical curve forχOmegaφm,0=0.3,χOmegaφλ,0=0. [Figure adapted from Perlmutter and Schmidt,Supernovaeand Gamma-Ray Bursters, K. Weiler (ed.),Lecture Notes in Physics,598, 195, 2003. Data fromPerlmutter et al,Ap. J.,517, 565, 1999 (SCP) and Riess et al,A. J.,116, 1009, 1998 (HZSNS).]ofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0because these are determined by thedepartures from linearityin theredshift–magnitude diagram.Angular Diameter DistanceAnother measure of an object’s distance may be found by comparing its linear diameterD(assumed known) with its observed angular diameterθ(assumed small). Theangulardiameter distance,dAis then deﬁned to bedA≡Dθ.(189)Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1333>>>

No Big Bang
–10123Vacuum energy density(cosmological constant)
0123Mass densitySCPHZSNSAcceleratingDeceleratingExpands foreverRecollapses eventuallyClosedFlatOpenFIGURE28The location of the most probable values ofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0for high-zsupernovae.The results of the SCP and the HZSNS Team are superimposed. [Figure adapted from Perlmutter andSchmidt,Supernovae and Gamma-Ray Bursters, K. Weiler (ed.),Lecture Notes in Physics,598, 195,2003. Data from Perlmutter et al,Ap. J.,517, 565, 1999 (SCP) and Riess et al,A. J.,116, 1009, 1998(HZSNS).]To place this into context with our previous results, consider a galaxy of redshiftzlocated atcomovingcoordinateϖ.WecanusedL=/radicalbig−(ds)2toﬁndanexpressionforD,theproperdistancefromonesideofthegalaxytotheother.IntegratingtheRobertson–Walker metric (Eq. 106) across the galaxy in the plane of the sky withdt=dϖ=dφ=0, we obtainD=R(te)ϖ θ=ϖθ1+z.[Note from Eq. ( 146) that for aﬂat universe this is the usual Euclidean geometric relation.]Of course,Dis the galaxy’s diameter at the timete, when the light we observe was emitted.Since the light from the galaxy traveled a radial path to Earth,θis the angular size of thegalaxy as measured by astronomers. Equation ( 176) can be used to express the diameterCosmology


<<<PAGE 1334>>>

–0.50.00.5–1.0–0.50.00.51.0D(m – M) (mag)D(m – M) (mag)0.50.01.01.52.0zGround discoveredHST discoveredHigh-z gray dust (+WM = 1.0)Evolution ~ z, (+WM = 1.0)WM = 1.0, WL = 0.0Empty (W = 0)WM = 0.27, WL = 0.73“replenishing” gray dustFIGURE29The redshift–magnitude relation measured for very high-zsupernovae. TheK-correction has been applied to the apparent magnitudes, and the theoretical curve forχOmegaφ=0( a“coast-ing universe”) has been subtracted from the data. The lower graph illustrates the averages of binneddata (grouped according to redshift) and compares them to curves of alternative models incorporating“gray dust”or evolutionary effects for supernovae. (Figure adapted from Riess et al,Ap. J.,607, 665,2004.)asD=cH0S(z)θ1+z.(190)Thus the angular diameter distance isdA=cH0S(z)1+z.(191)From Eq. ( 183), weﬁnd that the angular diameter distance and the luminosity distanceare related bydA=dL(1+z)2.(192)Figure 30 shows a graph ofθin units ofH0D/c,cθH0D=(1+z)S(z),(193)as a function of the redshiftzfor several model universes. It is surprising that the angulardiameter of a galaxy doesnotcontinue to decrease with distance. In fact, beyond a certainredshift, the angular size actuallyincreaseswith distance. This is due to the universe actingCosmology


<<<PAGE 1335>>>

23456
12345zWm,0 = 1, WL,0 = 0Wm,0 = 0.3, WL,0 = 0WMAPc/H9258/H0D
FIGURE30The angular diameterθof a galaxy in units ofH0D/cfor several values ofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.as a sort of gravitational lens, enlarging the appearance of a galaxy beyond what would beexpected in a static Euclidean universe. In principle, observations of galaxies of a knownlinear diameterDwould allow observers to determine which values of cosmological pa-rameters are preferred. In practice, however, galaxies do not have sharp boundaries, andthey evolve as the universe ages. As of this writing, the most productive use of the angulardiameter distance has been coupled with observations of the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect.The Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect provides an independent determination of the Hubbleconstant. Measurements ofχDeltaφT /T0(Eq. 64) along with the X-rayﬂuxFXand tempera-tureTeof the intracluster gas in rich clusters of galaxies can be used to model the physicalproperties of the cluster. Comparing the calculated diameterDof the cluster with its mea-sured angular diameterθyieldsdA, the cluster’s angular diameter distance. On the otherhand,themeasuredX-rayﬂuxfromtheclusterandfortheX-rayluminosityoftheintraclustergasdeterminethecluster’s luminosity distance. The connection betweenthesetwodistances,Eq.(192),canthenbeusedtocalculatetheHubbleconstant.H0=Cf (z)FXT3/2eθ(χDeltaφT /T0)2,wheref (z)is a function of the redshiftzof the cluster andCis a constant. One team ofastronomers measured the value of the Hubble constant forﬁve clusters and obtained anaverage ofH0=65 km s−1Mpc−1, consistent with the values obtained from other recentmeasurements.See Jones et al. (2005) for details of howH0was determined.3838Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1336>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralAlpher, R. A., and Herman, R. C.,“Evolution of the Universe,”Nature,162, 774, 1948.Goldsmith, Donald,The Runaway Universe, Perseus Publishing, Cambridge, MA, 2000.Harrison, Edward,Cosmology, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,2000.Harrison, Edward,Darkness at Night, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1987.Kirshner, Robert,The Extravagant Universe, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,2002.Krauss, Lawrence M.,“Cosmological Antigravity,”Scientiﬁc American, January 1999.Lineweaver, Charles, and Davis, Tamara,“Misconceptions about the Big Bang,”ScientiﬁcAmerican, March 2005.Silk, Joseph,The Big Bang, Third Edition, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 2001.Silk, Joseph,On the Shores of the Unknown, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005.Weinberg, Steven,The First Three Minutes, Second Edition, Basic Books, New York, 1988.TechnicalBennett, C. L.,“First-YearWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe(WMAP) Observations:Preliminary Maps and Basic Results,”The Astrophysical Journal Supplement,148,1 ,2003.Binney, James, and Tremaine, Scott,Galactic Dynamics, Princeton University Press, Prince-ton, NJ, 1987.Carlstrom, John E., Holder, Gilbert P., and Reese, Erik D.,“Cosmology with the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich Effect,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,40, 643, 2002.Davis, Tamara M., Lineweaver, Charles H., and Webb, John K.,“Solutions to the TetheredGalaxy Problem in an Expanding Universe and the Observation of Receding BlueshiftedObjects,”American Journal of Physics, 71, 358, 2003.Dicke, R. H., Peebles, P. J. E., Roll, P. G., and Wilkinson, D. T.,“Cosmic Black-bodyRadiation,”The Astrophysical Journal,142, 414, 1965.Felten, James E., and Isaacman, Richard,“Scale factorsR(t)and Critical Values of theCosmological Constant Lambda in Friedmann Universes,”Reviews of Modern Physics,58, 689, 1986.Foley, Ryan J., et al.,“AD eﬁnitive Measurement of Time Dilation in the Spectral Evolutionof the Moderate-Redshift Type Ia Supernova 1997ex,”The Astrophysical Journal Letters,626, L11, 2005.Garnavich, Peter M., et al.,“Supernova Limits on the Cosmic Equation of State,”TheAstrophysical Journal,509, 74, 1998.Gott, J. Richard III, et al.,“A Map of the Universe,”The Astrophysical Journal,624, 463,2005.Harrison, Edward R.,“Why Is the Sky Dark at Night?”Physics Today, February 1974.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1337>>>

Jones, Michael E., et al.,“H0from an Orientation-Unbiased Sample of SZ and X-rayClusters,”Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,357, 518, 2005.Kolb, Edward W., and Turner, Michael S.,The Early Universe, Westview Press, 1994.Loeb, Abraham,“Long-Term Future of Extragalactic Astronomy,”Physical Review D,65,047301, 2002.Peacock, John A.,Cosmological Physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999.Peebles, P. J. E.,Principles of Physical Cosmology, Princeton University Press, Princeton,NJ, 1993.Penzias, A. A., and Wilson, R. W.,“A Measurement of Excess Antenna Temperature at4080 Mc/s,”The Astrophysical Journal,142, 419, 1965.Perlmutter, S., et al.,“Measurements ofχOmegaφandχLambdaφfrom 42 High-Redshift Supernovae,”TheAstrophysical Journal,517, 565, 1999.Perlmutter, S., and Schmidt, B. P.,“Measuring Cosmology with Supernovae,”Supernovaeand Gamma-Ray Bursters, K. Weiler (ed.),Lecture Notes in Physics,598, 195, 2003.Raine, D. J., and Thomas, E. G.,An Introduction to the Science of Cosmology, Institute ofPhysics Publishing, Philadelphia, 2001.Riess, Adam G., et al.,“Type Ia Supernova Discoveries atz>1 from theHubble SpaceTelescope: Evidence for Past Deceleration and Constraints on Dark Energy Evolution,”The Astrophysical Journal,607, 665, 2004.Riess, Adam G., et al.,“Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an Accelerating Uni-verse and a Cosmological Constant,”The Astronomical Journal,116, 1009, 1998.Ryden, Barbara,Introduction to Cosmology, Addison-Wesley, New York, 2003.Spinrad, Hyron, Dey,Arjun, and Graham, James R.,“Keck Observations of the Most DistantGalaxy: 8C 1435+63 atz=4.25,”The Astrophysical Journal Letters,438, L51, 1995.Cosmology


<<<PAGE 1338>>>

CosmologyPROBLEM SET1Itmightbearguedthattheinversesquarelaw for light, shown below, would provide asolutionto Olbers’sparadox.Toseethatthisisnotso,considerauniformdistributionofstarswithnstars per unit volume, each of luminosityL.Imaginethattwothin,sphericalshellsofstarswith radiir1andr2arecenteredonEarth;letthethicknessofeachshellbeχDeltaφr.Showthatthesame energyﬂux reaches Earth from each shell.2Suppose that all of the matter in the universe were converted into energy in the form ofblackbody radiation. Take the average density of matter to be the WMAP value for the densityof baryonic matter,ρb,0.U s et h e  b e l o w  e q u a t i o n  f o rt h ee n e r g yd e n s i t yo fb l a c k b o d yr a d i a t i o nspectrumpeak?Inwhatregionoftheelectromagneticspectrumisthiswavelengthfound?Explain how your result may be applied to Olbers’s paradox.3Show by substitution that Eqs. ( 32) and ( 34) are solutions to Eq. ( 11) for a closeduniverse (k>0).
4Show by substitution that Eqs. ( 36) and ( 38) are solutions to Eq. ( 11) for an openuniverse (k<0).to find thetemperatureoftheuniverseinthissituation.AtwhatwavelengthwouldtheblackbodyF=L4πr2
u=4πc/integraldisplay∞0Bλ(T ) dλ=4σT4c=aT4
Rclosed=4πG ρ03kc2[1−cos(x)](32)tclosed=4πG ρ03k3/2c3[x−sin(x)](34)/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2−8πG ρ03R=−kc2.(11)
Ropen=4πG ρ03|k|c2[cosh(x)−1](36)topen=4πG ρ03|k|3/2c3[sinh(x)−x](38)From Chapter 29 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved...
,

<<<PAGE 1339>>>

5Derive Eqs. (33) and (35) from Eqs. (32) and (34), respectively.
6Derive Eqs. (37) and (39) from Eqs. (36) and (38), respectively.
7 (a)Use Eq. ( 11) toﬁnd an expression for the maximum scale factorRin a closed universe.Does your answer agree with Eq. (33)?
(b)Find the lifetime of a closed universe (expressed as a multiple of the Hubble time,tH)a sa function of the density parameter,χOmegaφ0.8Derive Eqs. ( 40–42) for the age of the universe using Eqs. ( 31), ( 33), ( 35),(37), (39), and (4).Rclosed=4πG ρ03kc2[1−cos(x)](32)=12χOmegaφ0χOmegaφ0−1[1−cos(x)](33)tclosed=4πG ρ03k3/2c3[x−sin(x)](34)=12H0χOmegaφ0(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2[x−sin(x)](35)Ropen=4πG ρ03|k|c2[cosh(x)−1](36)=12χOmegaφ01−χOmegaφ0[cosh(x)−1](37)topen=4πG ρ03|k|3/2c3[sinh(x)−x](38)=12H0χOmegaφ0(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2[sinh(x)−x].(39)/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2−8πG ρ03R=−kc2.(11)=12χOmegaφ0χOmegaφ0−1[1−cos(x)](33)R=11+z,(4)=/parenleftbigg32/parenrightbigg2/3/parenleftbiggttH/parenrightbigg2/3(forχOmegaφ0=1),(31)Cosmology: Problem Set
.


<<<PAGE 1340>>>

=12χOmegaφ0χOmegaφ0−1[1−cos(x)](33)=12H0χOmegaφ0(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2[x−sin(x)],(35)=12χOmegaφ01−χOmegaφ0[cosh(x)−1](37)=12H0χOmegaφ0(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2[sinh(x)−x].(39)
9Consider a one-component universe of pressureless dust.(a)Show thatχOmegaφ(t)=ρ(t)ρc(t)=1+kc2(dR/dt)2,(194)which describes howχOmegaφvaries with time. What does this have to say about the nature ofthe early universe?(b)Show thatdR/dt→∞ast→0. What does this say about the difference between aclosed, aﬂat, and an open universe at very early times?10For a one-component universe of pressureless dust, show that1χOmegaφ−1=/parenleftbigg1χOmegaφ0−1/parenrightbigg(1+z)−1.(195)What happens aszincreases?11Show that in the limit(1+z)≫1/χOmegaφ0, Eq. ( 41) reduces to Eq. ( 43).Hint:First writeEq. ( 41) in terms of a variableu≡1/[χOmegaφ0(1+z)], and then expand the equation in a Taylorseries aboutu=0. You mayﬁndcos−1(1−x)=√2x1/2+√212x3/2+···forx≪1 to be useful.tclosed(z)tH=χOmegaφ02(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2/bracketleftbiggcos−1/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0z−χOmegaφ0+2χOmegaφ0z+χOmegaφ0/parenrightbigg−2√(χOmegaφ0−1)(χOmegaφ0z+1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0>1).(41)t(z)tH=231(1+z)3/2χOmegaφ1/20(43)Cosmology: Problem Set
tﬂat(z)tH=231(1+z)3/2(forχOmegaφ0=1).(40)tclosed(z)tH=χOmegaφ02(χOmegaφ0−1)3/2/bracketleftbiggcos−1/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0z−χOmegaφ0+2χOmegaφ0z+χOmegaφ0/parenrightbigg−2√(χOmegaφ0−1)(χOmegaφ0z+1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0>1).(41)topen(z)tH=χOmegaφ02(1−χOmegaφ0)3/2/bracketleftbigg−cosh−1/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0z−χOmegaφ0+2χOmegaφ0z+χOmegaφ0/parenrightbigg+2√(1−χOmegaφ0)(χOmegaφ0z+1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg(forχOmegaφ0<1).(42)
.

<<<PAGE 1341>>>

13Assuming thatP=0, show that Eq. ( 51) for the acceleration of a mass shell can be foundfrom Newton’s second law by considering the gravitational force on an expanding shell.14Consider a model of the universe consisting of neutral hydrogen atoms for which the average(rms) speed of the atoms is 600 km s−1(approximately the speed of the Local Group relative tothe Hubble Flow). Show thatρ≫P/c2for the gas. For an adiabatically expanding universe,for what value ofRandzwillρ=P/c2?15By inserting the equation of stateP=wρc2into theﬂuid equation, Eq. ( 50), show thatR3(1+w)ρ=constant=ρ0, whereρ0is the present value ofρ.16Show that for a pressureless dust universe,q(t)=12χOmegaφ(t), which is Eq. (55).17The deuterium (21H) nucleus is not very tightly bound.d2Rdt2=−43πG/parenleftbiggρ+3Pc2/parenrightbiggR.(51)
d(R3ρ)dt=−Pc2d(R3)dt.(50)q(t)=12χOmegaφ(t),(55)(a)Calculate the binding energy of the deuterium nucleus, using values ofmH=1.007825 u,mn=1.008665 u, andmD=2.014102 u.(b)What is the wavelength of a photon with this energy?(c)From Wien’s law, at what temperature is this the characteristic energy of a blackbodyphoton?18The carbon absorption lines that are formed when the light from a distant quasar, Q1331+70,passes through an intergalactic cloud have been measured by Antoinette Songaila and hercolleagues. The relative strengths of the lines indicate that the temperature of the cloud is7.4±0.8 K, and the lines show a redshift ofz=1.776. How does the temperature of thecloud compare with the temperature of the CMB at that redshift? (If there are sources ofheating for the cloud in addition to the CMB, then its temperature must be considered as anupper limitto the temperature of the CMB.)19In 1941, microwave observations detected absorption lines due to cyanogen molecules (CN) inmolecular clouds. A cyanogen molecule has threeﬁrst excited rotational states, each of whichis degenerate and has an energy that is 4.8×10−4eV above the ground state. An analysisof the absorption lines shows that for every 100 molecules in the ground state, there are 27others that are in one of the threeﬁrst excited states. Assuming that the molecular clouds arein thermal equilibrium with the CMB, use the Boltzmann equation shown below to estimatethe temperature of the CMB.NbNa=gbe−Eb/kTgae−Ea/kT=gbgae−(Eb−Ea)/kT.Cosmology: Problem Set12Derive the acceleration equation, Eq. (51).d2Rdt2=−43πG/parenleftbiggρ+3Pc2/parenrightbiggR.(51)


<<<PAGE 1342>>>

20u=⟨S⟩/c.)21Usethe below equation fortherelativisticDopplershifttoderiveEq.(61).ShowthatEq.(61)reduces to Eq. (62) whenv≪c.
22Calculate the magnitude of the variation in the temperature of the CMB due to the Sun’speculiar velocity.23In this problem you will approximate the physics that produces the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect.(a)First, estimate the shift in the frequency of a low-energy CMB photon as it is scattered bya high-energy electron (inverse Compton scattering) of speedvein the hot intracluster gasof a rich cluster of galaxies. Although photons can be scattered from any direction into anydirection, we will consider the four equally likely situations shown in Fig. 31. Showthat theaverageshift in the frequency of these four photons isχDeltaφνν=v2ec2=3kTemec2,whereTeis the temperature of the electron gas. Evaluate this expression usingTe=108K,and explain why you could assume that in the rest frame of the electron, the change in thewavelength (∼λC) of the photon could be neglected.(b)About what fraction of the CMB photons will be scattered as they pass through the intra-cluster gas? Assume an electron number density ofne=104m−3and a cluster radius of3 Mpc.νobs=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+(u/c)cosθ=νrest/radicalbig1−u2/c21+vr/cTmoving=Trest/radicalbig1−v2/c21−(v/c)cosθ,(61)Tmoving≃Trest/parenleftBig1+vccosθ/parenrightBig(62)
Photon
Before scatteringAfter scatteringElectronTo Earth1.2.3.4.FIGURE 31Inverse Compton scattering of a CMB photon by a high-energy electron.Cosmology: Problem Set
.Channel 6 on your television consists of radio waves with wavelengths between 3.41 m and 3.66 m. Consider a 25,000-watt television station located 70 km from your home. Use the be-low equation for the energy density of blackbody radiation to estimate the ratio of the number of channel 6 photons to the number of CMB photons that your television antenna picks up in this wavelength band. (Hint: For the television broadcast, recall that the energy density of an electromagnetic wave is related to the time-averaged Poynting vector by


<<<PAGE 1343>>>

(c)Use the increaseχDeltaφνof the peak frequency with Wien’s law (Eq. 59) to obtain anapproximate expression for the effective decrease in the temperature of the CMB,χDeltaφT /T0(the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect).24Show that in the general equation of stateP=wu(Eq. 52),w=1/3 for relativistic particles(E≫mc2).Hint:The pressure integral, may prove useful.25Consider a comoving sphere whose surface expands with the universe. Let it be centered atthe origin andﬁlled with CMB photons. Show that Eq. ( 81),R4ρrel=ρrel,0, is consistentwith the conservation of energy within the sphere.26Some quantities obey an exponential time-behavior of the formf (t)=f0et/τ, whereτis thecharacteristic timefor the system under consideration.(a)Show thatτ=/parenleftbigg1fdfdt/parenrightbigg−1.This expression can be used to deﬁne a characteristic time for any function, regardless ofwhether its behavior is exponential.(b)Use the scale factor,R(t), to show that the characteristic time for the expansion of theuniverse isτexp(t)=1/H(t).(c)Assuming aﬂat universe containing only matter and radiation,ﬁnd an expression (validin both the radiation era and the matter era) for the characteristic expansion timeτexpas afunction of the scale factorR.27 (a)Show that deep in the radiation era whenR≪Rr,m, Eq. ( 84) is well approximated byEq. (86).(b)Solve the Friedmann equation for aﬂat, one-component universe that contains only rela-tivistic particles, and compare your result with Eq. (86).νmaxT=5.88×1010Hz K−1.(59)P=wu=wρc2,(52)P=13⎩integraldisplay∞0nppv dp.R4ρrel=ρrel,0(81)
t(R)=23R3/2r,mH0/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/bracketleftBigg2+/parenleftbiggRRr,m−2/parenrightbigg/radicalBiggRRr,m+1/bracketrightBigg,(84)R(t)=/parenleftbigg16πGg∗a3c2/parenrightbigg1/4T0t1/2(86)Cosmology: Problem Set
.


<<<PAGE 1344>>>

28Use a procedure similar to that used to obtain Eq. ( 28) to show that a one-componentuniverse of relativistic particles isﬂat in the limitz→∞.χOmegaφ=/parenleftbigg1+z1+χOmegaφ0z/parenrightbiggχOmegaφ0=1+χOmegaφ0−11+χOmegaφ0z.(28)29Assuming that the present density of baryonic matter is given by Eq. ( 17), what was thedensity of matter at the time of Big Bang nucleosynthesis, whenT∼1010K?30One factor that contributed to the cessation of the reactions that formed neutrons at roughly1010K [Eqs. ( 93–95)] was the annihilation of electron–positron pairs that occurred at thattime. When the temperature became too low, the electron–positron pairs could not be replacedby pair production. (This removed the supply of electrons that could combine with protons toform neutrons.) By setting the characteristic thermal energy of a photon,kT, equal to the restenergy of an electron–positron pair, estimate the temperature below which an annihilated pairwill not readily be replaced.31In this problem, you will show that when the temperature of the universe was about 109K, allof the neutrons would have combined with protons to form helium nuclei.(a)Usingargumentssimilartothoseleadinguptothe equation below showthatthenumberofχDeltaφtisnpσvχDeltaφt, wherenpis the number density of protons,σis the neutron’s collision cross section, andvis thespeed of the neutron.(b)EvaluatenpσvχDeltaφt. If the result is≫1, then each neutron had ample opportunity to combinewith a proton. LetχDeltaφtbe the characteristic timescale of the universe at the time of heliumformation, and useσ=π(2r)2, wherer≃10−15m is the radius of a neutron. The numberdensity of protons can be estimated from the baryonic mass density whenT=109K.32 (a)Use the cross section for electron scattering shown below toﬁnd an expression for the(b)Assuming that the electrons remain free, at what value ofRandzwill the average timebetween scatterings equal the characteristic expansion timeτexpof Problem 26? (UseWMAP values.) What is the age of the universe when this occurs? This is when aﬂatuniverse of matter and radiation would have become transparent due solely to its expansion(no recombination).ρb,0=4.17×10−28kg m−3(forh=0.71),(17)
n/harpoonleftrightp++e−+νe(93)n+e+/harpoonleftrightp++νe(94)n+νe/harpoonleftrightp++e−.(95)collisions between a neutron and a proton that occur within a timeℓ=vtnσvt=1nσ.
average time between scatterings of a photon by free electrons.σT=16πϵ20/parenleftbigge2mec2/parenrightbigg2=6.65×10−29m2.Cosmology: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1345>>>

33Solve Eq. ( 101) for a composition of pure hydrogen toﬁnd the temperature when half ofthe electrons and protons have combined to form neutral atoms.34Calculate the time of decoupling,tdec, for a universe of matter and radiation using the WMAPvalues forzdec=1089 and other quantities. Compare your answer with the WMAP result of379+8−7kyr.35Using WMAP values for a universe of matter and radiation, estimate the time intervalχDeltaφtbetween when recombination began (say, when 99% of the hydrogen atoms were ionized) andwhen recombination ended (say, when 1% of the hydrogen atoms were ionized). What is thedifferenceχDeltaφzbetween the values of the redshiftzat these two times? This is the thickness (interms ofz)o ft h e“surface”of last scattering. Compare your answers with the WMAP resultsofχDeltaφt=118+3−2kyr andχDeltaφz=195±2. Assume a composition of pure hydrogen.36Suppose that Earth were a perfectly smooth sphere. If you drew a circle of radiusD=100 me-ters on Earth’s surface, what discrepancy would youﬁnd between the expected and measuredvalues of the circle’s circumference?37Follow a procedure similar to that used to obtain Eq. ( 28) to derive an expression forthe total density parameter,χOmegaφ(z), as a function ofz. Verify that your expression reduces tof1−f=mHR3fρb,0/parenleftbigg2πmekT0h2R/parenrightbigg3/2e−χIR/kT0(101)
χOmegaφ=/parenleftbigg1+z1+χOmegaφ0z/parenrightbiggχOmegaφ0=1+χOmegaφ0−11+χOmegaφ0z.(28)Eq. ( 28) ifχOmegaφrel,0=χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0=0. What does your expression say about the geometry of anearly, three-component universe?38Use the Robertson–Walker metric, Eq. ( 106), to show that the proper area (dt=0) ofa spherical surface, centered at the origin and passing through comoving coordinateϖ, is4π[R(t)ϖ]2.
39Einstein originally introduced the cosmological constantχLambdaφto stabilize his model of a pres-sureless dust universe against expansion or contraction.(a)Find an expression forχLambdaφin terms of the densityρmof a static model of a pressureless dustuniverse with a cosmological constant.(b)Find an expression for the curvaturekfor this static model. Is this model universe closed,open, orﬂat?(c)Explain why Einstein’s static model is in an unstable equilibrium, so any departure fromequilibrium (expansion or contraction) will tend to increase.40EvaluateχOmegaφm,χOmegaφrel, andχOmegaφχLambdaφat the time of decoupling (z=1089) using WMAP values.(ds)2=(c dt)2−R2(t)/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbiggdϖ√1−kϖ2/parenrightbigg2+(ϖ dθ)2+(ϖsinθd φ )2/bracketrightBigg(106)Cosmology: Problem Set.
.


<<<PAGE 1346>>>

41Show that Eq. (122) may be written asH=H0/bracketleftBigg/summationdisplayiχOmegaφi,0(1+z)3(1+wi)+(1−χOmegaφ0)(1+z)2/bracketrightBigg1/2,(196)wherewis the coefﬁcient from the equation of statePi=wiρic2and the“i”subscriptsidentify one of the components of the universe (i.e., pressureless dust, relativistic particles, ordark energy).42Derive Eq. (123) for a general expression of the deceleration parameter,q(t)=12/summationdisplayi(1+3w )χOmegaφ (t).ii43Use the acceleration equation to show that the acceleration of the universe changed sign (fromnegative to positive) when the scale factor wasRaccel=/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,02χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3.Evaluate the value ofRaccelandzaccelat this time with WMAP values.44 (a)Use Eq. ( 129) toﬁnd an expression for the lookback time,tL, as a function of theredshiftz.(b)function of redshift. Using your expression for the lookback time with WMAP values,replot the“ChoMP + CDF + ROSAT”data (marked withﬁlled circles) withtL/tHonthe horizontal axis (the lookback time as a fraction of the Hubble time). How would youcharacterize the decline in the space density of AGN with increasing lookback time?H=H0(1+z)/bracketleftbiggχOmegaφm,0(1+z)+χOmegaφrel,0(1+z)2+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0(1+z)2+1−χOmegaφ0/bracketrightbigg1/2(122)
q(t)=12/summationdisplayi(1+3w )χOmegaφ (t)ii(123)
t(R)=231H0/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0ln/bracketleftBigg/radicalBigg/parenleftbiggχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0χOmegaφm,0/parenrightbiggR3+/radicalBigg1+/parenleftbiggχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0χOmegaφm,0/parenrightbiggR3/bracketrightBigg.(129)The below showsthecomovingspacedensityofactivegalacticnuclei(AGN)asaCosmology: Problem Set
.
Figure


<<<PAGE 1347>>>

45The cosmological constant becomes dominant as the scale factorRbecomes increasinglylarger in theχLambdaφera.(a)Show that the Hubble parameter is a constant in aﬂat universe deep in theχLambdaφera.(b)Suppose that, starting today (t=t0, whenR=1), only the cosmological constant con-tributes to the Friedmann equation. Solve the Friedmann equation and show that forχLambdaφ>0, the scale factor will increase exponentially.(c)Use WMAP values to evaluate the characteristic time for the exponential expansion (cf.Problem 26).46In the matter era, the distance to the particle horizon for a closed, one-component universe ofpressureless dust is given bydh(z)=cH0(1+z)√χOmegaφ0−1cos−1/bracketleftbigg1−2(χOmegaφ0−1)χOmegaφ0(1+z)/bracketrightbigg.(197)In this problem, you will derive this expression fordh. First change variables in Eq. ( 153)to obtaindh(t)=R(t)/integraldisplay11+z0cdRR(dR/dt),where the limits of integration range fromR=0 (att=0) toR=1/(1+z)(at timet). Thenshow that/parenleftbiggdRdt/parenrightbigg2=H20/parenleftbiggχOmegaφ0R−χOmegaφ0+1/parenrightbigg,*
Such a universe is called ade Sitter universe, named for the Dutch mathematician Willem de Sitter (1872–1934).*Cosmology: Problem Set
10–810–710–610–5Number density (Mpc–3)
012345RedshiftChaMP + CDF + ROSATROSAT (Miyaji et al. 2000)COMBO–17 (Wolf et al. 2003)2dF (Croom et al. 2004)SSG (1995)SDSS (Fan et al. 2001)
The comoving space density of active galactic nuclei (number per cubic mega-parsec) as a function of redshift. (Figure adapted from Silverman et al.,Ap. J.,624, 630, 2005.)


<<<PAGE 1348>>>

and make this substitution into the denominator of the integral. You mayﬁnd/integraldisplaydx√bx−ax2=1√a/bracketleftbiggcos−1/parenleftbigg1−2axb/parenrightbigg−π2/bracketrightbiggto be useful.47Use the results of Problem 46 toﬁnd the ratio of the distance to the particle horizon to thecircumference of a closed, matter-dominated universe. What happens at very early times, asz→∞? Show that at the time of maximum expansion (just before the closed universe beginsto collapse), this ratio is equal to one-half. This means that at the moment of the Big Crunchending the collapse, the particle horizon encompasses the entire universe.48Using Eq. ( 163) for the comoving coordinate,ϖ, of a photon just now arriving from thepresent particle horizon in aﬂat universe,ﬁnd the maximum proper distance of the photonduring its journey. Express your answer as a fraction of the model’s particle horizon,dh,0=3ct0. At what time (t/t0) is the photon at this distance? Carefully explain the meaning of thephrase“just now arriving from the present particle horizon.”49Consider the (unrealistic) model of aﬂat, one-component universe of pressureless dust, asdescribedinSection1 of Cosmology.(a)Show that for this model,ϖ=2cH0/parenleftbigg1−1√1+z/parenrightbigg.(198)(b)Find an expression for the proper distance to an object with redshiftzfor this model.ϖ=ϖe−3ct0/parenleftbiggtt0/parenrightbigg1/3.(163)
(c)Find an expression for the horizon distance in this model. Evaluate this using WMAPvalues, and compare your result with the more accurate value of Eq. (159).50Derive Mattig’s relation for a one-component universe of pressureless dust,ϖ=2cH011+z1χOmegaφ20/bracketleftBigχOmegaφ0z−(2−χOmegaφ0)(/radicalbig1+χOmegaφ0z−1)/bracketrightBig,(199)or in terms of the deceleration parameterq0=χOmegaφ0/2 (valid for this one-component model),ϖ=cH011+z1q20/bracketleftBigq0z−(1−q0)(/radicalbig1+2q0z−1)/bracketrightBig.(200)Show that this is valid for aﬂat, an open, and a closed one-component universe of pressurelessdust. Note that Eq. ( 198) in the previous problem and Eq. ( 199) are in agreement whenχOmegaφ0=1.dh,0=4.50×1026m=14,600 Mpc=14.6 Gpc(159)
51Show that Eq. (178) is the Taylor-series expansion of Eq. (168) aboutz=0.I (z)≡/integraldisplayz0dz′/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0(1+z′)3+χOmegaφrel,0(1+z′)4+χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0+(1−χOmegaφ0)(1+z′)2.(168)I (z)=/integraldisplayz0/braceleftbigg1−(1+q0)z′+/bracketleftbigg12+2q0+32q20+12(1−χOmegaφ0)/bracketrightbiggz′2+···/bracerightbiggdz′(178)Cosmology: Problem Set
”“


<<<PAGE 1349>>>

52In this problem, you will carry out a general derivation of Eq. ( 180) without reference toany speciﬁc model of the universe.(a)Expand the scale factor,R(t), in a general Taylor series about the present time,t0, andobtainR(t)=R(t0)+dRdt/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglet0(t−t0)+12d2Rdt2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglet0(t−t0)2+···=1−H0(t0−t)−12H20q0(t0−t)2+···.(201)(b)Show that 1/R(t)is then given by1R(t)=1+H0(t0−t)+H20/parenleftbigg1+12q0/parenrightbigg(t0−t)2+···.[Hint:Use long division to divide 1 byR(t).](c)Use Eq. ( 142), 1/R(t)=1+z, with the result of part (b) to write the expansion forzabout the present time. Now solve fort0−tand express the result as a series inzto gett0−t=zH0−/parenleftbigg1+12q0/parenrightbiggz2H0+···.(d)Consider a photon that is emitted at comoving coordinateϖat timetand received onEarth at the present timet0. Use an equation similar to Eq. ( 138) toﬁnd an approximateexpression forϖ. You need only use theﬁrst two terms in the expansion in part (b) for1/R(t)in the left-hand integral. For the right-hand integral, use a two-term Taylor seriesfor 1/√1−kϖ2. You shouldﬁnd thatϖ=c(t0−t)/bracketleftbigg1+12H0(t0−t)/bracketrightbigg+···.(e)By substituting the expression fort0−tfrom part (c) into this equation forϖ, show that,to second order inz,ϖ=czH0/bracketleftbigg1−12(1+q0)z/bracketrightbigg+···.ϖ≃czH0/bracketleftbigg1−12(1+q0)z/bracketrightbigg(forz≪1).(180)
1R(te)=λ0λe=1+z.(142)
/integraldisplayt0tecdtR(t)=/integraldisplayϖe0dϖ√1−kϖ2(138)
This result is very important because it does not rely on any particular model of the universe.It is valid even if the cosmological constant,χLambdaφ, is not equal to zero.53Use Eq. ( 196) from Problem 41 to show that the luminosity distance may be written asdL=c(1+z)H0√|1−χOmegaφ0|sinn/braceleftBigg/radicalbig|1−χOmegaφ0|/integraldisplayz0dz′/bracketleftbig/summationtextiχOmegaφi,0(1+z′)3(1+wi)+(1−χOmegaφ0)(1+z′)2/bracketrightbig1/2/bracerightBigg,(202)Cosmology: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1350>>>

wheresinn(x)≡sinh(x)ifχOmegaφ0<1,≡xifχOmegaφ0=1,≡sin(x)ifχOmegaφ0>1.This is Eq. (1) of Garnavich et al. (1998), which explains how this equation may be used withthe distance modulus, Eq. ( 186), to place limits on the value ofwχLambdaφfor the equation of stateof dark energy. The WMAP result is thatwχLambdaφ<−0.78.m−M=5 log10(dL/10 pc)(186)54Assume aﬂat, one-component universe of pressureless dust for this problem.(a)Show that the angular diameter observed for an extended object of linear diameterDatredshiftzisθ=H0D2c(1+z)3/2√1+z−1.(b)Find the value of the redshift for whichθis a minimum. Compare your result withFig. 30.
23456
12345zWm,0 = 1, WL,0 = 0Wm,0 = 0.3, WL,0 = 0WMAPc/H9258/H0D
FIGURE 30The angular diameterθof a galaxy in units ofH0D/cfor several values ofχOmegaφm,0andχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.(c)What is the smallest value ofθwhen observing a cluster of galaxies with a diameter of1 Mpc? Useh=0.71.55Model the hot intragalactic gas in a rich cluster of galaxies as a homogeneous sphere of radiusRand temperatureTe. LetFXbe the X-rayﬂux observed for the gas, and letθbe the angulardiameter of the gas, as observed from Earth.(a)Show that if the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect,χDeltaφT /T0, is measured for the cluster, then theHubble constant may be calculated asCosmology: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1351>>>

H0=Cf (z)FXT3/2eθ(χDeltaφT /T0)2.wheref (z)is a function of the redshiftzof the cluster andCis a constant factor you mustdetermine.(b)Use the data in Fig. 12 for the clusters, together withθ=46′′andkTe=8.0 keV forAbell 697, andθ=69′′andkTe=7.2 keV for Abell 2218 (from Jones et al., 2005) toevaluateh, the Hubble parameter. To crudely compensate for the gas not being isothermal,takeTeto be half the value obtained from the data. How do your answers compare withthe WMAP value ofh=0.71?
17181920222123242536º26'
0809111012141315161766º18'Declination (J2000)
Declination (J2000)08h43m15s00 42m45s16h34m45s30 15 0030 1535m45sRight ascension (J2000)Right ascension (J2000)1020300100200
FIGURE 12Radio contours showing the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect superimposed on ROSATimages of the clusters Abell 697 (χDeltaφT=1047µK,z=0.282) and Abell 2218 (χDeltaφT=797µK,z=0.171). The contour interval is 60µJy (left) and 80µJy (right). The dashed contours indicatea decrease in the received radio ﬂux density. (Figure adapted from Jones et al.,MNRAS,357, 518,2005.)COMPUTER PROBLEMS56In Eq. ( 166), the limits of integration on the left-hand side span a time interval that liesentirely in the past. Use Eq. ( 132) to approximate the scale factor on the left-hand side.On the right-hand side, consider the case oftmva>t0, so the limits of integration span a timeinterval that lies entirely in the future. Use Eq. ( 133) for the scale factor on the right-handside. [Note that very distant objects have already emitted the last photon that will ever reach us(tmva<t0), so we must restrict our attention to nearer objects to ensure thattmva>t0.] Showthattmva≃tH/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0ln⎡⎣/parenleftBigg/radicalbigχOmegaφm,02/radicalbigχOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightBigg1/3/parenleftBigg√1+z√1+z−1/parenrightBigg⎤⎦.Using WMAP values, what is the largest redshift for whichtmva>tH? Find the maximumvisible age, in units oftH, for sources at values ofzof 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 1.5.Cosmology: Problem Set


<<<PAGE 1352>>>

R(t)≃/parenleftbigg32H0t/radicalbigχOmegaφm,0/parenrightbigg2/3=/parenleftBigg3/radicalbigχOmegaφm,02/parenrightBigg2/3/parenleftbiggttH/parenrightbigg2/3,(132)R(t)≃/parenleftbiggχOmegaφm,04χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0/parenrightbigg1/3eH0t√χOmegaφχLambdaφ,0.(133)/integraldisplayt0tedtR(t)=/integraldisplaytftidtR(t)(166)58Use WMAP values for this problem.(a)On a single graph, plot the luminosity distance, the present proper distance, the angulardiameterdistance,therelativisticHubblelawdistanceestimatethe below equation,andzbetween 0 and 4.c/H0.
(b)From your results, determine the value ofzwhen the relativistic Hubble law distanceestimate differs from the proper distance by more than 10%.59A distant radio galaxy, 8C 1435+63, has a redshift ofz=4.25. Assume WMAP values forthis problem.(a)How old was the universe at this redshift? Express your answer both in terms of years andas a fraction of the present age of the universe.(b)What is the present proper distance (in Mpc) to 8C 1435+63?(c)What was the proper distance (in Mpc) to 8C 1435+63 when its light was emitted?(d)What is the luminosity distance to 8C 1435+63?(e)What is the angular diameter distance to 8C 1435+63?(f)The angular diameter of the nucleus of 8C 1435+63 is about 5′′. What is the linear diameterof the galaxy (in units of kpc)?(g)Suppose the galaxy’s redshift werez=1. What would its linear diameter be [using thesame angular diameter as in part (d)]?Further information about 8C 1435+63, which may be the progenitor of a cD ellipticalgalaxy, can be found in Spinrad, Dey, and Graham (1995).the non-relativistic Hubble law distance shown below for values ofExpress these distances in units ofd≃cH0(z+1)2−1(z+1)2+1,d=czH0Cosmology: Problem Set
.
.


<<<PAGE 1353>>>



<<<PAGE 1354>>>

The Early Universe
å&ROM #HAPTER   OF An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics3ECOND %DITION "RADLEY 7 #ARROLL $ALE ! /STLIE #OPYRIGHT ÚBY0EARSON %DUCATION )NC 0UBLISHED BY 0EARSON !DDISON7ESLEY !LL RIGHTS RESERVED


<<<PAGE 1355>>>

The Early Universe1The Very Early Universe and Inﬂation2The Origin of Structure1THE VERY EARLY UNIVERSE AND INFLATION4HIS CHAPTER DEALS WITH THEEMERGENCE OF STRUCTURE FROM THE FEATURELESS CAULDRON OF THE "IG-UCH HAPPENED DURING THE UNIVERSES lRST FRACTION OF A SECOND AND THE NATURE OF THATEARLIESTENVIRONMENTISSTILLONLYPARTIALLYUNDERSTOOD4HEIDEASOFMODERNPARTICLEPHYSICSTHATDESCRIBETHESEEARLYEPOCHSHAVEALSOMADESUCCESSFULPREDICTIONSABOUTTHETYPESANDNUMBERS OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLES THAT EXIST TODAY )T IS TO THESE THEORIES THAT WE TURN WITHSOME MEASURE OF CONlDENCE	 IN HOPES OF GLIMPSING THE ENGINES OF CREATIONFundamental Particles!CCORDINGTOTHEStandard ModelOFPARTICLEPHYSICSTHEREARETHREEKINDSOFFUNDAMENTALNOT COMPOSITE	 PARTICLESs 4HEleptonsARETHECHARGEDLEPTONSe±µ±ANDτ±ANDTHENEUTRINOSνeνµANDντTOGETHER WITH THEIR ANTINEUTRINOSνeνµ ANDντ ,EPTONS ARE FERMIONSs 4HERE ARE SIXquarks UP DOWN STRANGE CHARM BOTTOM AND TOP ALONG WITH THEIRANTIQUARKS %ACH QUARK COMES IN THREE hCOLORSv THREE CHOICES OF AN INTERNAL DEGREEOF FREEDOM	 0ARTICLES MADE OF QUARKS ARE CALLEDhadrons 4HERE ARE TWO TYPES OFHADRONSbaryonsMADEOFTHREEQUARKS	ANDmesonsFORMEDBYAQUARKnANTIQUARKPAIR	 "ARYONS ARE FERMIONS WHILE MESONS ARE BOSONSs 4HEforce-carrying particlesCONSISTOFTHEPHOTONEIGHTDIFFERENTGLUONSPARTICLESTHAT MEDIATE THE STRONG INTERACTION AND BIND QUARKS TOGETHER	 THREE VECTOR GAUGEBOSONS W±ANDZ	 THAT MEDIATE THE WEAK INTERACTION AND THE SCALAR (IGGS BOSONWHICH HAS YET TO BE CONlRMED BY EXPERIMENT	!LL OF THESE PARTICLES ARE BOSONS4ABLE  SUMMARIZES SOME OF THE PROPERTIES OF THESE PARTICLES #URRENT TECHNOLOGY CANREPRODUCETHETEMPERATURESENERGIESANDDENSITIESTHATPREVAILEDBACKTOTHEquark–hadron"ANG


<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TABLE 10ARTICLES OF THE 3TANDARD -ODEL IN THE 2ELATIVISTIC (IGH4EMPERATURE	 ,IMIT0ARTICLE4YPESnANTInSPINgf#ONTRIBUTION TOg∗0HOTON     #HARGED LEPTONS      .EUTRINOS     1UARKS     'LUONS     6ECTOR GAUGE BOSONS      3CALAR (IGGS BOSON      TABLE 2%RAS AND %VENTS IN THE %ARLY 5NIVERSE4HE VALUES ARE APPROXIMATE%RA OR %VENT4IME 4EMPERATURE kT	0LANCK ERA<×−S>'E60LANCK TRANSITION×−S 'E6'RAND UNIlCATION ERA ×−S TO −S 'E6TO 'E6)NmATION−S TO −S 'E6%LECTROWEAK ERA−S TO −S 'E6TO  'E6%LECTROWEAK TRANSITION−S 'E61UARK ERA−S TO −S  'E6TO  -E61UARKnHADRON TRANSITION−S -E6.EUTRINO DECOUPLING.S -E6%LECTRONnPOSITRON ANNIHILATION.S -E6transitionAT ABOUT −S WHEN A PLASMA OF FREE QUARKS AND GLUONS CONDENSED TO FORMHADRONS INCLUDING THE FAMILIAR PROTON AND NEUTRON4ABLE  SHOWS THE TYPICAL TIMES AND TEMPERATURES kT	 OF DIFFERENT ERAS DURING THElRST SECOND AFTER THE "IG "ANG 7E REMIND YOU THAT ANY hAGE OF THE UNIVERSEv THAT ISQUOTEDHASBEENOBTAINEDFROMABACKWARDEXTRAPOLATIONINTIMEUSINGA&RIEDMANNMODELOF THE UNIVERSE	 4HE TEMPERATURE AS A FUNCTION OF TIME IS GIVEN BYT (t)=(.×+S/)g−/∗t−/.	4HEVALUEOFg∗THEEFFECTIVENUMBEROFDEGREESOFFREEDOMOFALLOFTHERELATIVISTICPARTICLESPRESENT AT TEMPERATURET IS GIVEN BYg∗=/summationdisplayBOSONSigi+/summationdisplayFERMIONSigi/parenleftbiggTνT/parenrightbigg.	The Early Universe



<<<PAGE 1357>>>

g
 n  n ,OG TFIGURE 14HE EFFECTIVE NUMBER OF DEGREES OF FREEDOMg∗ AS A FUNCTION OF TEMPERATURE 4HETEMPERATUREISACTUALLYkTINUNITSOF-E64HEQUARKHADRONTRANSITIONISCHOSENTOOCCURAT-E6&IGURE ADAPTED FROM #OLEMAN AND 2OOSPhys. Rev. D, 68  	4HE FACTOR(Tν/T)=(/)/IS APPLIED ONLY TO NEUTRINOS AND ONLYIF THE TEMPERATUREIS BELOW THAT OF NEUTRINO DECOUPLING kT≈ -E6	&IGURE SHOWSTHEVARIATIONINTHEVALUEOFg∗ASAFUNCTIONOFkTINUNITSOF-E64HEPRESENT VALUE OFg∗=.AT THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE GRAPH IS DUE TO THE PHOTONANDTHE THREE SPECIES OF NEUTRINOS AND THEIR ANTINEUTRINOS "ETWEEN NEUTRINO DECOUPLING ATABOUT-E6AND∼-E6THEELECTRONANDPOSITRONARETHEONLYADDITIONALRELATIVISTICPARTICLES YIELDINGg∗=. !BOVE ABOUT  -E6 THE HADRONS ARE DISSOCIATED INTOTHEIR COMPONENT QUARKS AND GLUONS WHICH CONTRIBUTE MORE TO THE VALUE OFg∗ &INALLY BYkT∼'E6BEYONDTHELEFTSIDEOFTHEGRAPH	ALLOFTHEPARTICLESOFTHESTANDARDMODELARERELATIVISTICANDg∗=..ONEWPARTICLESMASSESAREPREDICTEDWITHINTHERANGEOFENERGIESOFTHEELECTROWEAKERASOWEMAYADOPTAVALUEOFg∗≃THROUGHOUTTHISTIMEINTERVAL 4HE ELECTROWEAK ERA IS SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS THEgreat desertBECAUSE OF THEPAUCITY OF NEW PARTICLES	!T EVEN EARLIER TIMES IT IS ESTIMATED FOR THE SIMPLEST MODEL THATg∗≃ &ORTUNATELYT (t)IS SENSITIVE ONLY TO THE FOURTH ROOT OFg∗ SO PRECISE VALUES OFg∗ARE NOT REQUIRED FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTIMATIONHot and Cold Dark Matter-ISSINGFROM4ABLE OFCOURSEARETHEPARTICLESTHATMAKEUPDARKMATTER$ETERMININGTHECOMPOSITIONOFDARKMATTERISONEOFTHEGREATESTCHALLENGESFACINGCOSMOLOGISTSTODAY3OME DARK MATTER MAY CONSIST OF ORDINARY BARYONIC MATTER ALTHOUGH THE TOTAL AMOUNT OFBARYONICMATTERBOTHSHININGANDDARK	CANNOTMAKEUPMORETHANOFTHETOTALMASSOFTHEUNIVERSE4HE7-!0RESULTSANDCONSTRAINTSIMPOSEDBYTHE"IG"ANGNUCLEOSYNTHESISOF THE LIGHT ELEMENTS ARE INCONSISTENT WITH MUCH LARGER AMOUNTS OF BARYONIC MATTER4HE GRAVITATIONAL MICROLENSING OF STARS IN THE ,ARGE -AGELLANIC #LOUD BY-!#(/SMASSIVECOMPACTHALOOBJECTS	MAYDEMONSTRATETHATSOME DARK BARYONICMATTER IS HIDING IN GALACTICHALOS PERHAPS IN THE FORM OF BROWN DWARFSORSTELLARMASSBLACK HOLES (OWEVER A STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MICROLENSING EVENTS INDICATESTHATONLY ABOUT  OF THE MASS OF THE -ILKY 7AYS DARK MATTER HALO CAN BE EXPLAINED BY-!#(/SThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1358>>>

$ARKMATTERCANDIDATESAREUSUALLYDIVIDEDINTOTWOCATEGORIEShot dark matter($-	ANDcold dark matter#$-	(OTDARKMATTERCONSISTSOFPARTICLESMOVINGWITHRELATIVISTICVELOCITIES4HELEADING CANDIDATES FOR HOTDARK MATTER ARE MASSIVE NEUTRINOSWHICHARELEPTONS	NEUTRINOS MASS IS. E6/c #OLD DARK MATTER CANDIDATES ARE HYPOTHETICAL PARTICLES THATMOVE SLOWLYSUCH AS THE 7)-0S WEAKLY INTERACTING MASSIVE PARTICLES	 THAT HARDLY INTERACTWITHNORMAL MATTER EXCEPT THROUGH THEIR GRAVITATIONALATTRACTION )T HASBEENSUGGESTEDTHATTHE REST ENERGY OF 7)-0S MAY RANGE FROM  'E6 ABOUT  TIMES MORE MASSIVE THAN APROTON	UPTOSEVERAL4E6E6	!NOTHERHYPOTHETICALCOLDDARKMATTERCANDIDATEISTHEaxionALOWMASSBOSONTHATISEXTREMELYLIGHTWEIGHTmc≈−E6	)FAXIONSDOEXISTANDIFTHEYCONSTITUTEMOSTOFTHEDARKMATTERTHENTHEYAREBYFARTHEMOSTNUMEROUSTYPEOFPARTICLEINEXISTENCE!LTHOUGHTHEREISASYETNOEVIDENCEFORTHEEXISTENCEOF7)-0SORAXIONS THE SEARCH FOR THEM CONTINUES4HE DISTINCTION BETWEEN HOT AND COLD DARK MATTER IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT IS DIFlCULTFOR THE RELATIVISTIC HOT DARK MATTER TO CLUMP TOGETHER GRAVITATIONALLY AND PARTICIPATE IN THEFORMATIONOFSTRUCTUREINTHEEARLYUNIVERSE&ORTHISREASONASWESHALLSEEIN3ECTION MODELSTHATINCORPORATECOLDDARKMATTERARECURRENTLYFAVORED)NFACTTHESTANDARDMODELINCOSMOLOGYISREFERREDTOASTHE/Lambda1CDM modelBECAUSEITINCLUDESBOTHTHECOSMOLOGICALCONSTANT AND COLD DARK MATTERThe Planck Limits on Time, Mass, and Length4HE EARLIEST TIME THAT CAN BE ADDRESSED BY CURRENT PHYSICAL THEORY IS THEPlanck timetP≡/radicalbigg/planckover2pi1Gc=.×−S.	4HE0LANCKTIMEISTHEONLYCOMBINATIONOFFUNDAMENTALCONSTANTSTHATHASUNITSOFTIMEANDAS SUCH IS A CHARACTERISTIC QUANTITY IN FUNDAMENTAL THEORIES )T CONTAINS 0LANCKS CONSTANT.EWTONS GRAVITATIONAL CONSTANT AND THE SPEED OF LIGHT A MELDING OF QUANTUM MECHANICSGRAVITATION AND RELATIVITY THAT HAS YET TO BE ACHIEVED IN A UNIlED THEORY4HE PHYSICISTS TOOLBOX OF THEORIES CANNOT PENETRATE THIS BARRIER IN TIME 3OME INSIGHTINTOTHELIMITSIMPOSEDBYTHE0LANCKTIMECOMESFROM(EISENBERGSUNCERTAINTYPRINCIPLE#ONSIDER A BLACK HOLE OF MASSM THE MOST COMPACT REGION WITHIN WHICH AMASS CAN BE CONTAINED4HE CENTRAL SINGULARITY IS CONlNED WITHIN THE EVENT HORIZON SO THEUNCERTAINTY IN ITS POSITION IS JUST ITS 3CHWARZSCHILD RADIUSφDeltaηx≈RS.4HUS THE UNCERTAINTY IN ITS MOMENTUM ISφDeltaηp≈/planckover2pi1φDeltaηx≈/planckover2pi1RS.-ORE PRECISELY IT IS THE INTERNAL VELOCITY DISPERSION OF THE PARTICLES THAT IS RELATIVISTICHE BEST ESTIMATE FOR THE UPPER LIMIT TO THE ELECTRONThe Early Universe4


<<<PAGE 1359>>>

&ORAVERYLOWMASSPRIMORDIALBLACKHOLETHATFORMEDIMMEDIATELYAFTERTHE"IG"ANGRSWILL BE EXTREMELY SMALL AND SOφDeltaηpWILL BE QUITE LARGE )N THE RELATIVISTIC LIMIT THE ENERGYOF THE SINGULARITY ISE=pc AND SO THE UNCERTAINTY IN THE ENERGY ISφDeltaηE=(φDeltaηp)c≈/planckover2pi1cRS.4HE EXPECTED VALUE OF THE ENERGY WILL BE AT LEAST AS LARGE ASφDeltaηE SO THE KINETIC ENERGY OFTHESINGULARITYISAPPROXIMATELYK≈/planckover2pi1c/RS4HEREWILLBEACONmICTBETWEENTHEQUANTUMAND CLASSICAL DESCRIPTIONS OF GRAVITY WHEN THIS ENERGY IS COMPARABLE TO THE MAGNITUDE OFTHE.EWTONIAN	GRAVITATIONALENERGYOFTHEBLACKHOLEWHICHISAPPROXIMATELYU≈−GM/RS)STHEBLACKHOLEBOUNDORCOULDTHESINGULARITYEMERGEFROMBEHINDTHEEVENTHORIZONINVIOLATIONOFTHEh,AWOF#OSMIC#ENSORSHIPv4HISCONFRONTATIONBETWEENTHEAPPLICATIONOFQUANTUMANDCLASSICALPHYSICSTO GRAVITATION MAY BE ESTIMATED TO OCCUR WHEN THE SUM OF THE KINETIC ENERGYK AND THEPOTENTIAL ENERGYU IS ZERO/planckover2pi1cRS−GMRS=.4HE RESULTING MASS IS CALLED THEPlanck massmP≡/radicalbigg/planckover2pi1cG=.×−KG.	
ℓP≡/radicalbigg/planckover2pi1Gc=.×−M.	4HE0LANCKTIMEtP=ℓP/cISJUSTTHETIMEREQUIREDFORLIGHTTOTRAVELTHE0LANCKLENGTH4HE0LANCKLENGTHISTHEREFORETHEDIAMETEROFACAUSALLYCONNECTEDREGIONTHEHORIZONDISTANCE	%QUATION  	 INDICATES THAT THE TEMPERATURE AT THE 0LANCK TIME WAS NEARLY + SOTHETYPICALTHERMALENERGYOFAPARTICLEWASkT∼'E64HEDESCRIPTIONOFTHEUNIVERSEBEFORE THE 0LANCK TIME STAGGERS EVEN THE STRONGEST IMAGINATION 4HE UNIVERSE WOULD HAVEBEEN A COLLECTION OF PRIMORDIAL BLACK HOLES THAT WERE CONTINUALLY FORMING EVAPORATINGAND REFORMING )N THE PROCESS DIFFERENT REGIONS OF SPACETIME WERE RAPIDLY CONNECTING ANDDISCONNECTING GIVING IT A FOAMLIKE STRUCTURE /UR CURRENT PHYSICAL THEORIES BREAK DOWN ATTIMES EARLIER THANtP AND IN FACT THE VERY NOTION OF SPACE AND TIME AS SEPARATE CONCEPTSDISSOLVES BEFORE THE 0LANCK TIME ! QUANTUM THEORY OF GRAVITY CAPABLE OF DESCRIBING THISThe Early Universe
4HIS IS AN ESTIMATE OF THE LEAST MASSIVE PRIMORDIAL BLACK HOLE )NSERTING THE 0LANCK MASS FOR THE 3CHWARZSCHILD RADIUS RS = GM/c NEGLECTING THE FACTOR OF TWO IN THIS ORDER OFMAGNITUDE ESTIMATE AND SOLVING FOR RS RESULTS IN A CHARACTERISTIC LENGTH CALLED THE Planck lengthAT THAT TIME !LTHOUGH THE FOREGOING ARGUMENT IS ONLY A LITTLE BETTER THAN A DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS IT DOES REVEAL THE signiਕcance OF COMBINING THESE FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTS TO PRODUCE A CHARACTERISTIC TIME MASS AND LENGTH


<<<PAGE 1360>>>

CONVOLUTEDARENAINWHICHSPACEANDTIMEHAVELOSTTHEIRFAMILIARSEPARATEIDENTITIESHASYETTOBEINVENTED!FTERTHE0LANCKTIMESPACETIMEBEGANTOTAKEONAMORECOHERENTSTRUCTUREASGREATERPORTIONSOFITBECAMECAUSALLYCONNECTED%XACTLYHOWTIMEITSELFEMERGEDFROMTHE "IG "ANG IS A QUESTION TO BE PONDERED BY PHYSICISTS AND PHILOSOPHERS ALIKEUniﬁcation and Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking)T IS AN ARTICLE OF FAITH FOR PHYSICISTS THAT BEFORE THE 0LANCK TIME THE FOUR FUNDAMENTALFORCESOFNATURETHEGRAVITATIONALFORCETHEELECTROMAGNETICFORCEANDTHESTRONGANDWEAKNUCLEARFORCES	WEREMERGEDINTOONEALLENCOMPASSINGTheory of Everything4/%	SEE&IG  !LTHOUGH THE ROUGH OUTLINES OF SUCH A THEORY ARE STILL A MATTER OF CONJECTURETHE THEORY MUST HAVE CERTAIN MATHEMATICAL SYMMETRIES GUARANTEEING THAT THE FOUR FORCESWERE CONJOINED7HEN THE UNIVERSE REACHED THE 0LANCK TIME THE SINGLE ALLENCOMPASSING4/%FORCESPONTANEOUSLYSEPARATEDINTOTHEGRAVITATIONALFORCEASDESCRIBEDBY%INSTEINSTHEORY OF GENERAL RELATIVITY	 AND A UNIlED VERSION OF THE THREE REMAINING FORCES 4HIS PROCESS IS CALLEDspontaneous symmetry breaking A TERM THAT REFERS TO THE CHANGES IN THEMATHEMATICAL SYMMETRIES OF THE THEORYS EQUATIONS
          ,OG kT	 'E6	4IME4HEORY OF%VERYTHING'RANDUNIFICATION3TRONG%LECTROWEAK'RAVITY7EAK%-2ELATIVE STRENGTH
FIGURE 24HEUNIlCATIONOFTHEFOURFUNDAMENTALFORCESACCORDINGTOA4HEORYOF%VERYTHING4HE ELECTROMAGNETIC AND WEAK FORCES WERE UNIlED AT TIMES EARLIER THAN −S AND THE ELECTROWEAKAND STRONG FORCES WERE UNIlED BEFORE −S !LL FOUR FORCES WERE JOINED AT TIMES EARLIER THAN THE0LANCK TIMEtP=×−S h%-v STANDS FOR THE ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCE /NLY THE ELECTROWEAKUNIlCATION HAS BEEN TESTED EXPERIMENTALLY SHADED REGION	&OREXAMPLEISTHESTATEMENTTHAThTIMEWASCREATEDBYTHE"IG"ANGvMEANINGFUL"ECAUSEANYACTOFCREATIONINVOLVES A TIME SEQUENCE hlRST IT ISNT THEN IT ISv	 CAN TIME ITSELF BE CREATED!PHYSICAL EXAMPLE OF SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING IS A MARBLE ROLLING AROUND THE RIM OF A ROULETTE WHEEL)NITIALLY THE MARBLE IS EQUALLY LIKELY TO BE FOUND ABOVE ANY OF THE NUMBERED BINS BUT AS THE MARBLE LOSES ENERGYIT FALLS INTO ONE OF THEM AND BECOMES TRAPPED

The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1361>>>

4HE MATHEMATICS INVOLVED IN SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING IS SIMILAR TO THAT WHICHDESCRIBES A FAMILIAR PHASE TRANSITION IN ORDINARY MATTER &OR EXAMPLE ABOVE A TEMPERATUREOF  + WATER IS IN A LIQUID STATE!SSUMING THAT THERE IS NO PREFERRED DIRECTION IMPOSEDFROM OUTSIDE THE WATER MOLECULES ARE RANDOMLY ORIENTED IN ALL DIRECTIONS 7HEN THE TEMPERATURE FALLS BELOW  + HOWEVER THE WATER UNDERGOES A PHASE TRANSITION AND FREEZES4HE SYMMETRY OF THE LIQUID WATER IS BROKEN BECAUSE THE ARRANGEMENT OF (/ MOLECULESIN THE LATTICE OF AN ICE CRYSTAL HAS PREFERRED DIRECTIONS ALONG THE AXES OF THE LATTICE *UST ASTHERE IS A RELEASE OF LATENT HEAT WHEN WATER FREEZES ENERGY WAS RELEASED IN THE EPISODES OFSPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING IN THE EARLY UNIVERSE4HETHEORIESTHEREARESEVERALVARIANTS	THATDESCRIBETHEJOININGOFTHEREMAININGTHREEFORCES ARE CALLEDgrand uniﬁed theories'54S	 4HE SIMPLEST '54 PROPOSED IN BY THE !MERICAN PHYSICISTS 3HELDON 'LASHOW AND (OWARD 'EORGI BOTH AT (ARVARD	 ISKNOWN AS 35	 4HE '54S HAVE HAD SOME SUCCESSES SUCH AS PROVIDING A FUNDAMENTALEXPLANATION FOR THE EQUAL MAGNITUDES OF THE PROTON AND ELECTRON CHARGE 4HEY HAVE ALSOHAD SOME SETBACKS THE FAILURE TO DETECT 35	S PREDICTED DECAY OF THE PROTON PROBABLYELIMINATES IT AS A SUCCESSFUL '54 4HE MORAL IS THAT SPECIlC PREDICTIONS BASED ON GRANDUNIlED THEORIES SHOULD BE VIEWED WITH SOME CAUTION4HE UNIlCATION OF THE STRONG AND WEAK NUCLEAR FORCES AND THE ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCEWOULD HAVE LASTED UNTIL THE TEMPERATURE OF THE UNIVERSE HAD FALLEN TO ABOUT + WHENTHE CHARACTERISTIC THERMAL ENERGY kT	 OF A PARTICLE WAS ABOUT 'E6 AND THE UNIVERSEWAS SOME −S OLD !T THIS POINT FOLLOWING ANOTHER EPISODE OF SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING THE STRONG NUCLEAR FORCE PARTED COMPANY WITH THE ELECTROWEAK COMBINEDELECTROMAGNETIC AND WEAK	 FORCE4HE THEORY OF THE ELECTROWEAK UNIlCATION WAS WORKED OUT IN THE S BY THREE PHYSICISTS 3HELDON 'LASHOW AND 3TEVEN 7EINBERG !MERICAN	 AND !BDUS 3ALAM 0AKISTANI	4HEY DESCRIBED HOW ELECTROMAGNETIC AND WEAK FORCES WERE UNITED WHEN THE TEMPERATUREEXCEEDEDABOUT×+ATROUGHLY−S !TTHISTEMPERATURETHECHARACTERISTICTHERMAL ENERGY OF A PARTICLE IS ABOUT  'E6 4HEIR THEORY PREDICTED THE EXISTENCE OF THREENEW PARTICLES THE THREE VECTOR GAUGE BOSONSW±ANDZ	 THAT MEDIATE THE WEAK FORCEJUST AS PHOTONS CONVEY THE ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCE !BOVEkT∼A FEW HUNDRED 'E6 THEVECTORGAUGEBOSONSBECOMEMASSLESSANDSOBECOMEINDISTINGUISHABLEFROMPHOTONS4HEELECTROMAGNETICANDWEAKFORCESARETHENUNIlED7HENTHETEMPERATUREFALLSBELOWABOUT×+ASPONTANEOUSSYMMETRYBREAKINGENDOWSTHEVECTORGAUGEBOSONSWITHMASS7HEN THESE PARTICLES WERE DISCOVERED IN THE S THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN EXPERIMENTAND THEORY PROVIDED A STRIKING CONlRMATION OF THE ELECTROWEAK UNIlCATION 4HIS SUCCESSPROVIDES ENCOURAGEMENT TO PHYSICISTS WORKING ON '54S AND4/%SProblems with the Standard Theory of the Big Bang7E NOW RETURN TO THE 0LANCK TIME TO DISCOVER HOW SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING WITHITSCONCOMITANTRELEASEOFSPECIlCHEATAFFECTEDTHEEXPANSIONOFTHEEARLYUNIVERSE!SWEMOVE FORWARD FROM THE 0LANCK TIME WE ARE CONFRONTED BY THREE PROBLEMS WITH THE SIMPLEPICTURE OF THE "IG "ANG WE HAVE CONSIDERED SO FAR4HIS IS THE EARLIEST TIME THAT CAN BE PROBED EXPERIMENTALLY
The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1362>>>

sWhy is the cosmic background radiation so smooth?#ONSIDER TWO #-" PHOTONSARRIVINGATTHEOBSERVERFROMOPPOSITESIDESOFTHESKY)TWOULDSEEMTHATTHEREGIONSFROMWHICHPHOTONSCAMECOULDNEVERHAVECOMMUNICATEDWITHEACHOTHERSINCETHEPHOTONSHAVEJUSTPASSEDEACHOTHER)NFACTTHEPROBLEMISEVENMORESEVERE!TTHETIME OF DECOUPLING REGIONS OF THE #-" THAT ARE NOW SEPARATED BY MORE THAN ◦ONWHICHLIEONTHEPASTLIGHTCONEOF0OINTA(OWEVERWHENEXTENDEDBACKTOTHE"IG"ANGTHEPASTLIGHTCONESOF0OINTSBANDCDONOTINTERSECT0OINTSBANDCARENOTIN CAUSAL CONTACT SINCE EACH IS OUTSIDE THE OTHERS PARTICLE HORIZON4HE SMOOTHNESSOFTHE#-"ISTHENVERYDIFlCULTTOEXPLAINESPECIALLYSINCETHEVARIATIONSTHATHAVEBEENFOUNDARESOVERYSMALLδT/T∼−	4HEPROBLEMOFlNDINGTHEMECHANISMTHATALLOWEDTHEUNIVERSESLEFTHANDTOKNOWWHATITSRIGHTHANDWASDOINGISCALLEDTHEhorizon problemsWhy is the universe so nearly ﬂatφOmegaη≃	φOmegaηIS ROUGHLY OF ORDERUNITYTHENATVERYEARLYTIMESz≫	THEDENSITYPARAMETERWASESSENTIALLY EQUAL TO ONE &ORTHE SIMPLE MODEL OF A UNIVERSE OF PRESSURELESS DUSTφOmegaη−=/parenleftbiggφOmegaη−/parenrightbigg(+z)	)FφOmegaηHAD DIFFERED SLIGHTLY FROM ONE IN THE VERY EARLY UNIVERSETODAYS VALUEφOmegaη WOULD VARY SIGNIlCANTLY FROM UNITY 3UPPOSE AT THE TIME OF DECOUPLING [tDEC]7-!0= KYR AT[z]7-!0=	 THAT THE DENSITY PARAMETER HADABCxy2ECOMBINATION.OWt
t  FIGURE 34HEHORIZONPROBLEM4HESAME#-"SPECTRUMISOBSERVEDAT0OINTAFROM0OINTSBANDC ALTHOUGHBANDCHAVE NEVER BEEN IN CAUSAL CONTACT)FThe Early UniverseTHE  SKY  COULD  NEVER  HAVE  BEEN  IN  CAUSAL  CONTACT  4HE  SPACETIME  DIAGRAM SHOWN  IN  &IG    ILLUSTRATES  THE  SITUATION  0HOTONS  ARRIVING  NOW  AT  %ARTH  0OINT A  WERE  EMITTED  AT  THE  TIME  OF  RECOMBINATION  FROM  SOURCES  AT  0OINTS B  AND C


<<<PAGE 1363>>>

DIFFERED FROM UNITY BY JUST  )FφOmegaηDEC=. THEN ACCORDING TO %Q  	TODAYS VALUE OF THE DENSITY PARAMETER WOULD BEφOmegaη≃. AND IFφOmegaηDEC=.THENφOmegaη≃ 3UCH UNDERDENSE AND OVERDENSE UNIVERSES HAVE PROFOUND DYNAMICALIMPLICATIONS &OR EXAMPLE IFφOmegaηDEC=. THEN AFTER ANOTHER FEW HUNDRED THOUSANDYEARSTHEUNIVERSEANDITSCONTENTSWOULDBETOOWIDELYDISPERSEDANDEXPANDINGTOOFAST TO ALLOW THE FORMATION OF GALAXIES OR STARS /N THE OTHER HAND IFφOmegaηDEC= THENAFTER A FEW HUNDRED THOUSAND YEARS THE EXPANSION WOULD HAVE REVERSED ITSELF ANDTHEUNIVERSEWOULDHAVEENDEDINA"IG#RUNCH/UREXISTENCEON%ARTHREmECTSTHISlNETUNING OFφOmegaη= IN THE EARLY UNIVERSE /THERWISE WE WOULD NOT BE HERE TODAYTOWONDERABOUTIT4HEPROBLEMOFTHEORIGINOFOURNEARLYmATUNIVERSEISCALLEDTHEﬂatness problemsWhy have we found no magnetic monopoles?!MAGNETICMONOPOLEISASINGLEMAGNETICCHARGETANTAMOUNTTOANISOLATEDMAGNETICPOLE7HENTHEUNIVERSEEXPERIENCEDAN EPISODE OF SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING AT THE END OF THE '54S ERA OF UNIlCATION A CHOICE OF hDIRECTIONv WAS MADE AT EACH POINT IN SPACE ASSOCIATED WITH THEQUANTUM lELD INVOLVED CALLED THE (IGGS lELD	 4HIS DIRECTION WAS NOT ONE OF SPATIAL ORIENTATION BUT RATHER INVOLVED A CHOICE OF CERTAIN DISCRETE VALUES ANALOGOUSTO QUANTUM NUMBERS	 FOR THE THEORY DESCRIBING THE lELDDefectsAROSE AT LOCATIONSWHERE A DISCONTINUITY IN THIS CHOICE OF VALUES EXISTED AND A POINTLIKE DISCONTINUITYCORRESPONDS TO Amagnetic monopole!LTHOUGH A MAGNETIC MONOPOLE MIGHT BE∼TIMES MORE MASSIVE THAN A PROTONmc∼'E6	 THERE WAS SUFlCIENT ENERGY AT THE END OF THE '54S ERA TO CREATECOPIOUS NUMBERS OF MAGNETIC MONOPOLES 9ET DESPITE MANY SEARCHES FOR MAGNETICMONOPOLESONLYONEEXPERIMENTHASFOUNDANYEVIDENCEFORTHEMANDTHENONLYONEPOSSIBLEMONOPOLECANDIDATEWASDETECTEDON6ALENTINES$AYIN	4HEREHAVENOT BEEN ANY OTHER DETECTIONS TO CONlRM THAT RESULT )F OUR UNDERSTANDING OF GRANDUNIlCATION IS CORRECT IN PREDICTING THE CREATION OF MAGNETIC MONOPOLES THEN WHEREARE THEY4HIS IS CALLED THEmonopole problem"Y ITSELF THE "IG "ANG EXPLANATION FOR THE BEGINNING OF THE UNIVERSE IS INCAPABLE OFMEANINGFULLY ANSWERING THESE QUESTIONS /F COURSE ONE POSSIBLE ANSWER IS h4HATS JUSTTHE WAY IT ISvTHAT THE UNIVERSE STARTED OUT SMOOTH AND mAT BECAUSE OF SOME SET OF INITIALCONDITIONS ATt= #OSMOLOGISTS WOULD PREFER TO lND A NATURAL SEQUENCE OF EVENTS THATINEVITABLY LED TO THE UNIVERSE AS IT APPEARS TODAY INSTEAD OF SPECIFYING IN AN AD HOC WAYTHE VALUES OF CERTAIN VARIABLES AT THE BEGINNING TO MAKE EVERYTHING COME OUT RIGHTInﬂation)N  AN !MERICAN ASTRONOMER WORKING AT 3TANFORD 5NIVERSITY !LAN 'UTH PROPOSED ASINGLESOLUTION!CCORDINGTO'UTHTHE"IG"ANGPICTUREISESSENTIALLYCORRECTBUTDURINGITSlRSTFRACTIONOFASECONDWHENtWASBARELYGREATERTHANZEROTHEWHOLEUNIVERSEWASMUCHMORECOMPACTTHANISDESCRIBEDBYTHESTANDARD"IG"ANG!TTHATTIMEEVERYPOINTWASCLOSE$EFECTSCANARISEANYTIMESYMMETRYBREAKINGOCCURSBUTTHOSEFROMTHEENDOFTHE'54SEPISODEHAVERECEIVEDTHE MOST ATTENTION
The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1364>>>

ENOUGH TO EVERY OTHER POINT TO BE IN CAUSAL CONTACT AND THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE HAD ACHIEVEDTHERMODYNAMIC EQUILIBRIUM4HEN THERE WAS A TREMENDOUS SPURT OFexponential expansionTHAT SMOOTHED OUT THE UNIVERSE RENDERING IT EXACTLY mAT WITHφOmegaη= ORveryNEARLY SO	'UTH CALLED THIS PERIOD OF EXPONENTIAL GROWTHinﬂation 4HIS EPISODE OF INmATION WOULDEXPLAINTHEGENERALISOTROPYOFTHEUNIVERSEANDTHESMOOTHNESSOFTHECOSMICBACKGROUNDRADIATION IN PARTICULAR !FTER INmATION THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE PROCEEDED AS IN THESTANDARD "IG "ANG MODEL4HE DETAILS OF 'UTHS INmATIONARY PROPOSAL INVOLVE IDEAS AT THE FRONTIERS OF PARTICLEPHYSICS )N FACT MANY VARIANTS ON THE ORIGINAL INmATIONARY SCENARIO HAVE BEEN PROPOSED!S OBSERVATIONS ACCUMULATE ONE MODEL MAY FALL OUT OF FAVOR PERHAPS TO BE REVIVED LATERAS MORE INFORMATION BECOMES AVAILABLE -UCH RESEARCH IS STILL ONGOING IN THIS AREA ANDTHE VERSION OF INmATION DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION MAY WELL BE WRONG IN SOMEOF ITS SPECIlCS (OWEVER MOST COSMOLOGISTS BELIEVE THAT BECAUSE IT GIVES SUCH SATISFYINGANSWERS TO SO MANY QUESTIONS SOME FORM OF INmATION MUST HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN THE EARLYUNIVERSEVirtual Particles and the Energy of the Vacuum4HE PARTICLE ENERGIES OF∼'E6 AT THE 0LANCK TIME WERE SO GREAT THAT THE FAMILIARBARYONSSUCHASPROTONSNEUTRONSANDTHEIRANTIPARTICLES	PRESENTATMUCHLOWERTEMPERATURESWEREABSENT7ENEEDNOTCONCERNOURSELVESWITHTHEHIGHLYRELATIVISTICPARTICLESTHATWERE PRESENT THEN )NSTEAD WE WILL CONCENTRATE ON ANOTHER SIGNIlCANT COMPONENT OF THEVERY EARLY UNIVERSE THE ENERGY OF THEvacuum 4HE TERMvacuumREQUIRES SOME EXPLANATION)NEVERYDAYLANGUAGEITMEANSACOMPLETEEMPTINESSDEVOIDOFANYMATTERORENERGY(OWEVER PHYSICISTS USEvacuumTO DESCRIBE THE GROUND STATE OF A SYSTEM &OR INSTANCE
7E CAN CRUDELY ESTIMATE THE VALUE OF THE ENERGY DENSITY OF THE VACUUM USING THE UNCERTAINTYPRINCIPLESφDeltaηx φDeltaηp≈/planckover2pi1ANDφDeltaηE φDeltaηt≈/planckover2pi14HEVACUUMCANBEMODELED AS A PLACE,ETSCONSIDERAVIRTUALPARTICLEOFMASSm≈(φDeltaηE)/cCONlNEDTOACUBICALBOXOFSIDEL≈φDeltaηxWITH A PARTICLE LIFETIME OFφDeltaηt≈/planckover2pi1/φDeltaηE≈/planckover2pi1/mc.The Early Universe
WHERE MATTERnANTIMATTER PAIRS OF PARTICLES ARE CONSTANTLY BEING CREATED AND ANNIHILATED 4HESE PARTICLES CANNOT BE DIRECTLY OBSERVED AND THEIR ENERGY CANNOT BE TAPPED THEY ARE KNOWN AS virtual particles 4HEY BORROW THEIR REST ENERGY  ΔE FROM THE VACUUM AND ARE ANNIHILATED IN SUCH A SHORT TIME  Δt THAT THEY ESCAPE DETECTIONan electron conﬁned to a small region can be calculated to have a certain minimum energy, its ground-state energy. This energy cannot be lost or extracted from the electron, since there is no lower quantum state to which the electron can make a transition. The existence of the vacuum has been veriﬁed by observations of the Casimir effect (named for Dutch physicist Hendrick Casimir, 1909–2000). Two uncharged parallel ﬂat conducting plates with a very small separation will alter the properties of the vacuum between the plates. This change in the vacuum creates an attractive force between the plates, which has been measured. Unfortunately, the Casimir effect cannot be used to calculate the value of the energy density of the vacuum.


<<<PAGE 1365>>>

)N ADDITION THE PARTICLES SPEED IS APPROXIMATELYv≈/planckover2pi1mφDeltaηx≈/planckover2pi1mL3INCE THE FARTHEST THE PARTICLE CAN TRAVEL IN TIMEφDeltaηtISvφDeltaηt WE SETL=vφDeltaηtTO BE CERTAIN THE PARTICLES MOTION DOES NOT CARRY IT OUTSIDE THE BOX4HUSL=vφDeltaηt≈/planckover2pi1mL/planckover2pi1mc.3OLVING FORL WE lNDL≈/planckover2pi1mc.4HEENERGYDENSITYOFTHEVACUUMMUSTBECAPABLEOFCREATINGAPAIROFPARTICLESINTHEBOXSO THAT CONSERVATION RULES CAN BE MAINTAINED SUCH AS ELECTRIC CHARGE	 4HAT IS THE ENERGYDENSITY OF THE VACUUM MUST BE AT LEASTuVAC≈mcL≈mc/planckover2pi1.4HE GREATEST MASS FOR EACH PARTICLE IN THE PAIR MAY BE TAKEN TO BE THE 0LANCK MASSmP=√/planckover2pi1c/G%Q 	 /UR ESTIMATE OF THE ENERGY DENSITY OF THE VACUUM IS THUSuVAC≈mPc/planckover2pi1≈c/planckover2pi1G,ORuVAC≈*M−/FCOURSETHISISONLYAROUGHESTIMATE-ORESOPHISTICATEDCALCULATIONS WHICH ALSO INVOKE AN ARBITRARY CUTOFF TO AVOID AN INlNITE ANSWER	 RESULT IN A VALUEOFuVAC≈*M−%INSTEINSGENERALRELATIVITYISRESPONSIVETOEVERYFORMOFENERGYINCLUDINGTHEENERGYOF THE VACUUM &URTHERMORE THE ENERGY DENSITY OF THE VACUUM IS Aconstant JUST AS FORDARK ENERGY 4HE mUID EQUATION SHOWS THAT THE CONSTANT VACUUM ENERGY DENSITYWOULDPRODUCE A NEGATIVE PRESSUREPVAC=−ρVACc=−uVAC,	uDARK≡ρφLambdaηc=ρc,φOmegaηφLambdaη,c=.×−*M−.	)FWEIDENTIFYDARKENERGYASTHEENERGYDENSITYOFTHEVACUUMWEAREFACEDWITHADAUNTINGDISCREPANCYOFSOMEORDERSOFMAGNITUDEBETWEENTHETHEORETICALANDOBSERVEDVALUES4HE HUGE VALUE CALCULATED FOR THE VACUUM ENERGY DENSITY IS IN SHARP CONmICT WITH THEOBSERVEDRATEOFTHE(UBBLEmOW)FEVERYCUBICMETERWEREACCOMPANIEDBYAPPROXIMATELYThe Early Universe
AN EQUATION OF STATE WITH w = − )T IS NATURAL TO IDENTIFY DARK ENERGY AS THE ENERGY DENSITY OF THE VACUUM (OWEVER THE VALUE OF THE VACUUM ENERGY DENSITY IS HUGE COMPARED TO THE ENERGY DENSITY OF DARK ENERGY


<<<PAGE 1366>>>

* OF VACUUM ENERGY AS THE UNIVERSE EXPANDED AND ITS VOLUME GREW THE UNIVERSEWOULD HAVE EXPANDED SO RAPIDLY THAT NO GALAXIES OR STARS COULD EVER HAVE COALESCED UNDERTHE INmUENCE OF GRAVITY! PLAUSIBLE PHYSICAL MECHANISM FOR REDUCING THE VALUE CALCULATED FOR TODAYS VACUUMENERGY DENSITY TO THE OBSERVED VALUE OFuDARKHAS YET TO BE FOUND !CCORDING TO SOMEADVANCED PARTICLE THEORIES BOSONS AND FERMIONS SHOULD MAKE CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE VACUUMENERGYOFOPPOSITESIGNSANDSOCANCELTOYIELDZEROVACUUMENERGY)FTHECANCELATIONWERENOT PERFECT A SMALL OBSERVED RESIDUAL VACUUM ENERGY DENSITY COULD RESULT 7HY SHOULDTHE CANCELATION BE EFFECTIVE FOR THE lRST  DECIMAL PLACES AND THEN BREAK DOWN 3O FARTHE COMBINED EFFORTS OF COSMOLOGISTS AND PARTICLE PHYSICISTS HAVE SHED LITTLE LIGHT ON THISMYSTERY.EVERTHELESSWEWILLCONTINUETOIDENTIFYDARKENERGYASTHEENERGYDENSITYOFTHEVACUUM AND TO ACCEPT ITS PRESENTLY OBSERVED VALUE OF NEARLY ZEROThe False Vacuum!TTHEENDOFTHE'54SEPOCHWHENt∼−SANDTHETEMPERATUREWAST∼+THEUNIVERSE ENTERED AN EXTREMELY PECULIAR STATE CALLED THEfalse vacuum 4HE FALSE VACUUMTHATEXISTEDWHENTHEUNIVERSEWASAPPROXIMATELY−SOLDWASNOTATRUEVACUUMSOTHEUNIVERSE WAS NOT IN THE STATE WITH THE LOWEST POSSIBLE ENERGY DENSITY )NSTEAD THE UNIVERSEHADENTEREDASUPERCOOLEDSTATEINWHICHITSTEMPERATUREHADPLUMMETEDfar below+THE TEMPERATURE FOR SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING 3UPERCOOLING HAPPENS WHEN A PHASETRANSITION PROCEEDS MUCH MORE SLOWLY THAN THE COOLING RATE &OR EXAMPLE WATER CAN BESUPERCOOLED TO MORE THAN  + BELOW ITS FREEZING POINT WITHOUT CHANGING PHASE 3INCEFREEZINGWOULDRELEASETHEWATERSLATENTHEATTHEREISASTATEOFLOWERENERGYDENSITYICE	AVAILABLE TO THE SUPERCOOLED WATER (OWEVER THE SUPERCOOLED WATER PERSISTS IN A LIQUIDSTATE OF HIGHER ENERGY DENSITY 3IMILARLY THE UNIVERSE PERSISTED IN ITS FALSE VACUUM STATEOF UNBROKEN SYMMETRY WITH A HIGH ENERGY DENSITY EVEN THOUGH A SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRYBREAKINGTOATRUEVACUUMWITHZEROENERGYDENSITYWASENERGETICALLYFAVORABLE!CCORDINGTO GRAND UNIlED THEORIES THE FALSE VACUUM HAD A CONSTANT ENERGY DENSITY ON THE ORDER OFuFV≈4E6M−=.×*M−.	Quantum Fluctuations and the Onset of Inﬂation7HENt<−STHEUNIVERSALEXPANSIONWASGOVERNEDBYRELATIVISTICPARTICLES)NmATIONSURROUNDEDOUTSIDEBYTHENEGATIVEPRESSUREOFTHEFALSEVACUUM4HEGREATERPRESSUREINSIDETHEBUBBLECAUSEDTHEBUBBLETOGROWATANASTOUNDINGRATE4HUSATROUGHLYti=−STHECONSTANTENERGYDENSITYOFTHEFALSEVACUUMBECAMEDOMINANTINTHEACCELERATIONEQUATION)T IS IMPORTANT TO RECALL THAT DARK ENERGY PLAYS AN INSIGNIlCANT ROLE AT THE TIME OF INmATION )F DARK ENERGY ISIDENTIlED AS THE ENERGY DENSITY OF THE VACUUM THEN THE MECHANISM OF INmATION REQUIRES AN ADDITIONAL SOURCE OFVACUUM ENERGY CALLED THEinﬂaton ﬁeld THAT IS DEPLETED OR NEARLY SO	 BY THE TIME INmATION ENDS
The Early Universe
BEGAN WHEN QUANTUM ॿuctuations GOVERNED BY THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE ALLOWED A SMALL REGION OF SPACE TO ENTER A TRUE VACUUM STATE IN A UNIVERSE OTHERWISE ਕlled WITH FALSE VACUUM !LTHOUGH THE PRESSURE WITHIN THE BUBBLE OF TRUE VACUUM WAS ESSENTIALLY ZERO IT WAS


<<<PAGE 1367>>>

4HIS EQUATION THEN BECAME OF THE FORMdRdt=/bracketleftbigg−πG/parenleftbigguFVc+PFVc/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbiggR.	5SINGPFV=−uFVFROM %Q 	 THIS BECOMESdRdt=πGuFVcR.	4HE EXPONENTIALLY GROWING SOLUTION ISR(t)=R(ti)et/τi,	WHERER(ti)ISTHEINITIALVALUEOFTHESCALEFACTORWHENINmATIONBEGANANDτiISTHEinﬂationtime scaleGIVEN BYτi=/radicalBiggcπGuFV≈−S.	/VERWHATTIMEINTERVALφDeltaηtDIDINmATIONOCCUR&UNDAMENTALPHYSICSCANNOTYETSUPPLYTHE ANSWER BUT WE CAN ESTIMATE THEminimumTIME INTERVAL BY EXAMINING WHAT INmATIONACCOMPLISHEDALLOWINGOURPRESENTUNIVERSETOBECAUSALLYCONNECTEDWITHAUNIFORMCOSMICMICROWAVE BACKGROUND!T THE INITIAL TIMEti=−S THE HORIZON DISTANCE WAS ONLYdi=cti=×−M,	"YTHETIMEINmATIONENDEDATTIMEtf=ti+φDeltaηtTHEHORIZONMUSTHAVEEXPANDED AT LEAST FAR ENOUGH TO INCLUDE TODAYS OBSERVABLE UNIVERSE TO ACCOUNT FOR THEUNIFORMITY OF THE #-" 7E CAN THEREFORE WRITE THE lNAL HORIZON DISTANCE AT THE END OFINmATION AS THE PRESENT HORIZON DISTANCEdh,=. 'PCMULTIPLIED BY THESCALEFACTORR(tf).df=dh,R(tf)=(.×M)(.×−S−/)(ti+φDeltaηtMIN)/.	4HEMINIMUMTIMEINTERVALCONSISTENTWITHTHEUNIFORM#-"MAYTHENBEFOUNDBYSOLVINGctieφDeltaηtMIN/τ=(.×M)(.×−S−/)√τ/parenleftbiggtiτ+φDeltaηtMINτ/parenrightbigg/.	4HIS MAY BE SOLVED NUMERICALLY TO OBTAINφDeltaηtMINτ=.	ORφDeltaηtMIN=.×−S.	The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1368>>>

$URINGTHISBRIEFTIMEINTERVALTHESIZEOFTHEOBSERVABLEUNIVERSEGREWFROM×−MTO . M 4HERE IS NO REASON TO BELIEVE THAT THE UNIVERSE CONSPIRED TO HAVE INmATION LASTEXACTLYLONGENOUGHTOENDOWONLYTHEPRESENTLYOBSERVABLEUNIVERSEWITHAUNIFORM#-")T IS CUSTOMARY TO ASSUME THAT THE INmATIONARY PHASE LASTED FOR −S OR MORE DURINGWHICHTHESIZEOFTHEUNIVERSEINCREASEDBYAFACTOROFAPPROXIMATELYe≃×4HISISTHEROUGHESTOFESTIMATESTHEACTUALFACTORCOULDHAVEEASILYEXCEEDEDAVALUETHATIS ALSO QUOTED4ODAYS OBSERVABLE UNIVERSE BEGAN INSIDE A SMALL BUBBLE OF TRUE VACUUM 7E WILL TAKETHE INITIAL DIAMETER OF THE BUBBLE TO BE THE PARTICLE HORIZON DISTANCE AT −S JUSTdi=×−M ACROSS!T THE BEGINNING OF INmATION EVERY POINT IN THE BUBBLE LAY WITHIN THEPARTICLEHORIZONOFEVERYOTHERPOINTANDITSCONTENTSWEREINTHERMODYNAMICEQUILIBRIUM4HE ISOTROPY AND HOMOGENEITY EVIDENT IN OUR UNIVERSE TODAY WERE ESTABLISHED AT THAT EARLYTIME4HE BUBBLES lNAL DIAMETER ASSUMING INmATION ENDED AT −S WASdf=edi=.×M.7HAT FRACTION OF THIS INmATED BUBBLE WAS OCCUPIED BY THE MATERIAL THAT MAKES UP THEPRESENTLYOBSERVABLEUNIVERSE4OANSWERTHISQUESTIONWEWILLWORKBACKWARD!SSUMINGA mAT UNIVERSE THE HORIZON DISTANCE TO THE FARTHEST POINT THAT CAN BE OBSERVED TODAY ISdh,=.×M−S WASR=.×−4HISMEANSTHATTHEDIAMETEROFTHEPRESENTLYOBSERVABLEUNIVERSEATTHATTIME WASRdh,=.M=.×−df.4HIS IMPLIES THAT THE SMALL BUBBLE OF TRUE VACUUM EXPANDED TO SUCH AN EXTENT THAT WHENINmATION ENDED AT −S TODAYS OBSERVABLE UNIVERSE OCCUPIED ABOUT  PARTS IN OFITS VOLUME )F THE SIZE OF THE PRESENTLY OBSERVABLE UNIVERSE IMMEDIATELY AFTER INmATION ISREPRESENTED BY A HYDROGEN ATOM THEN THE INmATED BUBBLE OF TRUE VACUUM IN WHICH IT WASIMMERSED WOULD BE A SPHERE OF RADIUS  KM4HISEPISODEOFINmATIONARYGROWTHCAMETOAHALTWHENSPONTANEOUSSYMMETRYBREAKINGlNALLYBROUGHTANENDTOTHE'54SEPOCHANDTHESTRONGNUCLEARFORCEBECAMEDISTINCTFROMTHE ELECTROWEAK FORCE4HE ELEVATED ENERGY DENSITY OF THE FALSE VACUUM WAS THEN RELEASEDLIKE THE RELEASE OF LATENT HEAT THAT OCCURS IN FREEZING 4HIS ENERGY REHEATED THE UNIVERSE TONEARLY+ITSPREINmATIONVALUEANDGENERATEDABURSTOFPARTICLEnANTIPARTICLECREATION&ROMTHISPOINTONWARDTHEUNIVERSEDEVELOPEDASPREVIOUSLYDESCRIBEDINTHESTANDARD"IG"ANG PICTURE!S SHOWN IN &IG  THE ONLY DIFFERENCE LIES IN THE lRST −S OR SO "UTINASINGLESTROKETHISBRIEFINSTANTOFINmATIONRESOLVESTHEPROBLEMSWITHTHESTANDARD"IG"ANGSolutions to the Problems of the Standard Big Bang Theory4HE EXPONENTIAL GROWTH OF OUR SMALL BUBBLE OF TRUE VACUUM CARRIED MOST OF ITS VOLUMEFAR BEYOND THE BOUNDARIES OF TODAYS UNIVERSE .EVERTHELESS BECAUSE THE BUBBLES VOLUMEWASINTHERMODYNAMICEQUILIBRIUMBEFOREINmATIONTHESPECTRUMOFTHE#-"ISEXTREMELYSMOOTH THEREBY SOLVING THE HORIZON PROBLEM4HESCALEFACTORATThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1369>>>

 + 'E6n
nnn4ODAYn4ODAY 'E6
 + 'E6 'E6R T
R TT
TRR
t SEC	
t SEC	3TANDARD #OSMOLOGY
)NFLATIONARY #OSMOLOGY!DIABATIC RT  CONSTANT	
!DIABATIC&ACTOROF 
&ACTOR OF ¥ 2EHEATING RT INCREASESBY FACTOR OF  ¥  ¥ 
)NFLATION3TD COSMOLOGYFIGURE 44HEEVOLUTIONOFTHETEMPERATUREOFTHEUNIVERSEANDTHESCALEFACTORWITHOUTANDWITHINmATION%XCEPTFORTHEBOTTOMVALUETHETEMPERATUREISGIVENINTERMSOFkT&IGUREADAPTEDFROM%DWARD7+OLBAND-ICHAEL34URNERThe EarlyUniverseÚBY!DDISON7ESLEY0UBLISHING #OMPANY )NC 2EADING -! 2EPRINTED BY PERMISSION OF THE PUBLISHER	)NmATIONALSORESOLVESTHEmATNESSPROBLEM!STHESMALLBUBBLEOFTRUEVACUUMINmATEDTHESCALEFACTORRINCREASEDBYAFACTOROFeORMORE %QUATION  	 SHOWSTHAT DURINGTHE EPISODE OF INmATION THE DENSITY PARAMETER WOULD HAVE VARIED ACCORDING TOφOmegaη(t)=+kc(dR/dt)=+kcτiR(t).4HEDRAMATICINCREASEINRBYATLEASTORDERSOFMAGNITUDEFORCEDφOmegaη→)NTHEINmATIONMODELTHEDENSITYPARAMETERANDCURVATUREAFTERINmATIONMAYBESAFELYSPECIlEDASφOmegaη=ANDk= THE INmATIONARY UNIVERSE ISﬂat .OTE THAT THIS SOLUTION TO THE mATNESS PROBLEMARISES NATURALLY FROM THE PHYSICS INSTEAD OF HAVING TO BE SPECIlED AS AN AD HOC CONDITIONAT THE BEGINNING4HE MONOPOLES PROBLEM IS ALSO SOLVED 2ECALL THAT AT THE END OF THE '54S ERA IT ISEXPECTED THAT DEFECTS AROSE AT LOCATIONS WHERE A DISCONTINUITY IN THE CHOICE OF AN INTERNALThe Early Universe
PAGE 	 


<<<PAGE 1370>>>

A	B	C	FIGURE 54YPESOFDEFECTSA	MAGNETICMONOPOLESB	COSMICSTRINGSANDC	DOMAINWALLS4HE ARROWS ILLUSTRATE THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISCONTINUITY INVOLVED IN EACH TYPE OF DEFECTDEGREE OF FREEDOM EXISTED 4HESE DEFECTS ARE REMNANTS OF THE FALSE VACUUM STILL IN A STATEOF UNBROKEN SYMMETRY WITH AN ENERGY DENSITY GIVEN BY %Q  	 4HUS IT IS THOUGHT THATTHEY SHOULD BE EXTREMELY MASSIVE ! POINTLIKE DISCONTINUITY CORRESPONDS TO A MAGNETICMONOPOLE AND IT IS CONJECTURED THAT OTHER DISCONTINUITIES CREATED ADDITIONAL RELICS &OREXAMPLEALINEARDISCONTINUITYGIVESRISETOAcosmic stringWHEREASAPLANARDISCONTINUITYISCALLEDAdomain wall&IGURE ILLUSTRATESTHEGEOMETRYOFTHESEDEFECTS!FOURTHTYPEOF DEFECT CALLED AtextureIS NOT SHOWN SINCE THE DISCONTINUITY IS NOT LOCALIZED TO A POINTLINE OR PLANE IT IS MORE LIKE A DIFFUSE THREEDIMENSIONAL CLUMP-ONOPOLES AND DOMAIN WALLS ARE SO MASSIVE THAT THEY WOULD EASILY OVERWHELM THEGRAVITATIONALEFFECTSOFORDINARYMATTERIFTHEYHADNOTBEENDILUTEDTOINSIGNIlCANCEBYTHEINmATIONOFTHEUNIVERSE4HESEDEFECTSPROBABLYAROSEATTHEBOUNDARIESBETWEENHOMOGENEOUS REGIONSTHAT IS NEAR THE SURFACES OF THE BUBBLES OF TRUE VACUUM )T IS THOUGHT THATEACH BUBBLE CONTAINED ONLY A FEW MONOPOLES OR DOMAIN WALLS !S SEEN ABOVE WHEN THEEPISODEOFINmATIONENDEDTHEPRESENTLYOBSERVABLEUNIVERSEOCCUPIEDANINSIGNIlCANTFRACTIONOFITSBUBBLESVOLUMEAFEWPARTSIN	SOITISEXPECTEDTHATMAGNETICMONOPOLESAND DOMAIN WALLS SHOULD BE EXCEEDINGLY RARE IN TODAYS UNIVERSE#OSMICSTRINGSANDTEXTURESCOULDBEMORECOMMONINTHEPRESENTUNIVERSEHOWEVER!TYPICAL COSMIC STRING A LONG CRACK IN SPACE lLLED WITH FALSE VACUUM MIGHT HAVE A LINEARMASS DENSITY OF∼KG M− )N THE SIMPLEST THEORIES EITHER THESE THIN TUBES OF FALSEVACUUM ARE INlNITELY LONG OR THEY FORM CLOSED LOOPS THAT ARE CONJECTURED TO BE HUNDREDSORTHOUSANDSOFPARSECSACROSS!COSMICSTRINGMIGHTBEDETECTEDTHROUGHITSINmUENCEASAGRAVITATIONALLENSBENDINGTHESTARLIGHTTHATPASSESBYONEITHERSIDETOFORMADOUBLEIMAGEOFTHESOURCE4ANGLEDSTRINGSWOULDCURLANDTWISTASTHEYSLOWLYSTRAIGHTENFORMINGLOOPSTHAT WOULD SOMETIMES CUT THE STRINGS UP INTO SMALLER LOOPS )T IS THOUGHT THAT THESE SMALLLOOPS EVENTUALLY DECAY BY EMITTING GRAVITATIONAL WAVESMatter–Antimatter Asymmetry!NOTHER CHALLENGE COSMOLOGISTS FACE IS EXPLAINING WHY THE UNIVERSE CONSISTS OF MATTERRATHER THAN ANTIMATTER!LL BUT ABOUT  OF COSMIC RAYS WHICH SAMPLE OUR 'ALAXY AREMATTER RATHER THAN ANTIMATTER 4HE FEW ANTIPARTICLES THAT ARE DETECTED CAN BE EXPLAINED ASTHERESULTOFHIGHENERGYINTERACTIONSSUCHASTHECREATIONOFPROTONnANTIPROTONPAIRSWHENTWOENERGETICPROTONSCOLLIDE2AREULTRAHIGHENERGYCOSMICRAYS5(%#2	WITHENERGIESThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1371>>>

EXCEEDING'E6MAYORMAYNOT	ORIGINATEIN-INTHE6IRGOCLUSTER4HESOURCEISONLYSUGGESTEDANDTHETRAJECTORYOF5(%#2SISCOMPLICATEDBYTHE-ILKY7AYSMAGNETIClELD	/BSERVATIONSOF5(%#2SREVEALNOEVIDENCEOFANTIMATTER.EITHERISTHEREANYSIGNIN THE FORM OF GAMMA RAYS OF A CERTAIN ENERGY OF THE VIOLENT ANNIHILATION REACTIONS THATWOULD OCCUR IF SUBSTANTIAL CONCENTRATIONS OF MATTER AND ANTIMATTER WERE TO COLLIDE 4HISINDICATES THAT WITHIN THE REGION OF SPACE EXTENDING AT LEAST AS FAR AS THE 'ALACTIC HALO ANDPERHAPS AS FAR AS THE 6IRGO CLUSTER SOME  -PC AWAY THE UNIVERSE IS OVERWHELMINGLYCOMPOSED OF MATTER4HE EXPLANATION OF THISmatter–antimatter asymmetryCOMES FROM A COMBINATION OFTHE DETAILS OF GRAND UNIlED THEORIES AND THE COOLING OF AN EXPANDING UNIVERSE FOLLOWINGINmATION!SWEHAVESEENANYPARTICLESTHATWEREPRESENTBEFOREINmATIONWOULDHAVEBEENDILUTED TO INSIGNIlCANCE BY THE EXPONENTIAL EXPANSION!LL OF THE PARTICLES IN OUR UNIVERSETODAYORIGINATEDINTHEBURSTOFPARTICLEnANTIPARTICLEPRODUCTIONTHATWASFUELEDBYTHEENERGYLATENT HEAT	 RELEASED BY THE FALSE VACUUM 4HE UNIVERSE WAS lLLED WITH A SOUP OF QUARKSLEPTONS PHOTONS AND EVEN MORE EXOTIC HYPOTHETICAL PARTICLES SIMPLY DENOTEDXBOSONSANDTHEIRANTIPARTICLESX4HESPONTANEOUSSYMMETRYBREAKINGTHATENDEDTHE'54SEPOCHENDOWEDTHEXPARTICLESWITHMASSJUSTASTHEVECTORGAUGEBOSONSGAINEDMASSWHENTHEELECTROWEAK UNIlCATION ENDED 4HESE EXTREMELY MASSIVEXPARTICLES mXc∼'E6	ARE NOT PRESENT AT THE MUCH LOWER ENERGIES THAT CHARACTERIZE THE UNIVERSE TODAY!CCORDINGTOTHEGRANDUNIlEDTHEORIESTHEXANDXPARTICLESWEREPRESENTINEQUALNUMBERS AND COULD BE TRANSFORMED INTO PAIRS OF QUARKS AND ANTIQUARKS RESPECTIVELY ACCORDINGTOX/harpoonleftrightq+q	X/harpoonleftrightq+q.	)T IS THOUGHT THAT THE lRST OF THESE REACTIONS OCCURRED SLIGHTLY MORE FREQUENTLY THAN THESECOND! RELATED MATTERnANTIMATTER ASYMMETRY REGARDING REACTION RATES HAS BEEN SEEN EXPERIMENTALLY/NETYPEOFPARTICLECALLEDAkaonCANDECAYINTOANOTHERPARTICLECALLEDApionBY THE REACTIONSK→π−+e++νeANDK→π++e−+νe 4HE lRST REACTION OCCURSSLIGHTLY BUT MEASURABLY	 MORE FREQUENTLY THAN THE SECOND)NITIALLYTHETEMPERATUREWASSOHIGHTHATREACTIONS 	AND 	OCCURREDEQUALLYINBOTHDIRECTIONS"UTASTHEUNIVERSECOOLEDANDTHECHARACTERISTICPARTICLEENERGYDROPPEDTHERE WAS NOT ENOUGH ENERGY AVAILABLE TO REPLACE THEXS ANDXS AS FAST AS THEY DECAYED! PERMANENT EXCESS OF QUARKS OVER ANTIQUARKS DEVELOPED THAT SURVIVED THE ELECTROWEAKSYMMETRY BREAKING ATt∼−S AND LASTED UNTIL THE UNIVERSE WAS A FEW MICROSECONDSOLD4HEUNIVERSEWASTHENCOOLENOUGHT∼×+	FORTHEQUARKnHADRONTRANSITIONWHENQUARKSANDANTIQUARKSCOMBINEDTOPRODUCEHUGENUMBERSOFBARYONSANDANTIBARYONSWITHASLIGHTEXCESSOFBARYONS&OLLOWINGTHISTHEREWASAlRESTORMOFPARTICLEnANTIPARTICLEANNIHILATION THAT ELIMINATED PRACTICALLY ALL OF THE ANTIMATTER LEAVING ONLY THE SMALL EXCESS!LAN 'UTH HAS REFERRED TO THIS AS THE hULTIMATE FREE LUNCHv)F YOU HAVE SOME ACQUAINTANCE WITH MODERN PHYSICS YOU WILL RECOGNIZE VIOLATIONS OF BOTH BARYON NUMBER AND#0CHARGE AND PARITY	 SYMMETRY HERE "OTH VIOLATIONS ARE INTEGRAL FEATURES OF GRAND UNIlED THEORIES

The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1372>>>

OFBARYONSTHATCONSTITUTESTHEVISIBLEMATTERINTHEUNIVERSETODAY4HEBARRAGEOFPHOTONSTHAT WAS UNLEASHED HAS SINCE BEEN COOLED BY THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE TO BECOMETHE COSMIC BACKGROUND RADIATION .EARLY ALL OF THE PHOTONS IN THE UNIVERSE ARE FROM THE#-" THE NUMBER PRODUCED BY OTHER SOURCES SUCH AS STARS	 PALES IN COMPARISON 4HERATIO OF THE NUMBER OF BARYONS IN THE UNIVERSE TO THE NUMBER OF PHOTONS IS ABOUT ×− "ECAUSETHEANNIHILATION OF A BARYON AND AN ANTIBARYON PRODUCESTWO PHOTONSTHIS RATIO IMPLIES THAT THERE WAS ROUGHLY ONE UNPAIRED BARYON FOR EVERY ONEBILLIONBARYONnANTIBARYON PAIRS 4HESE UNPAIRED BARYONS WERE THE TINY RESIDUE OF MATTERTHATSURVIVED ANNIHILATION TO MAKE UP THE MATERIAL WORLDThe CMB and the Decoupling of Matter and Radiation&ORSEVERALTHOUSANDYEARSFOLLOWINGTHEFORMATIONOFHELIUMNUCLEITHEUNIVERSEREMAINEDA HOT BROTH OF PHOTONS HYDROGEN AND HELIUM NUCLEI AND ELECTRONS 2ADIATION DOMINATEDTHE DYNAMICS OF THE EXPANSION AND THE SCALE FACTOR OF THE UNIVERSE INCREASED ASR∝t/&INALLY ATt≃×S THE #-" HAD BECOME SUFlCIENTLY DILUTED THAT MASSIVE PARTICLESBEGAN TO GOVERN THE EXPANSION4HE RADIATION ERA CAME TO A CLOSE AND THE MATTER ERA BEGANAT A TEMPERATURE OF ROUGHLY  +4HE PREVALENCE OF FREE ELECTRONS CONTINUED TO OBSTRUCT THE #-" PHOTONS UNTIL THE TEMPERATURE FELL TO ABOUT  + WHEN ELECTRONS COMBINED WITH THE NUCLEI TO FORM NEUTRALATOMS 4HE RESULTING DROP IN THE OPACITY DECOUPLED THE RADIATION FROM THE MATTER IN THEUNIVERSEANDALLOWEDTHEPHOTONSTOROAMFREELY!SWESHALLSEETHISDECOUPLINGHADDRAMATICIMPLICATIONSFORTHECOLLAPSEOFHIGHERDENSITYREGIONSANDTHESUBSEQUENTFORMATIONOF STRUCTURE IN THE UNIVERSE2THE ORIGIN OF STRUCTURE%VENAMOMENTARYGLIMPSEATTHENIGHTSKYPROVIDESCONVINCINGEVIDENCETHATTHEUNIVERSEISNOTPERFECTLYHOMOGENEOUS3TRUCTUREABOUNDSONALLSCALESFROMPLANETSTOSUPERCLUSTERSOFGALAXIES!TYPICALGALAXYISABOUTTIMESMOREDENSETHANTHEUNIVERSEASAWHOLESOTHEPRESENTUNIVERSEONASMALLSCALEISRATHERLUMPY4HISlNALSECTIONOFTHETEXTDEALSWITHTHEEMERGENCEOFSTRUCTUREFROMTHEFEATURELESSCAULDRONOFTHE"IG"ANGWITHGALAXIESANDCLUSTERS OF GALAXIES REVEALING THE PRESENCE OF EARLY DENSITY mUCTUATIONSAdiabatic and Isothermal Density Fluctuations4HE EARLY UNIVERSE BEFORE RECOMBINATION	 WAS lLLED WITH A HOT PLASMA OF PHOTONS ANDPARTICLES4HEELECTRONSANDPHOTONSWERETIGHTLYCOUPLEDBY#OMPTONSCATTERINGANDELECTROMAGNETIC INTERACTIONS AND THE ELECTRONS COUPLED THE PROTONS TO THE PHOTONS !S A RESULT THE PHOTONS ELECTRONS AND PROTONS MOVED TOGETHER TO FORM Aphoton–baryon ﬂuid(EISENBERGS UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE GUARANTEES THAT BECAUSE THE POSITIONS OF PARTICLES AREINDETERMINATE THERE MUST HAVE BEEN DENSITY INHOMOGENEITIES IN THE EARLY UNIVERSE 4HESEDISTURBANCESWERENEARLYTHESAMEONALLSCALESMEANINGTHATTHEDENSITYmUCTUATIONSCAUSEDALMOST THE SAME MAGNITUDE PERTURBATION OF THE GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL 7E SAY THAT THEThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1373>>>

DENSITYmUCTUATIONSWERENEARLYscale-invariant 4HEIRMASSESARETHOUGHTTOHAVERANGEDANYWHERE FROM THE MASS OF STARS TO THE MASS OF CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES WITH THE LESS MASSIVEmUCTUATIONS BEING MORE COMMON4HERE ARE TWO TYPES OF DENSITY mUCTUATIONS )N PRINCIPLE THERE CAN BE INDEPENDENT mUCTUATIONS OF THE FOUR COMPONENTS OF THE EARLY UNIVERSE PHOTONS BARYONS NEUTRINOS ANDDARK MATTER )F THE mUCTUATIONS ARE PROPORTIONAL TO ONE ANOTHER IN SUCH A WAY THAT THERE ISNO ENERGY EXCHANGE BETWEEN THEM THEY ARE CALLEDadiabatic ﬂuctuationsORcurvatureﬂuctuationsBECAUSE THE NONZERO DENSITY mUCTUATION AFFECTS THE LOCAL CURVATURE OF SPACETIME	 /N THE OTHER HAND FORisothermal ﬂuctuationsORisocurvature ﬂuctuations THESUMOFTHEFOURDENSITYmUCTUATIONISZERO4HEYINVOLVEApotentialDENSITYINCREASETHATISSUPPRESSEDORhFROZENINv&OREXAMPLEASPATIALVARIATIONINTHETYPESOFPARTICLESPRESENTMAYPOTENTIALLYPRODUCEAPRESSUREDIFFERENCEBUTTHISCOULDNOTBECONVERTEDINTOANACTUALDENSITYVARIATIONWHILEPARTICLEMOTIONWASINHIBITEDBYTHECLOSEINTERACTIONOFMATTERWITHTHE UNIFORM RADIATION lELD!NY COLLECTION OF DENSITY mUCTUATIONS CAN BE EXPRESSED AS THESUM OF ADIABATIC mUCTUATIONS AND ISOTHERMAL mUCTUATIONS4HE DISTINCTION BETWEEN ADIABATIC AND ISOTHERMAL mUCTUATIONS CONTINUED UNTIL DECOUPLING WHEN RADIATION AND MATTER WENT THEIR SEPARATE WAYS &REED FROM THE DRAG OF THESURROUNDING RADIATION PARTICLES IN ISOTHERMAL mUCTUATIONS COULD RESPOND TO DIFFERENCES INPRESSUREANDMOVETOPRODUCETRUEDENSITYPERTURBATIONS4HEDISTINCTIONBETWEENADIABATICANDISOTHERMALmUCTUATIONSTHENVANISHED4HEIMPORTANCEOFISOTHERMALmUCTUATIONSLIESINTHEIRABILITYTOACTASADEEPFREEZEPRESERVINGPOTENTIALDENSITYmUCTUATIONSANDPROTECTINGTHEM FROM THE DISSIPATION PROCESS SUFFERED BY THE ADIABATIC mUCTUATIONS DESCRIBED LATER	"ECAUSE NOTHING SIGNIlCANT HAPPENED TO THE ISOTHERMAL mUCTUATIONS UNTIL DECOUPLING WEWILL CONCENTRATE ON THE STORY OF THEIR ADIABATIC COUNTERPARTSThe Development of Adiabatic Density Fluctuations1UANTUM MECHANICAL DENSITY mUCTUATIONS GUARANTEE THAT EVEN IN ITS lRST INSTANT THE "IG"ANGWASNOTPERFECTLYSMOOTH%VERYWHERETHEDENSITYOFREGIONSOFSPACEVACILLATEDRANDOMLYBETWEENBEINGUNDERDENSEANDOVERDENSE(OWEVERTHEBARYONICMATTERCOUPLEDTOTHEPHOTONSREMAINEDEVENLYDISTRIBUTEDTHROUGHOUTTHEPLASMA!TABOUT−SINmATIONSUDDENLYSTRETCHEDTHEUNIVERSEATANEXPONENTIALRATESORAPIDTHATTHESIZEOFTHEOVERDENSEAND UNDERDENSE REGIONS VASTLY EXCEEDED THE PARTICLE HORIZON AT THAT TIME 4HESE DENSITYmUCTUATIONSWEREESSENTIALLYFROZENBECAUSETHEYWERENOTCAUSALLYCONNECTED4HEMOTIONOF THEIR PARTICLES WAS INHIBITED BECAUSE THEY COULD NOT RESPOND TO CONDITIONS BEYOND THEIRHORIZON4HE REGION THEREFORE PASSIVELY PARTICIPATED IN THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE4OUNDERSTANDHOWASUPERHORIZONSIZEDREGIONOFENHANCEDDENSITYEVOLVEDWITHTIMEAS THE UNIVERSE EXPANDED WE WILL CONCENTRATE ON A PARTICULARLY SIMPLE CASE AND IMAGINETHAT WITHIN AN OTHERWISE mAT UNIVERSE OF DENSITYρ(t) THERE WAS A SPHERICAL REGION WITHAN INCREASED DENSITY OFρ′(t) > ρ(t) SEE &IG  "ECAUSE THE DYNAMICS OF THE SPHERICALDENSITYmUCTUATIONDEPENDEDONLYONTHEMASSCONTAINEDWITHINITITEVOLVEDASASEPARATEENTITYLIKEAMINIATURECLOSEDUNIVERSE!SSUMING7ESAYnearlySCALEINVARIANTBECAUSEINmATIONPREDICTSTHATTHEmUCTUATIONSWEREABITWEAKERONSMALLERMASSSCALES7-!0OBSERVATIONSCONlRMINGTHISPREDICTIONWEREANNOUNCEDIN-ARCHSUPPORTINGTHEINmATIONARYMODEL
The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1374>>>

$ENSITY /H9267¢$ENSITY /H9267
FIGURE 6!SPHERICAL REGION OF ENHANCED DENSITYρ′ IN A mAT UNIVERSE OF DENSITYρTHATTHE(UBBLEmOWHASALWAYSBEENUNIFORMTHEREGIONOFHIGHERDENSITYEXPANDEDATTHESAME RATE AS ITS SURROUNDINGS SO BOTH REGIONS CAN BE DESCRIBED BY THE SAME SCALE FACTORR(t) AND THE SAMEH(t) HR−πG ρ′R=−kcFOR THE HIGHDENSITY REGION ANDHR−πG ρR=FOR THE mAT UNIVERSE OUTSIDE 3UBTRACTING THESE RESULTS AND DIVIDING BY πG ρ/ SHOWS THATTHE DENSITY mUCTUATIONδρ/ρISδρρ=ρ′−ρρ=kcπG ρR.	$URINGTHERADIATIONERAρ=ρRAD∝R−ANDTHESCALEFACTORVARIEDASR∝t/!PPLYINGTHESEDEPENDENCIESTO%Q 	WElNDTHATTHEDENSITYmUCTUATIONIS DESCRIBED BYδρρ=/parenleftbiggδρρ/parenrightbiggi/parenleftbiggtti/parenrightbiggRADIATION ERA	,	WHERE(δρ/ρ)iISTHEVALUEδρ/ρATSOMEINITIALTIMEti4HEAMPLITUDEOFOURSUPERHORIZONSIZED ADIABATIC mUCTUATION THEREFORE INCREASED LINEARLY WITH TIME DURING THE RADIATION ERA!N ISOTHERMAL mUCTUATION REMAINED FROZEN WITHδρ/ρ=	4HERE IS ACTUALLY A SLIGHT DIFFERENCE IN THE SCALE FACTORS BUT FOR THE EARLY UNIVERSE THIS CAN BE NEGLECTED4HIS SHOWS THAT
The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1375>>>

3IMILARLY DURING THE MATTER ERAρ∝R−AND THE SCALE FACTOR VARIED ASR∝t/FORA mAT UNIVERSE SOδρρ=/parenleftbiggδρρ/parenrightbiggi/parenleftbiggtti/parenrightbigg/MATTER ERA	.	.OTE THAT THE INCREASE INδρ/ρDID NOT INVOLVE SEPARATION OF THE HIGHDENSITY REGIONFROMTHE(UBBLEmOW4HEINCREASEINTHEDENSITYPERTURBATIONWASDUETOTHEDIFFERENCEINTHE RATES AT WHICH THE DENSITY DECREASED INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE mUCTUATION AS THE UNIVERSEEXPANDED7E NOW MOVE AHEAD TO A LATER TIME IN THE RADIATION ERA WHEN THE PARTICLE HORIZON HADEXPANDED TO ENCOMPASS THE ENTIRE ADIABATIC DENSITY mUCTUATION 4HE REGION OF ENHANCEDDENSITY IS NOW CAUSALLY CONNECTED AND CAN RESPOND AS A WHOLE TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITIONSINSIDE &ROM THIS POINT ONWARD THE FATE OF THE mUCTUATION IS DETERMINED BY THE RELATIVEVALUES OF ITS MASS AND THE *EANS MASS4HEEVOLUTIONOFTHE*EANSMASSASTHEUNIVERSEEXPANDEDISOFPRIMARYIMPORTANCETOOURSTORY &OR A STATIC NOT EXPANDING	 MEDIUM THE MINIMUM MASS REQUIREDFORδρ/ρTOINCREASE WITH TIME ISMJ≃/parenleftbiggkTGµmH/parenrightbigg//parenleftbiggπρ/parenrightbigg/.	4HE SAME EXPRESSION FOR THE *EANS MASS IS VALID FOR AN EXPANDING UNIVERSE ALTHOUGH THECONSEQUENCESOFFALLINGBELOWTHISMINIMUMMASSAREDIFFERENTASWILLBEEXPLAINEDSHORTLY4HE *EANS MASS CAN BE WRITTEN IN TERMS OF THE ADIABATIC SOUND SPEED )N GENERAL THESPEED OF SOUNDvsIS GIVEN BYvs=/radicalBigg∂P∂ρ.	&OR THE FAMILIAR ADIABATIC SOUND WAVES IN AIRP=Cργ WHERECIS A CONSTANT AND WERECOVERvs=/radicalBiggγPρ=/radicalBiggkTµmH,	WHERE THE LAST EXPRESSION COMES FROM THE IDEAL GAS LAWWITHγ=/ FOR ANIDEALMONATOMICGAS2EARRANGINGANDSUBSTITUTINGINTO%Q	THE*EANSMASSBECOMESMJ=ρπ/vs(Gρ)/.	4HETEMPERATUREDEPENDENCEOFTHE*EANSMASSCHANGEDDRAMATICALLYATTHETIMEOFRECOMBINATION!LTHOUGHITISNOTOBVIOUSFROM%Q 	AMORECAREFULDERIVATIONOFTHE*EANSMJMUSTBEINTHEFORMOFBARYONICMATTER&OREXAMPLETHEUSEOFK=/NkTINTHEDERIVATIONOFMJMAYNOTBEAPPLIEDTONONBARYONICPARTICLES)TSHOULDBENOTEDTHATThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1376>>>

MASSAPPLICABLETOTHETIMEBEFORERECOMBINATIONREVEALSTHATTHEρINTHENUMERATORISρbTHEBARYONICMASSDENSITY"ECAUSETHETEMPERATURESOFRADIATIONANDMATTERWEREEQUALDURINGTHISEPOCHρb=ρb,/R=ρb,T/T(OWEVERTHEρINTHEDENOMINATOROF%Q 	INCLUDESTHEDOMINANTEFFECTOFTHEPHOTONSSOρ∝TINTHE DENOMINATOR&URTHERMOREBEFORE RECOMBINATIONPREL=uREL/=ρRELc/SO THE SPEED OF SOUND WASvs=/radicalBigg∂P∂ρ=c√,	ABOUTPERCENTOFTHESPEEDOFLIGHT4HERESULTASSHOWNIN&IG ISTHATTHE*EANSMASSWASPROPORTIONALTOT−UNTILTHETIMEOFRECOMBINATIONAPPROACHED!FTERRECOMBINATIONTHE DENSITY IN THE DENOMINATOR REVERTED TO A MASS DENSITY AND THE SOUND SPEED PLUNGED TOASSUMEITSIDEALGASVALUE"ECAUSERADIATIONANDMATTERAREDECOUPLEDAFTERRECOMBINATIONTHEMASSDENSITYISINDEPENDENTOFTHETEMPERATURE4HEONLYTEMPERATUREDEPENDENCEISTHATOF THE SOUND SPEED %Q  	 AND SO AFTER RECOMBINATION THE *EANS MASS IS PROPORTIONALTOT/ &IGURE  SHOWS THE TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF THE *EANS MASS )N REALITY THEPRESENCEOFDARKMATTERLEVELSOFFTHESHARPPEAKBEFORETHETIMEOFRECOMBINATIONTOPRODUCEA PLATEAU AT ABOUTMJ≃-⊙"EFORERECOMBINATIONOCCURREDTHE*EANSMASSWASABOUTANORDEROFMAGNITUDEgreaterTHAN THE AMOUNT OF BARYONIC MATTER CONTAINED WITHIN A CAUSALLY CONNECTED REGIONSOTHEMASSOF A SUBHORIZONSIZED DENSITYmUCTUATION WASALWAYS LESSTHAN THE *EANSMASS#ONSEQUENTLY DURING THIS PERIOD THE GROWTH OF AN ADIABATIC DENSITYmUCTUATIONWASSUPPRESSEDINOTHERWORDSδρ/ρREMAINEDCONSTANTUNTILTHEPASSAGETOTHEMATTER ERA
          
2ECOMBINATION
,OG T +	.OWMJ µ T -MJ µ T 3/2,OG MJM  	
FIGURE 74HEVARIATIONOFTHE*EANSMASSMJWITHTEMPERATUREASTHEUNIVERSEEXPANDS4HESHARPPEAKATTHETIMEOFRECOMBINATIONISACTUALLYLEVELEDOFFBYTHEPRESENCEOFDARKMATTERATABOUTMJ≃-⊙The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1377>>>

Acoustic Oscillations and Damping&ROM THE TIME AN ADIABATIC mUCTUATION BECAME SUBHORIZONSIZED UNTIL RECOMBINATION ITUNDERWENT ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS REMINISCENT OF STELLAR PULSATION 3OUNDWAVES TRAVERSEDITS VOLUME AT A SUBSTANTIAL FRACTION OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT c/√	 UNTILRECOMBINATION4HESMALLERADIABATICmUCTUATIONSDIDNOTSURVIVETHEPHASEOFACOUSTICOSCILLATIONSSINCEPHOTONSCOULDDIFFUSEANDLEAKOUTOFCOMPRESSEDREGIONSWHENTHEWAVELENGTHSOFTHESOUNDWAVESWERESHORTENOUGH4HECLOSEINTERACTIONBETWEENTHEESCAPINGRADIATIONANDMATTERTHEN PRODUCED A SMOOTHING EFFECT THAT DAMPED OUT THE SHORTWAVELENGTH COMPRESSIONSThe Minimum Mass Required to Survive Damping4O DETERMINE HOW LARGE A mUCTUATION NEEDED TO BE TO SURVIVE THIS DAMPING CONSIDER AREGION OF ENHANCED DENSITY JUST PRIOR TO THE TIME OF DECOUPLING ATtDEC=.× YR!S A ROUGH ESTIMATE THE DENSITY mUCTUATION WOULD SURVIVE IF THE SIZE OF THEREGION WERE LARGER THAN THE DISTANCE THAT A DIFFUSING RANDOMWALKING PHOTON COULD TRAVELDURING THE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE UP TO DECOUPLING 4HE MEAN FREE PATH OF THE PHOTONS ISGIVENBYℓ=/nσWHEREσ=.×−MISTHEELECTRONSCATTERINGCROSSSECTIONANDnISTHEELECTRONNUMBERDENSITY4HENUMBEROFSCATTERINGSSUFFEREDBY A PHOTON INTHE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE IS THENN=tDECℓ/c=nσctDEC.4HEAVERAGEDISPLACEMENTFROMTHEPHOTONSSTARTINGPOINTCANBEOBTAINEDFROMd=ℓ√N=√nσctDECnσ=/radicalbiggctDECnσ.! SOUND WAVE WITH A WAVELENGTH LONGER THANdCOULD SURVIVE THE DAMPING EFFECT OF THEDIFFUSING PHOTONS 4HE DAMPING OF THE SHORTERWAVELENGTH OSCILLATIONS IS KNOWN ASSilkdamping NAMED FOR!MERICAN ASTRONOMER *OSEPH 3ILK4HEMINIMUMMASSOFASURVIVINGDENSITYmUCTUATIONMUSTHAVEBEENROUGHLYTHEMASSCONTAINED WITHIN A SPHERE OF RADIUSdMASS DENSITY AT THE TIME OFDECOUPLING WHENz=	 WASρb=ρb,R=ρb,(+z)≃.×−KG M−,	WHERETHEPRESENTBARYONICMASSDENSITYρb,4HE NUMBER DENSITYOF ELECTRONS CANNOW BE FOUND FROMn≃ρb/mHA S S U M I N G F O RC O N V E N I E N C E C O M P O S I T I O NOF PUREHYDROGENONE ELECTRON FOR EVERY PROTON	 3ETTINGρ=ρbT H EM A S SC O N T A I N E D I N4HE BARYONICThe Early Universe
.THIS SPHERICALOCCURRED 4HESE SOUND WAVES PRODUCED REGIONS OF COMPRESSION SLIGHTLY HOTTER	 AND RAREFACTION SLIGHTLY COOLER	 THAT LEFT THEIR IMPRINT ON THE #-" WHEN DECOUPLING OCCURRED 7E WILL RETURN TO THESE IMMENSELY USEFUL ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS AFTER OUR DISCUSSION OF THE FATE of the density ॿuctuations.


<<<PAGE 1378>>>

VOLUME WAS THEN ABOUTπdρb=πρ/b/parenleftbiggmHctDECσ/parenrightbigg/=.×-⊙.!NYADIABATICmUCTUATIONSWITHAMASSSMALLERTHANTHISDIDNOTSURVIVEPASTRECOMBINATION)TISINTERESTINGTHATTHISVALUEOFSEVERAL×-⊙ISREMINISCENTOFTHEMASSOFANELLIPTICALC$ GALAXY OR A SMALL CLUSTER OF GALAXIESThe Isothermal Density Fluctuations7E NOW RETURN OUR ATTENTION TO THE ISOTHERMAL DENSITY mUCTUATIONS $ENSITY PERTURBATIONSLESS MASSIVE THAN SOME -⊙EXISTED AFTER RECOMBINATION ONLY BECAUSE THE hFROZENvISOTHERMAL mUCTUATIONS WERE PRESERVED FROM THE DISSIPATIVE EFFECTS OF THE ACOUSTIC OSCILLATION PHASE!FTER RECOMBINATION THESE mUCTUATIONS WERE TRANSFORMED INTO ACTUAL REGIONSOFENHANCEDDENSITY4HEPRESSUREPERTURBATIONSFORMERLYRESTRAINEDBYTHERADIATIONlELDWERE FREED TO MOVE PARTICLES AND PRODUCE TRUE DENSITY DIFFERENCES #ONSEQUENTLY THERE ISNO FURTHER NEED TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN ADIABATIC AND ISOTHERMAL DENSITY mUCTUATIONSThe Jeans Mass after Recombination4HE DEVIATIONS FROM THE AVERAGE DENSITY WERE FAIRLY SMALL AT THE TIME OF RECOMBINATIONδρ/ρ∼−ASWILLBESEENLATER	BUTTHEmUCTUATIONSENCOMPASSEDVARIOUSAMOUNTSOFMASSPRESUMABLYRANGINGFROMSTELLARTOGALACTICCLUSTERVALUES7ECANEVALUATETHE*EANSMASS JUST AFTER RECOMBINATION WHENT≃ + AND THE DENSITY IS GIVEN BY %Q  	7ITHAMEANMOLECULARWEIGHTOFµ=.FORANASSUMEDCOMPOSITIONOFX=.ANDY=. THE VALUE OF THE *EANS MASS WASMJ≃/parenleftbiggkTGµmH/parenrightbigg//parenleftbiggπρ/parenrightbigg/≃.×-⊙,COMPARABLETOTHEMASSOFAGLOBULARCLUSTER!FTERRECOMBINATIONmUCTUATIONSWITHMASSESEXCEEDINGABOUT-⊙WEREAMPLIlED4HERATEOFGROWTHOFTHEDENSITYPERTURBATIONSISJUST THAT GIVEN BY %Q 	δρ/ρ=(δρ/ρ)i(t/t )i/The Timing of Structure Formation)TISREMARKABLETHATTHETWOCHARACTERISTICMASSVALUESTHATHAVEEMERGEDFROMOURANALYSISOF DENSITY mUCTUATIONS -⊙AND -⊙ NEATLY SPAN A RANGE OF MASSES THAT INCLUDESMOSTOFTHEGALACTICOBJECTSOFINTERESTFROMSTELLARCLUSTERSTOCLUSTERSOFGALAXIES7EWILLNOWFOLLOWTHEEVOLUTIONOFTHESEHIGHERDENSITYREGIONSANDINVESTIGATEWHETHERTHEYCOULDHAVE PRODUCED THE OBJECTS THAT ARE ACTUALLY OBSERVED IN THE UNIVERSEExample 2.1.4HEHIGHESTREDSHIFTQUASARIS*ASOFTHISWRITING	$ISCOVERED BY THE 3LOAN $IGITAL 3KY 3URVEY ITS REDSHIFT ISz=. CORRESPONDING TORq=/(+z)=. THEqSUBSCRIPT DENOTES hQUASARv	continuedThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1379>>>

.×S=-YR7EWILLASSUMETHATTHEGRAVITATIONALCOLLAPSEOFAREGIONCANBEGINWHENδρ/ρ≈!TTHISPOINTNONLINEAREFFECTSBECOMEIMPORTANTANDTHEREGIONSEPARATESFROMTHE (UBBLE mOW AND STARTS TO COLLAPSE 3ETTING(δρ/ρ)q= FOR THE COLLAPSE THAT FORMEDTHISFARTHESTQUASAR%Q 	CANBEUSEDTOlNDTHESIZEOFTHEDENSITYmUCTUATIONATTHETIME OF RECOMBINATION[tDEC]7-!0=.×YR4HE RESULT IS/parenleftbiggδρρ/parenrightbiggREC=/parenleftbiggδρρ/parenrightbiggq/parenleftbiggtDECtq/parenrightbigg/≃..4OMANUFACTURETHEMOSTDISTANTQUASARSTHEREMUSTHAVEBEENDENSITYmUCTUATIONSOFSEVERALTENTHS OF A PERCENT AT THE TIME DECOUPLING OCCURRED4HE RESULTS OF THIS EXAMPLE ARE CONTRADICTED BY CAREFUL OBSERVATIONS OF THE ANISOTROPIESIN THE COSMIC BACKGROUND RADIATION !T THE TIME OF DECOUPLING PHOTONS WOULD HAVE EXPERIENCED A GRAVITATIONAL REDSHIFT AS THEY CLIMBED OUT OF THE GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL WELLSTHATSURROUNDEDTHELARGESTmUCTUATIONS4HESELARGESTmUCTUATIONSAREDISCUSSEDFURTHER	4HE RADIATION FROM REGIONS OF ENHANCED DENSITY SHOULD APPEAR SLIGHTLY COOLERTHANTHEBACKGROUND#-"WHILERADIATIONFROMLOWERDENSITYREGIONSSHOULDAPPEARABITHOTTER 4HESE mUCTUATIONS IN THE TEMPERATURE OF THE #-" HAVE BEEN MEASURED TO BE IN THERANGE OFδT/T≃n.×−4HESE PROPERTIES CAN BE TRANSLATED INTO DENSITY VARIATIONSWHICHTOGETHERIMPLYTHATρ∝T)T IS LEFT ASAN EXERCISETO SHOW THAT THE LINEARIZEDVERSION OF THIS RELATIONSHIP ISδρρ=δTT.	4HERESULTINGVALUESOFδρ/ρ≃.n.×−AREABOUTTWOORDERSOFMAGNITUDELESSTHANTHOSE PREDICTED FROM ARGUMENTS LIKE THE ONE MADE IN %XAMPLE  4HE ACCUMULATIONSOFBARYONICMATTERREPRESENTEDBYTHESETEMPERATUREmUCTUATIONSCOULDNOTHAVEGROWNFASTENOUGH BY THEMSELVES TO COLLAPSE AND FORM THE LARGESCALE STRUCTURES THAT ARE COMMON INTHE PRESENT UNIVERSE 4HERE MUST HAVE BEEN DENSITY mUCTUATIONS HUNDREDS OF TIMES GREATERTHANTHESEATTHETIMEOFRECOMBINATIONEVENTHOUGHTHISSIMPLEANALYSISOFBARYONICMATTERDOES NOT DETECT THEM.ONBARYONIC DARK MATTER MAY PROVIDE THE SOLUTION TO THIS PUZZLE )F THIS DARK MATTERHAS A NEGLIGIBLE INTERACTION WITH RADIATION IT COULD HAVE STARTED TO ACCUMULATE LONG BEFOREDECOUPLING OCCURRED AT THE BEGINNING OF THE MATTER ERACOULD NOT GROW DURING THIS TIME BECAUSE THE CLOSE INTERACTION OF RADIATION AND BARYONICMATTER RESULTED IN A SOUND SPEED OFc/√ WHICH IN TURN PRODUCED A PROHIBITIVELY HIGHVALUE OF THE BARYONIC *EANS MASS	 $URING THE MATTER ERA THESE CONCENTRATIONS OF DARKMATTERWOULDHAVEGROWNATTHERATEGIVENBY%Q 	δρ/ρ=(δρ/ρ)i(t/ti)/"YTHETIMEOFDECOUPLINGTHERELATIVEDENSITYENHANCEMENTOFTHEDARKMATTERCOULDHAVEREACHEDTHE LEVEL OF SEVERAL TENTHS OF A PERCENT AS REQUIRED BY %XAMPLE !FTER DECOUPLING$URING THE EARLIER RADIATION ERA THE UNIVERSE WAS EXPANDING TOO FAST TO ALLOW ANY SUBHORIZONSIZED DENSITYmUCTUATIONS TO GROW REGARDLESS OF THEIR COMPOSITION4HE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE WHEN THE LIGHT LEFT THE QUASAR IS USING 7-!0VALUES 
"ARYONIC mUCTUATIONSThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1380>>>

TABLE 32EDSHIFTS FOR 3TRUCTURE &ORMATION!PPROXIMATE REDSHIFTS AT THE TIME OF THEFORMATION OF VARIOUS STRUCTURES !DAPTED FROM 0EEBLESPrinciples of Physical Cosmology0RINCETON 5NIVERSITY 0RESS 0RINCETON .* 	3TRUCTURE2EDSHIFT$ENSITY mUCTUATIONS IN #-"[zDEC]7-!0=3PHEROIDS OF GALAXIESz∼4HE lRST ENGINES OF ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEIz≥4HE INTERGALACTIC MEDIUMz∼$ARK HALOS OF GALAXIESz∼4HE lRST  OF HEAVY ELEMENTSz≥2ICH CLUSTERS OF GALAXIESz∼4HIN DISKS OF SPIRAL GALAXIESz∼3UPERCLUSTERS WALLS AND VOIDSz∼BARYONICMATTERWOULDHAVEBEENGRAVITATIONALLYATTRACTEDTOTHESECLUMPSOFDARKMATTER)TIS THOUGHT THAT THE SIZES OF THE RESULTING BARYONIC mUCTUATIONS WOULD QUICKLY CATCH UP WITHTHOSE OF THE UNDERLYING DARK MATTER AND THAT THEREAFTER THEY WOULD SHARE THE SAME VALUE OFδρ/ρASTHEYGREWTOFORMTHECONCENTRATIONSOFORDINARYMATTERTHATAREVISIBLETHROUGHOUTTHE UNIVERSE 7HENδρ/ρ≈ THESE REGIONS OF DARK AND BARYONIC MATTER WOULD DETACHFROMTHE(UBBLEmOWANDBEGINTHEIRCOLLAPSETOFORMTHESPHEROIDALCOMPONENTSOFGALAXIESTHECENTRALENGINESOFQUASARSANDOTHEREARLYFORMINGSTRUCTURESSEE4ABLE (OWEVERTHE TIME CONSTRAINTS ARE SEVERE AND IT IS STILL NOT CLEAR WHETHER THE COLLAPSE OF REGIONS OFDARK MATTER CAN ACCOUNT FOR THE EARLIEST OBSERVED STRUCTURESDetermining When the First Stars and Galaxies Formed! GALAXY DISCOVERED FAR BEYOND THE GALACTIC CLUSTER !BELL  ILLUSTRATES JUST HOW TIGHTTHETIMINGFORGALAXYFORMATIONIS7ITHAREDSHIFTOFAPPROXIMATELYz≃THISISTHEMOSTREMOTE GALAXY FOUND SO FAR 4HE LIGHT WE OBSERVE LEFT THIS GALAXY WHEN THE UNIVERSE WASJUST /(+z)=. OF ITS PRESENT SIZECORRESPONDS TO A TIME JUST  MILLION
/NECLUEPOINTINGTOTHETIMEWHENTHElRSTSTARSANDGALAXIESWEREFORMEDCOMESFROMOBSERVATIONS OF THE ,YMANαFOREST IN HIGHzQUASARS4HE CLOSELYSPACED,YαABSORPTIONLINES ARE PRODUCED BY CLOUDS OF NEUTRAL HYDROGEN OF SMALLER REDSHIFTTHAT LIEBETWEENTHE QUASAR AND %ARTH .EUTRAL HYDROGEN IS A VERY EFlCIENT ABSORBER OF NM56	PHOTONS(OWEVER IFAFTER RECOMBINATION ATz=ALLOFTHEHYDROGENINTHEINTERGALACTICMEDIUMREMAINEDNEUTRALTHENALMOSTALLOFTHE,YαFORESTSHOULDBEREDUCEDTO4HISThe Early Universe
YEARS AFTER THE "IG "ANG JUST  OF THE PRESENT AGE OF THE UNIVERSE 4HE GALAXY IS TINY PERHAPS JUST  PC IN DIAMETER .EVERTHELESS IT IS A SITE OF EXTREMELY ACTIVE STAR FORMATION )T IS FORTUNATE THAT !BELL  SERVED AS A GRAVITATIONAL LENS THAT magniਕed THE IMAGE OF THIS FARTHEST GALAXY AND ALLOWED IT TO BE DETECTED 4HE PRESENCE OF SUCH A YOUNG GALAXY SERVES AS A SEVERE CONSTRAINT ON THEORIES OF STRUCTURE FORMATION "ECAUSE IT FORMED LESS THAN  BILLION YEARS AFTER THE "IG "ANG IT MUST HAVE FORMED EXTREMELY RAPIDLY PERHAPS BY THE PROCESS OF DISSIPATIVE COLLAPSE	 


<<<PAGE 1381>>>

ZERODUETOABSORPTIONBYTHEINTERGALACTICNEUTRALHYDROGEN)NEFFECTTHENEUTRALHYDROGENIN THE INTERGALACTIC MEDIUM WOULD ACT AS AN ABSORBING CLOUD WITH A CONTINUALLY DECLININGREDSHIFTINTHEDIRECTIONOF%ARTH4HISINDICATESTHATTHEHYDROGENINTHEINTERGALACTICMEDIUMIS NOT NEUTRAL BUT ALMOST COMPLETELY IONIZED7E CONCLUDE THAT AFTER RECOMBINATION THE UNIVERSE ENTERED A h$ARK !GEv BEFORE THElRST STARS AND GALAXIES HAD FORMED AND STARTED TO SHINE 4HEN 56 RADIATION FROM THE lRSTGENERATION OF STARS AND!'. REIONIZED THE UNIVERSE AND IT HAS REMAINED IONIZED UNTIL THEPRESENTTIME)FWECANlNDAmATTENINGOFTHE,YαFORESTFORAHIGHzQUASARTHENWEKNOWTHAT WE ARE OBSERVING THAT QUASAR DURING THEepoch of reionization 4HIS mAT REGION IN AQUASARS SPECTRUM IS CALLED THEGunn–Peterson trough NAMED FOR THE ASTRONOMERS WHOPREDICTED IT *AMES 'UNN !MERICAN	 AND "RUCE 0ETERSON !USTRALIAN	 &IGURE  SHOWSTHE 'UNNn0ETERSON TROUGH FOR FOUR HIGHzQUASARS4HE RELATIVELY RAPID DIMINISHING OF THE,YαFORESTINDICATESTHATTHEREIONIZATIONOFTHEINTERGALACTICNEUTRALHYDROGENWASlNISHEDBYz= AND THAT ITS lNAL STAGES OCCURRED VERY QUICKLY 7E MAY VERY WELL BE PENETRATINGBACK TO THE END OF THE h$ARK!GEv!CCORDING TO THE 7-!0 RESULTS THE lRST STARS IGNITED ABOUT  MILLION YEARS AFTERTHE "IG "ANG 4HE 3PITZER 3PACE 4ELESCOPE MAY HAVE DETECTED THE LIGHT SHIFTED TO INFRAREDWAVELENGTHS	FROMTHElRSTGENERATIONOFOBJECTSTHATINITIATEDTHEREIONIZATIONOFTHEUNIVERSE &OLLOWING A DEEP HOUR EXPOSURE IN THE DIRECTION OF THE CONSTELLATION $RACOALL KNOWN OBJECTS WERE CAREFULLY SUBTRACTED FROM THE IMAGE !N INFRARED BACKGROUND REMAINEDWITHBLOBSTHATMAYBETHEGLOWFROMTHEVERYlRSTSTARS0OPULATION)))	ASSHOWNIN &IG Top-Down Galaxy Formation and Hot Dark Matter!SNOTEDPREVIOUSLYITISINTRIGUINGTHATTHETWOMASSVALUESTOEMERGEFROMRECOMBINATIONROUGHLY SPAN THE MASS RANGE OF GALACTIC STRUCTURE 4HE *EANS MASS OFMJ≃-⊙ISTYPICAL OF A GLOBULAR CLUSTER OF STARS )N ADDITION THE LOWER LIMIT FOR THE MASS OF ADIABATICmUCTUATIONSTHATSURVIVEDTHEACOUSTICOSCILLATIONPHASEBEFORERECOMBINATION-⊙ISCHARACTERISTIC OF AN ELLIPTICAL C$ GALAXY OR A SMALL CLUSTER OF GALAXIES !DIABATIC DENSITYmUCTUATIONSANDHOTDARKMATTERARETHOUGHTTOBEHAVESIMILARLYBECAUSETHEYBOTHTENDTORESIST CLUMPING THROUGH THE DIFFUSION OF PHOTONS AND FASTMOVING PARTICLES	4HE RESULTING TOPDOWN PROCESS OF GALAXY FORMATION INVOLVES THE BREAKUP OF LARGERSTRUCTURES 4HE PROBLEM WITH THIS PROCESS IS THAT THE BREAKUP MAY OCCUR TOO LATE TO BECONSISTENTWITHTHEOBSERVEDTIMESOFFORMATIONOFTHEEARLIESTGALAXIES!NYCLUMPINGTHATOCCURSINVOLVESLARGEAMOUNTSOFMASSTO -⊙REPRESENTATIVEOFGALACTICCLUSTERSANDSUPERCLUSTERS	ANDSOMUSTBEINVOLVEDINATOPDOWNPROCESSFORFORMINGGALAXIESFROMTHE BREAKUP OF LARGER ENTITIESBottom-Up Galaxy Formation and Cold Dark Matter/N THE OTHER HAND COLD DARK MATTER IS SLOW MOVING AND SHOULD ACCUMULATE MUCH MOREEASILY #ONCENTRATIONS OF COLD DARK MATTER CAN BEGIN TO COLLECT ON A VARIETY OF MASS SCALESWHEN THE MATTER ERA BEGINS RESULTING IN A BOTTOMUP SCENARIO FOR FORMING GALAXIES FROMTHEASSEMBLYOFSMALLERCOMPONENTS4HEDIFlCULTYWITHTHECOLDDARKMATTERMODELISTHATNUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF THE EARLY UNIVERSE HAVE TROUBLE REPRODUCING THE GALACTIC VOIDSThe Early Universe
FOUND IN REDSHIFT SURVEYS )T HAS BEEN FOUND THAT IF GALAXY FORMATION IS BIASED SO GALAXIES 

<<<PAGE 1382>>>

f/H9261 n 7Mn NMn	*n z  	
* z  	
* z  	
* z  	,Y LIMIT,Y/H9252  / 6),Y/H9251. 6/ )  3I ))3I )6  / )6
         7AVELENGTH NM	FIGURE 84HE 'UNNn0ETERSON TROUGH OBSERVED IN FOUR HIGHzQUASARS ILLUSTRATES THE RAPIDSUPPRESSIONOFTHE,YαFORESTWITHINCREASINGz4HISINDICATESTHATTHEABUNDANCEOFIONIZEDHYDROGENHASDECLINEDSIGNIlCANTLYFROMz∼TOANDTHATTHEUNIVERSEISAPPROACHINGTHEREIONIZATIONEPOCHATz∼ .OTE THAT CGS UNITS AND ANGSTROMS ARE USED IN THIS lGURE &IGURE ADAPTED FROM "ECKER ETALA. J.122  	The Early Universe
TEND TO FORM MORE READILY IN OVERDENSE REGIONS THIS PROBLEM WITH COLD DARK MATTER CAN BE OVERCOME &IGURE  SHOWS NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF THE FORMATION OF STRUCTURE FROM THE BOTTOMUP CLUMPING OF COLD DARK MATTER AND FROM THE TOPDOWN FRAGMENTATION OF HOT DARK MATTER #URRENT OBSERVATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS STRONGLY FAVOR A BOTTOMUP PROCESS FOR THE FORMATION OF GALAXIES 4HE BRIGHT GALAXIES WE OBSERVE TODAY WERE ASSEMBLED FROM FRAGMENTS AT HIGH REDSHIFT

<<<PAGE 1383>>>

FIGURE 94HETOPPANELSHOWSTHERESULTSOFAHOUREXPOSUREBYTHE3PITZER3PACE4ELESCOPE4HELOWERPANELSHOWSTHEINFRAREDEMISSIONPERHAPSFROMTHElRSTGENERATIONOFSTARSTHATREMAINSWHEN ALL KNOWN OBJECTS HAVE BEEN SUBTRACTED4HEPRESENCEOFHIGHREDSHIFTGALAXIESANDQUASARSPRESENTSSEVERECHALLENGESFOREVERYTHEORYOFSTRUCTUREFORMATION4HE3LOAN$IGITAL3KY3URVEYHASDISCOVEREDSEVERALLUMINOUSQUASARSWITHz>THATINDICATETHEEXISTENCEOFSUPERMASSIVEBLACKHOLESOFTO-⊙WHENTHEUNIVERSEWASLESSTHAN'YROLD)TISSIGNIlCANTTHATTHEMOSTREALISTICNUMERICALSIMULATIONOFSTRUCTUREFORMATIONCANREPRODUCETHESEVERYEARLYCOMPONENTSOFTHEUNIVERSE4HE6IRGO CONSORTIUM AN INTERNATIONAL GROUP FROM THE 5NITED +INGDOM 'ERMANY *APAN#ANADA AND THE 5NITED 3TATES COMPUTED THE BEHAVIOR OF∼PARTICLES AS THEY EVOLVEDFROMz=TOFORMSOME×GALAXIESINACUBEWITHSIDESOFh−-PCAPROJECTTHECONSORTIUMCALLEDTHE-ILLENNIUM3IMULATION4HERESULTSSEE&IG 	DEMONSTRATETHAT A FEW MASSIVE BLACK HOLES CAN FORM QUICKLY ENOUGH BY A FEW YEARS	 TO ACCOUNTFORTHE3$33OBSERVATIONS4HESEBLACKHOLESEVOLVETOBECOMETHEMOSTMASSIVEGALAXIESWHICH RESIDE AT THE CENTER OF THE LARGEST CLUSTERS OF GALAXIESThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1384>>>

FIGURE 104HE RESULTS OF NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF THE FORMATION OF STRUCTURE IN THE UNIVERSEFROM THE BOTTOMUP CLUMPING OF COLD DARK MATTER LEFT	 AND THE TOPDOWN FRAGMENTATION OF HOT DARKMATTER RIGHT	 "OTH MODELS ASSUMEφOmegaη= ANDh=. &IGURE FROM &RENKPhysica ScriptaT36 	Cosmic Harmonics and Acoustic Oscillationsh4HE MUSIC OF EARTH SINGS THROUGH A THOUSAND HOLES4HE MUSIC OF MAN IS MADE ON mUTES AND INSTRUMENTS7HAT MAKES THE MUSIC OF HEAVENv #HUANG4ZU TH CENTURY "#	7E NOW RETURN TO THE ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY 2ECALL THAT BEFORERECOMBINATIONTHEPHOTONSELECTRONSANDPROTONSMOVEDTOGETHERTOFORMAPHOTONnBARYONmUID 1UANTUM MECHANICAL DENSITY mUCTUATIONS CAUSED THE DENSITY OF REGIONS OF SPACETO VARY RANDOMLY BETWEEN BEING UNDERDENSE AND OVERDENSE !T ABOUT −S INmATIONSUDDENLYSTRETCHEDTHEUNIVERSEATANEXPONENTIALRATESOFASTTHATTHESIZEOFTHEOVERDENSEAND UNDERDENSE REGIONS VASTLY EXCEEDED THE PARTICLE HORIZON AT THAT TIME 4HESE DENSITYmUCTUATIONS WERE ESSENTIALLY FROZEN THEY COULD NOT RESPOND AS A WHOLE BECAUSE THEY WERENOT CAUSALLY CONNECTED7HENTHEPARTICLEHORIZONlNALLYGREWLARGEENOUGHTOENGULFTHEDENSITYmUCTUATIONSTHEmUCTUATIONSWERESETFREETOREACTTOTHEIRENVIRONMENT!TTHISTIMEWHENTHEUNIVERSEWASROUGHLY YEARS OLD THE UNIVERSE BECAME lLLED WITH SOUND WAVES THAT TRAVELED THROUGHTHE PLASMA !S THE DENSITY OF A REGION WAS ENHANCED BY A COMPRESSION IT WAS HEATED BYA SMALL AMOUNT δT/T≈−	 UNTIL RADIATION PRESSURE REVERSED THE MOTION 3IMILARLY ASTHE DENSITY WAS DIMINISHED BY AN EXPANSION IT COOLED 4HE SMALL AMPLITUDE OF THE SOUNDWAVES MEANS THAT A PASSING WAVE WILL CAUSE THE PHOTONnBARYON mUID TO EXECUTE SIMPLEHARMONIC MOTION 4HIS MOTION CONTINUED UNTIL THE TIME OF DECOUPLING WHEN THE ELECTRONSCOMBINED WITH THE PROTONS AND HEAVIER NUCLEI FORMED IN "IG "ANG NUCLEOSYNTHESIS 4HE1UOTATION FROMThe Way of Chuang Tzu4HOMAS -ERTON TRANS	 .EW $IRECTIONS The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1385>>>

FIGURE 114HE -ILLENNIUM 3IMULATION OF  MILLION GALAXIES 4HIS IS A  -PCh−THICKSLICE OF THE RESULTS ATz= 4HE PANELS ZOOM IN BY A FACTOR OF FOUR 4HE MAXIMUM MAGNIlCATIONSHOWS THE SUBSTRUCTURE OF A RICH CLUSTER OF GALAXIES &IGURE COURTESY OF THE6IRGO CONSORTIUM	PHOTONS OF THE #-" NOW RELEASED TO TRAVERSE THE UNIVERSE FREELY CARRIED THE SIGNATURE OFTHEACOUSTICOSCILLATIONS3OMEAREASOFTHE#-"APPEARSLIGHTLYHOTTERHIGHERFREQUENCY	OTHERS SLIGHTLY COOLER4HE FREQUENCY OF THE PHOTONS IS ALSO AFFECTED BY THESachs–Wolfe effectAS THE PHOTONS LOSE ENERGY WHEN THEY CLIMB OUT OF THE GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL WELLS OF THE DENSITYmUCTUATIONS /VERDENSE REGIONS CAUSE THE PHOTON FREQUENCY TO BE REDUCED SLIGHTLY HENCEAPPEARING COOLER	 WHEREAS UNDERDENSE REGIONS HAVE THE OPPOSITE EFFECTThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1386>>>

nT /H9262+	FIGURE 124HE TEMPERATURE mUCTUATIONS IN THE #-" OBSERVED BY THE7-!0ORBITING OBSERVATORY &IGURE ADAPTED FROM "ENNETT ET ALAp. J. Suppl.148  	4HEOVERALLPATTERNOF#-"TEMPERATUREVARIATIONSONTHECELESTIALSPHERESEE&IG 	CANBEEXPRESSEDASTHESUMOFSPHERICALHARMONICFUNCTIONSYℓm(θ, φ).Yℓm(θ, φ)HASℓNODALLINES;WHEREYℓm(θ, φ)==WITH|m|OFTHESELINESPASSINGTHROUGHTHElGURESNORTHPOLE φ=	4HE TEMPERATURE mUCTUATION IN THE DIRECTION OF THE ANGULAR POSITION θ,φ	 ISδT (θ, φ)T=∞/summationdisplayℓ=ℓ/summationdisplaym=−ℓaℓ,mYℓm(θ, φ).4HE COEFlCIENTSaℓ,mARE IN GENERAL COMPLEX NUMBERS BECAUSE THE SPHERICAL HARMONICSTHEMSELVES ARE COMPLEX 4HE VALUE OF THEaℓ,mCAN BE DETERMINED BY OBSERVING THE #-"ANDMAKINGMEASUREMENTSOFδT/TINALLDIRECTIONS4HEℓ=ISTHEDIPOLEANISOTROPYOFTHE#-"THE$OPPLERSHIFTOFTHE#-"CAUSEDBYANOBSERVERSPECULIARVELOCITYTHROUGHSPACERELATIVETOTHE(UBBLEmOW	 WHICHISIGNOREDINTHEFOLLOWINGANALYSIS4OREMOVETHEEFFECTOFTHEARBITRARYCHOICEOFTHEDIRECTIONOFφ=ANANGULARAVERAGEOVER THE ℓ+ VALUES OFmCAN BE TAKENCℓ=ℓ+ℓ/summationdisplay−ℓ|aℓ,m|=ℓ+ℓ/summationdisplay−ℓaℓ,ma∗ℓ,m,WHEREa∗ISTHECOMPLEXCONJUGATEOFa4HEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMISTHENDElNEDTOBEℓ(ℓ+)Cℓ/π.OTETHATEVERYTERMINTHESUMMATIONIS≥SOBOTHPOSITIVEANDNEGATIVETEMPERATUREmUCTUATIONSCONTRIBUTETOTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMTHEYDONOTCANCELEACHOTHER4HEVALUESOFCℓCONTAINMUCHINFORMATIONABOUTTHEPHYSICALCONDITIONSANDCONSTITUENTSOFTHEEARLYUNIVERSE&IGURE SHOWSTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMOFTHE#-"ANDTHEBESTlTTHEORETICALφLambdaη#$-MODEL4HISISANAMAZINGRESULT)NMUSICALTERMSITISANALOGOUSTO THE WAVEFORM GENERATED BY DISPLAYING THE SOUND OF AN INSTRUMENT A mUTE SAY	 ON AN4HE PATTERN FOR A GIVENThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1387>>>

/H5129/H5129  	C/H5129/H9266 ;/H9262+=
 -ULTIPOLE MOMENT /H5129!NGULAR SCALE
FIGURE 134HEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMOFTHETEMPERATUREmUCTUATIONSINTHE#-"4HESOLIDLINEISTHEBESTlTφLambdaη#$-MODEL&IGUREADAPTEDFROM(INSHAWETALAp. J.SUBMITTED	ANDCOURTESY OF .!3!AND THE7-!03CIENCE4EAM	OSCILLOSCOPE 4HE WAVEFORM IDENTIlES THE FUNDAMENTAL AND HARMONIC FREQUENCIES OF THEmUTE AND THE HEIGHT OF THE PEAKS REVEALS THE RELATIVE POWER OF THE HARMONICS 3IMILARLY&IG  SHOWS THE FUNDAMENTAL THE HIGHEST PEAK	 AND TWO HARMONICS OF THE ACOUSTICOSCILLATIONS OF THE EARLY UNIVERSE *UST AS THE AIR INSIDE THE mUTE HAS SEVERAL MODES OFVIBRATION SO DOES THE #-" ON THE CELESTIAL SPHEREFine-Tuning Our Understanding of Cosmic Harmonics"UT WHY DOES THE COSMIC SYMPHONY INVOLVE THESE PARTICULAR HARMONICS 7HY IS THERE ALOWmATPLAINFORSMALLVALUESOFℓAFUNDAMENTALPEAKAROUNDℓ≃WHICHCORRESPONDSTO AN ANGULAR SIZE OF ABOUT ◦ON THE SKY	 AND THEN A FEW HARMONICS PEAKS WHOSE HEIGHTSDECLINEASℓSPPROACHES4HESEAREDIFlCULTQUESTIONSBECAUSEWEAREACTUALLYLOOKINGAT A CROSS SECTION OF THE SOUND WAVES WHERE THEY INTERSECT THE SURFACE OF LAST SCATTERING ACOMPLICATION WE WILL CONVENIENTLY IGNORE	 .EVERTHELESS WE CAN USE SOME SIMPLE MODELSTO UNDERSTAND THE MAIN FEATURES OF THE ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM,ETS BEGIN WITH THE lRST PEAK ATℓ≃ 7E WANT TO DETERMINE THE ANGULAR DIAMETEROFTHELARGESTREGIONTHATCOULDHAVERESPONDEDTOASOUNDWAVE&ORTHEREGIONTORESPONDAS A WHOLE A SOUND WAVE MUST HAVE BEEN ABLE TO TRAVEL ACROSS THE REGION BY THE TIME OFDECOUPLINGtDEC4HIS IS KNOWN AS THEsonic horizon distance "ECAUSE THE SPEED OF SOUNDBEFOREDECOUPLINGISPROPORTIONALTOTHESPEEDOFLIGHTTHESONICHORIZONDISTANCEdsISRELATEDTOTHEPARTICLEHORIZONDISTANCEdhBYds=dh/√4HETIMEOFRADIATIONMATTEREQUALITYISMUCHEARLIERTHANTHETIMEOFDECOUPLINGtr,m≪tDEC SOTHEACOUSTICOSCILLATIONSOCCURREDPRIMARILYDURINGTHEMATTERERAThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1388>>>

THUSds(t)=ct√.ds(tDEC)=ctDEC√=.×M= KPC.7E NOW ESTIMATE THE PROPER DISTANCE TO THE SURFACE OF LAST SCATTERING THE ORIGIN OF THE#-"PHOTONSANDTHESITEOFOURREGIONOFDIAMETERds(tDEC)&ORAmATUNIVERSETHEPROPERDISTANCEdpANDANGULARDISTANCEdAARERELATEDBYdp=dA(+z)=D(+z)θ,	WHEREθIS THE ANGULAR DIAMETER OF AN OBJECT OF PHYSICAL DIAMETERDLOCATED AT REDSHIFTz5SINGR(t)=Ct/FOR THE MATTER ERA ;CIS A CONSTANT= WEOBTAIN THE PROPER DISTANCEdp=Ct//integraldisplayttDECcdtCt/=ct/bracketleftBigg−/parenleftbiggtDECt/parenrightbigg//bracketrightBigg=D(+z)θ.	3ETTINGD=ds(tDEC)ANDUSING[zDEC]7-!0=ALONGWITHTHE7-!0VALUESOFtDECANDt WE lND THATθ=.×−RAD=.◦,WHICH CORRESPONDS TOℓ≃π/θ= REASONABLY CLOSE TO THE OBSERVED VALUE OFℓ≃FORTHElRSTACOUSTICPEAK!MOREDETAILEDANALYSISSHOWSTHATTHELOCATIONOFTHElRSTPEAKIS SENSITIVE TO THE VALUE OFφOmegaηAND IS GIVEN BYℓ≃/√φOmegaη )N EFFECT WE ARE LOOKINGAT A REGION OF KNOWN SIZEdsTHROUGH THE GRAVITATIONAL LENS OF THE OVERALL GEOMETRY OFTHE UNIVERSE AS DETERMINED BYφOmegaη AND COMPARING ITS ANGULAR SIZE WITH OUR THEORETICALEXPECTATIONS4HE "OOMERANG OBSERVATORYCARRIED ALOFT BY A STRATOSPHERIC LONGDURATIONBALLOON WAS ONE OF THE lRST TO ACCOMPLISH THIS MEASUREMENT &IGURE  ILLUSTRATES THECOMPARISON OF "OOMERANGS OBSERVATIONS WITH THEORETICAL SIMULATIONS FOR A CLOSED A mATANDANOPENUNIVERSE4HERESULTSCONVINCINGLYDEMONSTRATETHATTHEUNIVERSEISINDEEDVERYNEARLY mATA Simple Model of Acoustic Oscillations4OINVESTIGATEFURTHERTHEACOUSTICOSCILLATIONSWEWILLCONSIDERAMODELPROBLEMTHATSTILLRETAINSTHEESSENTIALPHYSICS#ONSIDERACYLINDEROFCROSSSECTIONALAREAAANDLENGTHLTHATISlLLEDWITHAGASSEE&IG )NORDERTOMODELTHEEBBANDmOWOFTHEPHOTONnBARYON4HE ACRONYM STANDS FOR "ALLOON /BSERVATIONS /F -ILLIMETRIC %XTRAGALACTIC 2ADIATION !.ISOTROPY AND 'EOPHYSICS4HE SONIC HORIZON DISTANCE IS7E OBTAINThe Early Universe



<<<PAGE 1389>>>

FIGURE 14! COMPARISON OF "OOMERANGS OBSERVATIONS TOP	 OF TEMPERATURE mUCTUATIONS INTHE #-" WITH THEORETICAL SIMULATIONS FOR A CLOSED LEFT	 mAT CENTER	 AND OPEN RIGHT	 UNIVERSE4HERESULTS SHOW THAT THE UNIVERSE IS VERY NEARLY mAT )MAGE COURTESY OF THE "OOMERANG #OLLABORATION	
gAx2EGION  2EGION LL0ISTON MASS mx  FIGURE 15! CYLINDER OF LENGTH LAND CROSSSECTIONAL AREAAlLLED WITH A GAS ! MOVABLEPISTON IS AT THE MIDDLE OF THE CYLINDERmUID AS A SOUND WAVE PASSES THROUGH IT WE WANT TO STUDY HOW THE GAS IN THE CYLINDER CANEXPERIENCESIMPLEHARMONICMOTION/FCOURSETHEGASINTHECYLINDERWILLFORMASTANDINGSOUND WAVE BUT WE WANT TO APPROXIMATE THE PHYSICS RATHER THAN WRITE DOWN THE EXACTANSWER4O THIS END LET THERE BE A MOVABLE PISTON IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CYLINDER4HE PISTONREPRESENTSTHEINERTIAOFTHEBARYONSSOWEWILLSETTHEMASSOFTHEPISTONEQUALTOTHEMASSOF THE GAS IN THE CYLINDER )F THE EQUILIBRIUM VALUES OF THE PRESSURE AND DENSITY AREPANDρ RESPECTIVELY THEN THE MASS OF THE PISTON ISm=LAρThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1390>>>

)F THE PISTON IS DISPLACED THE DENSITY ON EITHER SIDE WILL CHANGE BY A SMALL AMOUNTφDeltaηρFROM EQUILIBRIUM4HIS IS ACCOMPANIED BY A PRESSURE DIFFERENCEφDeltaηP=P−P,WHERE TO lRST ORDERP=P+dPdρφDeltaηρANDP=P+dPdρφDeltaηρ.5SING %Q 	 WE HAVEφDeltaηP=dPdρ(φDeltaηρ−φDeltaηρ)=vs(φDeltaηρ−φDeltaηρ).&ORADISPLACEMENTxOFTHEPISTONANDNOTINGTHATTHEMASSOFTHEGASONEITHERSIDEOFTHEPISTON DOES NOT CHANGEφDeltaηρ=ρ−ρ=ρ/parenleftbiggρρ−/parenrightbigg=ρ/parenleftbiggLL+x−/parenrightbiggAND SIMILARLYφDeltaηρ=ρ−ρ=ρ/parenleftbiggρρ−/parenrightbigg=ρ/parenleftbiggLL−x−/parenrightbigg.4HUSφDeltaηP=vsρ/parenleftbigg+x/L−−x/L/parenrightbiggSO TO lRST ORDER INxφDeltaηP=−vsρ/parenleftBigxL/parenrightBig..EWTONS SECOND LAW FOR THE PISTON OF MASSm=LAρIS THENmdxdt=AφDeltaηPORLAρdxdt=−vsAρ/parenleftBigxL/parenrightBig.The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1391>>>

3OLVING FOR THE ACCELERATION OF THE PISTON WE lND THE EQUATION OF MOTION TO BEdxdt=−vsLx.4HE RESULTING SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION OF THE PISTONx=xSIN(ωt),HAS ANGULAR FREQUENCYω=vsL.	4HIS IS IN REASONABLE AGREEMENT WITH THE FUNDAMENTAL FREQUENCY FOR AN ORGAN PIPE CLOSEDAT BOTH ENDSω=πvs/L4HIS SHOWS THAT MORE EXTENSIVE DENSITY mUCTUATIONS LARGERL	WILL OSCILLATE WITH A LOWER FREQUENCY.OW WE WILL ADD A UNIFORM GRAVITATIONAL lELD OF STRENGTHgDIRECTED IN THE POSITIVExDIRECTION4HISREPRESENTSTHEEFFECTOFACONCENTRATIONOFDARKMATTERONTHEBARYONSINTHEPHOTONnBARYONmUID"ECAUSEDARKMATTERISNOTSUBJECTTOTHEINTENSERADIATIONPRESSUREOFTHE#-"ITCANFORMCLUMPSCAPABLEOFGRAVITATIONALLYASSISTINGORRESISTINGTHEMOTIONOFTHE mUID 2ETURNING TO OUR CYLINDER .EWTONS SECOND LAW NOW GIVESmdxdt=AφDeltaηP+mg,WHICH LEADS TOdxdt=−vsLx+g.4O SOLVE THIS DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION DElNEy≡x−LvsgSO .EWTONS SECOND LAW BECOMESdydt=−vsLy.!SBEFORETHEPISTONEXECUTESSIMPLEHARMONICMOTIONWITHANGULARFREQUENCYω=vs/LBUT NOW THE OSCILLATIONS ARE ABOUTy= WHICH CORRESPONDS TO AN EQUILIBRIUM POSITIONOFxEQ=Lg/vs> 4HIS MEANS THAT THE COMPRESSIONS IN 2EGION  IN THE DIRECTION OFTHE GRAVITATIONAL lELD ARE OF GREATER MAGNITUDE THAN ARE THE RAREFACTIONS IN 2EGION  4HEEQUILIBRIUM DENSITY IN 2EGION  WHENy=	 ISρ,EQ=ρ/parenleftbiggLL−xEQ/parenrightbigg,	WHICH IS GREATER THANρ THE AVERAGE DENSITY OF THE GAS IN THE CYLINDERThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1392>>>

7E WILL TAKE 2EGION  TO BE A MODEL OF THE OSCILLATION OF THE PHOTONnBARYON mUIDSURROUNDINGALOCALCONCENTRATIONOFDARKMATTER4HEMODELINDICATESTHATTHESTARTINGSTATEOFADENSITYmUCTUATIONISMORELIKELYTOBEONETHATWOULDFALLINWARDTOWARDTHEDARKMATTERRATHERTHANEXPANDOUTWARD4HEREASONFORTHISBIASISTHATTHEQUANTUMDENSITYmUCTUATIONSVARIEDRANDOMLYBETWEENBEINGUNDERDENSEρ<ρINOURMODEL	ANDOVERDENSEρ>ρ	RELATIVE TO THE AVERAGE DENSITY OF THE UNIVERSE ρIN OUR MODEL	 AND NOT RELATIVE TO THEDENSITYOFTHEEQUILIBRIUMCONlGURATIONINTHEPRESENCEOFDARKMATTERρ,EQ	3IMILARLYIFTHEINITIALPOSITIONOFOURMODELSPISTONWERECHOSENRANDOMLYABOUTx=WEWOULDBEMORELIKELYTOGETAMODELFORWHICH2EGIONWOULDINITIALLYMOVEINTHE+xDIRECTIONINTHEDIRECTIONOFTHEGRAVITATIONALlELD	BECAUSExEQ>INTRODUCESABIAS4HEREFOREINTHEEARLYUNIVERSECOLLAPSINGINITIALCONlGURATIONSWEREFAVOREDOVEREXPANDINGONES"ECAUSETHE COMPRESSIONS IN THE DIRECTION OF THE GRAVITATIONAL lELD ARE OF GREATER MAGNITUDE THANARETHERAREFACTIONSWEEXPECTTHEPEAKSOFTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMTOBEENHANCEDFORODD HARMONICS COMPRESSIONS	 AND DIMINISHED FOR EVEN HARMONICS RAREFACTIONS	The Implications of the Angular Power Spectrum Peaks!SSHOWNIN&IG THElRSTPEAKINTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMOFTHE#-"&IG 	ISDUETOTHECOMPRESSIONOFALARGEREGIONLARGEL	THATREACHEDITSMAXIMUMCOMPRESSIONATTHETIMEOFDECOUPLING4HElRSTTROUGHISPRODUCEDBYASMALLERREGIONSMALLERL	THATSTARTEDOSCILLATINGEARLIERWHENITBECAMESUBHORIZONSIZED4HISSMALLERREGIONWASABLETO OSCILLATE MORE QUICKLY LARGERω FROM %Q 	 SO THAT IT ARRIVED ATδT=A TT H E
nnk Q  Y	
/H9257/H9257
3UPERHORIZON&IRST PEAK&IRSTTROUGH3ECONDPEAK
FIGURE 163EVERAL MODES OF THE ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS IN THE EARLY UNIVERSE 4HE SUM OF THEPOTENTIALSPLOTTEDONTHEVERTICALAXISCANBEINTERPRETEDASδTSOPOSITIVEVALUESINDICATEACOMPRESSIONOF THE PHOTONnBARYON mUID AND NEGATIVE VALUES INDICATE A RAREFACTION 4HE TIMEηIS PLOTTED ON THEHORIZONTAL AXIS AS A FRACTION OF THE TIME AT RECOMBINATION η∗	 SOη/η∗= AT RECOMBINATION 4HEOSCILLATIONS ARE NOT SYMMETRIC ABOUTδT= BECAUSE THE BARYONS ARE ATTRACTED TO CONCENTRATIONS OFDARK MATTER &IGURE ADAPTED FROM $ODELSONNeutrinos, Flavor Physics, and Precision Cosmology:Fourth Tropical Workshop on Particle Physics and Cosmology *OS£ & .IEVES AND 2AYMOND 26OLKAS EDS	!)0#ONFERENCE 0ROCEEDINGS689  	The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1393>>>

TIMEOFDECOUPLINGWHEREδTISTHEVARIATIONINTEMPERATUREFROMEQUILIBRIUM4HESECONDPEAK IS DUE TO THE OSCILLATION OF A STILL SMALLER REGION THAT PASSED THROUGH ITS MAXIMUMCOMPRESSIONANDTHENREACHEDITSMAXIMUMRAREFACTIONATTHETIMEOFDECOUPLING.OTETHATTHEMAGNITUDEOFδTATDECOUPLINGFORTHElRSTPEAKISGREATERTHANTHEMAGNITUDEOFδTATDECOUPLING FOR THE SECOND PEAK 4HIS IS DUE TO THE BIASING EFFECT OF THE GRAVITATIONAL PULLON THE BARYONS BY LOCAL CONCENTRATIONS OF DARK MATTER!S A RESULTδTFOR THE COMPRESSIONIS GREATER IN MAGNITUDE	 THAN THAT FOR THE RAREFACTION 4HUS THE HEIGHT OF THE SECOND PEAKIS LESS THAN THAT OF THE lRST PEAK AND THE RELATIVE SUPPRESSION OF THE SECOND PEAK INCREASESAS THE VALUE OFφOmegaηbINCREASES #OMPARISON OF THE HEIGHTS OF THE lRST AND SECOND HARMONICPEAKS REVEALS THE DENSITY OF BARYONIC MATTER IN THE UNIVERSE4HE THIRD PEAK THE THIRD HARMONIC	 IS DUE TO AN OSCILLATION THAT REACHES ITS SECONDMAXIMUM COMPRESSION AT THE TIME OF DECOUPLING *UST AS THE RELATIVE HEIGHTS OF THE lRSTTWO PEAKS INDICATE THE AMOUNT OF BARYONIC MATTER IN THE UNIVERSE THE HEIGHT OF THE THIRDPEAK IS SENSITIVE TO THE DENSITY OF DARK MATTER )N ESSENCE THE LOCATION AND HEIGHTS OF THETHREE PEAKS CAN BE USED TO DETERMINE WITH SOME ACCURACY THE VALUES OF THE THREE DENSITYPARAMETERSφOmegaηφOmegaηb, ANDφOmegaηDARK, 4HE COMPARABLE HEIGHTS OF THE SECOND AND THIRD PEAKSINDICATE THAT MOST OF THE MATTER IN THE UNIVERSE IS IN THE FORM OF DARK MATTER4HE LINE LABELED h3UPER(ORIZONv IN &IG  DESCRIBES THE BEHAVIOR OF A DENSITYmUCTUATION SO VAST THAT IT REMAINED OUTSIDE THE PARTICLE HORIZON UNTIL RECOMBINATION SOIT NEVER EXPERIENCED ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS 4HE #-" PHOTONS FROM SUCH A SUPERHORIZONREGION WERE AFFECTED BY BOTH THE PRIMORDIAL TEMPERATURE mUCTUATION AND THE GRAVITATIONALREDSHIFT OF THE 3ACHS7OLFE EFFECT AS THEY CLIMBED OUT OF THE GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL WELLS4HE ANGULAR SIZE OF THESE REGIONS CORRESPONDS ROUGHLY TOℓ< SO THE LEFT SIDE OF THEANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM SHOWS ONLY A LOW mAT PLAIN FOR THESE VALUES OFℓ&IGURE SHOWSTHATONTHERIGHTSIDEOFTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMTHEPEAKSDIEOFFFORℓ>4HIS IS THE 3ILK DAMPING THAT OCCURS WHEN THE RANDOMWALKING PHOTONS CANDIFFUSE BETWEEN THE COMPRESSIONS AND RAREFACTIONS OF THE SHORTWAVELENGTH SOUND WAVESAND SO DECREASE THEIR AMPLITUDES!S YOU ADMIRE THE HARMONIC STRUCTURE OF THESE CELESTIAL SOUND WAVES IT IS STRIKING TOREALIZE THAT THE VERY EXISTENCE OF HARMONICS STRONGLY SUPPORTS THE IDEA OF INmATION 4HEREGULARITYINTHISHARMONICSTRUCTUREMEANSTHATTHEOSCILLATIONSOFALLDENSITYmUCTUATIONSOFAGIVENSIZEANDSOHAVINGTHESAMEFREQUENCY	MUSTREACHTHEIRMAXIMUMCOMPRESSIONSANDRAREFACTIONSat the same time4HISREQUIRESTHATTHEYBEGINTHEIROSCILLATIONSSIMULTANEOUSLY)NmATIONPROVIDESTHENATURALMECHANISMOFGENERATINGDENSITYmUCTUATIONSANDEXPANDINGTHEM TO SUPERHORIZON SIZE 4HEY REMAIN hFROZENv UNTIL THE PARTICLE HORIZON GROWS LARGEENOUGHTOENCOMPASSTHEMANDALLOWTHEMTOOSCILLATE7ITHOUTTHISINmATIONARYMECHANISMA COLLECTION OF DENSITY mUCTUATIONS THAT WAS GENERATED RANDOMLY IN TIME WOULD NOT BE INPHASE AND A SERIES OF EVENLY SPACED PEAKS WOULD NOT BE OBSERVED IN THE POWER SPECTRUM&IGURE  SHOWS THE EFFECT ON THE POWER SPECTRUM OF VARYING SEVERAL COSMOLOGICALPARAMETERS 9OU MAY lND IT ILLUMINATING TO DOWNLOAD THE #-"&!34 PROGRAM LISTED INTHE REFERENCES	 THAT WILL QUICKLY AND ACCURATELY CALCULATE THE ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM FORA CHOICE OF MODEL INPUT PARAMETERS &UTURE MISSIONS ARE BEING PLANNED TO BETTER RESOLVETHEHIGHERHARMONICPEAKSANDSOFURTHERCONSTRAINTHEMODELS3OMETHEORETICALMODELSOFSTRUCTURE FORMATION HAVE ALREADY BEEN DECISIVELY ELIMINATED BY COMPARING THEM WITH THEOBSERVED ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM &OR EXAMPLE EXOTIC RELICS OF THE FALSE VACUUM SUCH ASThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1394>>>

/H5129/H5129  	C/H5129/H9266 ;/H9262+=
   -ULTIPOLE MOMENT /H5129!NGULAR SCALE  7-!0!CBAR"OOMERANG#")63!
FIGURE 174HE RESULTS OF RECENT MEASUREMENTS OF THE ANGULAR POWER SYSTEM BY A VARIETY OFPROJECTS4HE SOLID LINE IS THE BEST lT TO THE7-!0DATA ;&IGURE ADAPTED FROM (INSHAW ET ALAp. J.SUBMITTED	  AND COURTESY OF .!3!AND THE7-!03CIENCE4EAM=

C/H5129/H5129/H5129  	C/H5129/H5129/H5129  	
C/H5129/H5129/H5129  	C/H5129/H5129/H5129  	     /H5129/H5129
     /H5129/H5129  
hWWbh
LREION
FIGURE 184HEORETICALCALCULATIONSOFTHEANGULARPOWERSPECTRUMFORAVARIETYOFCOSMOLOGICALPARAMETERS&ORTHELOWERRIGHTPANELφOmegaη=&IGUREADAPTEDFROM+AMIONKOWSKIAND+OSOWSKYAnnu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.49  	The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1395>>>

MONOPOLESANDDOMAINWALLSWEREONCECONSIDEREDCANDIDATESFORTHEhSEEDSvOFSTRUCTUREFORMATION (OWEVER THEIR POWER SPECTRUM IS QUITE DIFFERENT FROM THE OBSERVED SPECTRUM4HESE RELICS MAY OR MAY NOT EXIST BUT THEY DO NOT PLAY A SIGNIlCANT ROLE IN THE GROWTH OFSTRUCTUREPolarization of the CMB Anisotropies)N -ARCH  THE LATEST 7-!0 lNDINGS WERE ANNOUNCED INCLUDING AN ANALYSIS OF THEPOLARIZATIONOFTHE#-"ANISOTROPIES4HEMAGNITUDEOFTHEPOLARIZATIONSIGNALISLESSTHANOFTHESIZEOFTHETEMPERATUREmUCTUATIONSSOTHISWASANEXTREMELYDEMANDINGMEASUREMENT #OMPLICATIONS SUCH AS POLARIZED FOREGROUND EMISSION DUE TO 'ALACTIC SYNCHROTRONANDTHERMALDUSTEMISSIONHADTOBECAREFULLYACCOUNTEDFOR4HEPOLARIZATIONORIGINATESINTHE 4HOMPSON SCATTERING OF THE #-" PHOTONS BY THE FREE ELECTRONS IN THE PHOTONnBARYONmUID4HETOPOF&IG SHOWSHOWTHEELECTRIClELDOFINCIDENTUNPOLARIZEDRADIATIONINTHE+yDIRECTION	CAUSESANELECTRONTOVIBRATE4HISPRODUCESSCATTEREDLIGHTINTHE+xAND+zDIRECTIONS THAT IS LINEARLY POLARIZED (OWEVER FOR AN ISOTROPIC RADIATION lELD COMINGAT THE ELECTRON FROM ALL DIRECTIONS THERE WILL BE NO NET POLARIZATION 4HE OBSERVED PARTIALPOLARIZATION OF THE #-" THEREFORE REQUIRES A RADIATION lELD THAT IS MORE INTENSE ALONG ONEAXISTHANALONGANOTHERAXIS4HISISSHOWNATTHEBOTTOMOF&IG WHERETHEINCIDENTEEEE
ExEyEEEE)NCIDENT UNPOLARIZED LIGHT
)NCIDENT UNPOLARIZED LIGHT,INEARLYPOLARIZED LIGHT
0ARTIALLY LINEARLYPOLARIZED LIGHT)NCIDENTUNPOLARIZED LIGHT,INEARLY POLARIZED LIGHT%LECTRON
%LECTRONzxyA	 
B	 FIGURE 190OLARIZATION OF LIGHT BY 4HOMPSON SCATTERING FROM AN ELECTRON )N A	 INCIDENTUNPOLARIZEDLIGHTFROMONEDIRECTIONPRODUCESLINEARLYPOLARIZEDLIGHTUPONSCATTERINGWHENOBSERVEDINTHExnzPLANE)NB	INCIDENTUNPOLARIZEDLIGHTOFDIFFERENTINTENSITIESE>E	FROMTWODIRECTIONSPRODUCES PARTIALLY LINEARLY POLARIZED LIGHT Ex>Ey	 WHEN OBSERVED ALONG THEzAXISThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1396>>>

LIGHT IN THE+yDIRECTION IS MORE INTENSE THAN THAT IN THE+xDIRECTION E>E	 7E SAYTHAT SUCH A RADIATION lELD HAS Aquadrupole moment !S A RESULT THE SCATTERED RADIATIONALONG THEzAXIS IS PARTIALLY POLARIZED IN THExDIRECTION)F 4HOMPSON SCATTERING OCCURS FREQUENTLY THEN THE PHOTON DIRECTIONS QUICKLY BECOMERANDOMIZED AND THE QUADRUPOLE MOMENT OF THE RADIATION lELD CANNOT BE SUSTAINED 4HISMEANS THAT THE OBSERVED POLARIZATION MUST BE ESTABLISHED AT THE TIME OF DECOUPLING WHENTHE UNIVERSE BECAME TRANSPARENT AND 4HOMPSON SCATTERING CEASED!FTER DECOUPLING THEREARENOFREEELECTRONSTOSCATTERTHE#-"PHOTONSUNTILTHElRSTGENERATIONOFSTARSREIONIZESTHE UNIVERSE 4HIS OCCURS AT A MUCH LOWER REDSHIFT THAN DECOUPLING [zDEC]7-!0=	SO THE SIGNATURE OF REIONIZATION CAN BE GLEANED FROM THE POLARIZATION MEASUREMENTS 4HERESULTS SHOW THAT REIONIZATION TOOK PLACE AT A REDSHIFT OFz=.+.−.4HEREARETWOWAYSOFPRODUCINGALOCALQUADRUPOLEMOMENTINTHE#-"BYTHEmOWOFTHEPHOTONnBARYONmUIDANDBYTHEEFFECTOFGRAVITATIONALRADIATION4HEACOUSTICOSCILLATIONOF THE PHOTONnBARYON mUID IMPLIES THAT THERE IS A VELOCITY GRADIENT WITHIN THE mUID &ORSIMPLICITY CONSIDER THE SITUATION WHERE THE mUID IS MOVING RADIALLY INWARD TOWARD A LOCALCONCENTRATIONOFDARKMATTERSEE&IG 	&ROMTHEFRAMEOFREFERENCEOFANELECTRONINTHEmUIDTHENEIGHBORINGELEMENTSOFmUIDAREALLMOVINGTOWARDITWITHINTHISEXAMPLE	THE mUID IN THE RADIAL DIRECTION APPROACHING MORE RAPIDLY THAN THE mUID IN THE TRANSVERSEDIRECTION4HERELATIVISTICHEADLIGHTEFFECTTHENCAUSESTHERADIATIONFROMTHERADIAL DIRECTIONS TO BE MORE INTENSE THAN THE RADIATION IN THE TRANSVERSE DIRECTIONS 4HISPRODUCESTHEQUADRUPOLEMOMENTINTHELOCALRADIATIONlELDTHATISRESPONSIBLEFORPARTIALLYPOLARIZING THE PHOTONS AS THEY ARE SCATTERED BY THE ELECTRON 4HE POLARIZATION PATTERN THEDIRECTIONOFTHEOBSERVEDELECTRIClELDOFTHE#-"PHOTONS	ISDIRECTEDRADIALLYFROMACOOLERTEMPERATUREmUCTUATIONφDeltaηT <	ANDFORMSTANGENTIALLOOPSAROUNDAWARMERmUCTUATIONφDeltaηT >	4HIS PATTERN IS CALLED ANE-mode ;.OTICE IN &IG B	 THAT THE ELECTRIC lELDOF THE PARTIALLY POLARIZED LIGHT IS ALONG THE DIRECTION OF THE LESS INTENSE SOURCE OF LIGHT ANDPERPENDICULAR TO THE DIRECTION OF THE MORE INTENSE SOURCE=4HE SECOND MEANS OF CREATING A LOCAL QUADRUPOLE MOMENT IN THE #-" IS THROUGH THEEFFECTOFTHEGRAVITATIONALRADIATIONPRODUCEDBYTHEPRIMORDIALDENSITYmUCTUATIONS7HENA GRAVITATIONAL WAVE PASSES THROUGH THE PHOTONnBARYON mUID THE SPACE CONTAINING THE
A	%LECTRONB	FIGURE 20A	4HEMOTIONOFANELECTRONINTHEPHOTONnBARYONmUIDASTHEmUIDMOVESRADIALLYINWARD TOWARD ITS MAXIMUM COMPRESSION B	 4HE VELOCITY lELD SEEN FROM THE REST FRAME OF THEELECTRONThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1397>>>

PHOTONSWILLBESTRETCHEDALONGONEAXISWHILEITISCOMPRESSEDALONGAPERPENDICULARAXIS4HE RESULTING CROWDING AND THINNING OF THE PHOTONS PRODUCE A QUADRUPOLE MOMENT IN THERADIATION lELD AND HENCE THE OBSERVED PARTIAL POLARIZATION OF THE #-" )N ADDITION TO THE%MODE PATTERN OF POLARIZATION GRAVITATIONAL WAVES CAN PRODUCE A CURLING PATTERN CALLEDB-modesTHAT SPIRALS OUTWARD FROM THE TEMPERATURE mUCTUATIONS THE DIRECTION OF THE SPIRALDEPENDING ON THE SIGN OF THE TEMPERATURE mUCTUATION	 !NY POLARIZATION PATTERN CAN BEDECOMPOSEDINTOITS%MODEAND"MODECONTRIBUTIONSSOOBSERVATIONSOFTHEPOLARIZATIONOF THE #-" CARRY MUCH INFORMATION ABOUT THE CONDITIONS AT THE TIME OF DECOUPLING&IGURE SHOWSTHE7-!0MEASUREMENTSOFTHE#-"POLARIZATIONINlVEFREQUENCYBANDS &IRST OF ALL NOTE THAT THE VERTICAL AXIS IS LOGARITHMIC AND DISPLAYS THEsquare rootOFTHE POWER SPECTRUM DISPLAYED IN &IG  &ORℓ> BEYOND THE LOW mAT PLAIN OF THE3ACHSn7OLFE EFFECT	 WE EXPECT TO SEE A CORRELATION BETWEEN THE 44 AND %% CURVES 4HISIS BECAUSE THE VELOCITY GRADIENTS OF THE ACOUSTIC OSCILLATIONS SHOULD BE GREATEST FOR MODESTHATARENEARTHEIREQUILIBRIUMCONlGURATIONSRATHERTHANATTHEIRMAXIMUMCOMPRESSIONORRAREFACTIONATTHETIMEOFDECOUPLING&ORAHARMONICWAVETHELARGESTVELOCITYGRADIENTSAREFOUNDWHERETHEWAVEDISPLACEMENTISAMAXIMUMWHILETHEMAXIMUMCOMPRESSIONORRAREFACTIONOFTHEMEDIUMOCCURSATTHEPOINTSOFZERODISPLACEMENT	4HUSTHEPEAKSINTHEANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM SHOULD BE OUT OF PHASE WITH THE %MODE PEAKS &OR EXAMPLE THE
[/H5129/H5129  	C/H5129/H9266] ;/H9262+=
-ULTIPOLE MOMENT /H5129%%4%44
""UPPER LIMIT	FIGURE 210LOTS OF THE 7-!0 MEASUREMENTS OF THE ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM 44	 THETEMPERATURE%MODE CORRELATION 4%	 THE %MODE POLARIZATION %%	 AND THE "MODE POLARIZATION""	7-!0FOUND NO EVIDENCE FOR "MODES SO THE UPPER LIMIT FOR THEM IS SHOWN AS A DOTTED LINE4HECURVESAREFORTHEBESTlTCOSMOLOGICALMODEL;&IGUREADAPTEDFROM0AGEETALAp. J.SUBMITTED	 AND COURTESY OF .!3!AND THE7-!03CIENCE4EAM=The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1398>>>

lRST PEAK IN THE ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM SHOULD CORRESPOND TO A MINIMUM IN THE %MODECURVE AND THIS IS INDEED WHAT IS OBSERVED 4HE CURVE LABELED h4%v SHOWS THE EXPECTEDCORRELATION BETWEEN THE TEMPERATURE AND %MODE OBSERVATIONS4ODATE7-!0HASFOUNDNOEVIDENCEFORTHE"MODESBUTTHEIREXPECTEDSIGNALISFAINTANDTHE7-!0OBSERVATORYANDTHE%UROPEAN3PACE!GENCYS0LANCKSPACECRAFTPLANNEDTO LAUNCH IN 	 WILL CONTINUE TO SEARCH FOR THE "MODES ! DElNITIVE MEASUREMENT OFTHE"MODESFORℓ<WOULDPROVIDEINSIGHTSABOUTTHEPHYSICSOFTHEEARLYUNIVERSEATENERGIES OF n'E6 BACK TO THE END OF INmATION4HEDETECTIONOF"MODESWOULDALSOIMPACTANALTERNATIVECOSMOLOGYTHECYCLICMODEL4HISRADICALBUTTESTABLE	ALTERNATIVETOTHE"IG"ANGINmATIONARYSCENARIOPROPOSESACYCLICUNIVERSEINWHICHTHELARGESCALESTRUCTUREOFTHEUNIVERSEWASSETUPbeforeTHE"IG"ANGDURING A SLOW CONTRACTION PHASE THAT FOLLOWED AN EVEN EARLIER EXPANSION 4HE OBSERVEDENERGY WE ATTRIBUTE TO THE "IG "ANG WAS INSTEAD RELEASED BY THE COLLISION OF TWO UNIVERSESRESIDING ON TWO PARALLEL THREEDIMENSIONAL MEMBRANES SEPARATED BY A FOURTH DIMENSION4HE"IG"ANGINmATIONMODELANDTHECYCLICMODELOFFERTHEONLYPOSSIBLEMECHANISMSFORPRODUCING NEARLY SCALEINVARIANT ADIABATIC mUCTUATIONS AS ARE OBSERVED BY 7-!0	 4HECOLLISIONOFMEMBRANESISINCAPABLEOFGENERATING"MODESINTHEPOLARIZATIONOFTHE#-"SO THE DETECTION OF "MODES WOULD RULE OUT THIS IMAGINATIVE MODEL AND AT THE SAME TIMECONlRM THE INmATIONARY MODELEvidence of Harmonics in Large-Scale Structure)F THE QUANTUM DENSITY mUCTUATIONS AMPLIlED BY CONCENTRATIONS OF DARK MATTER REALLY ARETHE hSEEDSv OF STRUCTURE FORMATION IN THE UNIVERSE AND IF THE DENSITY mUCTUATIONS REVEAL ANACOUSTICHARMONICSTRUCTURETHENITSEEMSREASONABLETOASKIFTHATHARMONICSTRUCTUREWASIMPRINTEDONTHELARGESCALESTRUCTUREOFTHEUNIVERSE)NCREDIBLYTHEANSWERISYES!LARGESAMPLEOFGALAXIESFROMTHE3LOAN$IGITAL3KY3URVEYWASEXAMINEDTOSEEIFTHEREWAS ANY CORRELATION IN THEIR POSITIONS 4HERE WAS A SLIGHT EXCESS OF GALAXIES SEPARATED BYh−-PC OR ABOUT  -PC FOR[h]7-!0=. 4HIS IS IN EXCELLENT AGREEMENT WITHTHE SEPARATION PREDICTED FOR THE lRST HARMONIC SOUND WAVE WHEN THE GROWTH OF STRUCTUREDUE TO THE UNIVERSAL EXPANSION IS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT!STRONOMERS HAVE ANOTHER POWERFULSTATISTICAL TOOL TO APPLY TO THE SECRETS OF THE EARLY UNIVERSE"ECAUSETHELOCATIONOFTHElRSTPEAKISSENSITIVETOTHEVALUEOFφOmegaη=φOmegaηm,+φOmegaηφLambdaη,WECAN PLOT THE 7-!0RESULTS ON THEφOmegaηm,nφOmegaηφLambdaη,PLANE TOGETHER WITH THE RESULTS FROM HIGHzSUPERNOVAE7E ALSO ADD THE RESULTS OF STUDIES OF 8RAYS FROM CLUSTERSOFGALAXIESBYTHE #HANDRA ORBITING OBSERVATORY WHICH WHEN COMBINED WITH GRAVITATIONALLENSDATAALLOWφOmegaηm,TOBEDETERMINED4HERESULTSHOWNIN&IG DISPLAYSABEAUTIFULCONCORDANCEA SPECTACULAR AGREEMENT WITH THE7-!0VALUES OBTAINED BY USING THEORETICAL MODELS TO REPRODUCE THE OBSERVED ANGULAR POWER SPECTRUM4HE SCIENCE OF PRECISION COSMOLOGY HAS ARRIVED4HE CYCLIC MODEL DOES NOT DENY THE EXPANSION OF THE UNIVERSE FROM A HOT DENSE STATE  BILLION YEARS AGO )FEVIDENCEFAVORINGTHECYCLICMODELISDISCOVEREDONLYTHIS CHAPTER OFTHIS WILLHAVETOBEREWRITTEN9OUAREREFERRED TO 3TEINHARDT AND4UROK  FOR DETAILS OF THEIR CYCLIC MODEL OF THE UNIVERSEThe Early Universe
text


<<<PAGE 1399>>>

3UPERNOVA #OSMOLOGY 0ROJECT+NOP ET AL 	3PERGEL ET AL 	!LLEN ET AL 	.O "IG "ANG3UPERNOVAE#-"%XPANDS FOREVER2ECOLLAPSES EVENTUALLY#LOSED&LAT/PEN#LUSTERSWMWL
n
FIGURE 224HECOSMICCONCORDANCEOFTHERESULTSOFTHREEDIFFERENTOBSERVINGPROJECTSONTHEφOmegaηm,nφOmegaηφLambdaη,PLANE !DAPTED FROM A lGURE COURTESY OF THE 3UPERNOVA #OSMOLOGY 0ROJECT	The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1400>>>

The Question)N OUR ASTROPHYSICS CLASS A STUDENT ONCE ASKED h7HY ARE WE HEREv 4HE ANSWER IS ASAMAZING TO US AS IT WAS TO THE CLASS7EAREHEREBECAUSEBILLIONYEARSAGOTHEUNIVERSEBORROWEDENERGYFROMTHEVACUUMTOCREATEVASTAMOUNTSOFMATTERANDANTIMATTERINNEARLYEQUALNUMBERS-OSTOFITANNIHILATED AND lLLED THE UNIVERSE WITH PHOTONS ,ESS THAN ONE PART PER BILLION SURVIVED TO FORMPROTONS AND NEUTRONS AND THEN THE HYDROGEN AND HELIUM THAT MAKE UP MOST OF EVERYTHINGTHEREIS3OMEOFTHISHYDROGENANDHELIUMCOLLAPSEDTOMAKETHElRSTGENERATIONOFMASSIVESTARSWHICHPRODUCEDTHElRSTBATCHOFHEAVYELEMENTSINTHEIRCENTRALNUCLEARlRES4HESESTARS EXPLODED AND ENRICHED THE INTERSTELLAR CLOUDS THAT WOULD FORM THE NEXT GENERATIONOF STARS &INALLY ABOUT  BILLION YEARS AGO ONE PARTICULAR CLOUD IN ONE PARTICULAR GALAXYCOLLAPSEDTOFORMOUR3UNANDITSPLANETARYSYSTEM,IFEAROSEONTHETHIRDPLANETBASEDONTHEHYDROGENCARBONNITROGENOXYGENANDOTHERELEMENTSFOUNDINTHEPROTOSTELLARCLOUD4HE DEVELOPMENT OF LIFE TRANSFORMED %ARTHS ATMOSPHERE AND ALLOWED LIFE TO MOVE ONTOLAND3IXTYlVEMILLIONYEARSAGOAFORTUNATECOLLISIONWITHALARGEMETEOROIDHASTENEDTHEDEMISE OF THE DINOSAURS AND ALLOWED SMALL FURRY MAMMALS TO TAKE CENTER STAGE 0RIMITIVEMEN AND WOMEN EVOLVED AND MOVED OUT OF !FRICA TO CONQUER THE WORLD WITH THEIR NEWKNOWLEDGE OF TOOLS LANGUAGE AND AGRICULTURE!FTER RAISING FOOD ON THE LAND YOUR ANCESTORSYOURPARENTSANDTHENYOUCONSUMEDTHISFOODANDBREATHEDTHEAIR9OUROWNBODYISA COLLECTION OF THE ATOMS THAT WERE CREATED BILLIONS OF YEARS EARLIER IN THE INTERIORS OF STARSTHEFRACTIONOFAFRACTIONOFAPERCENTOFNORMALMATTERTHATESCAPEDANNIHILATIONINTHElRSTMICROSECONDOFTHEUNIVERSE9OURLIFEANDEVERYTHINGINTHEWORLDAROUNDYOUISINTIMATELYTIED TO COUNTLESS ASPECTS OF MODERN ASTROPHYSICSSUGGESTED READINGGeneral!BBOTT ,ARRY h4HE -YSTERY OF THE #OSMOLOGICAL #ONSTANTvScientiﬁc American -AY"UCHER-ARTIN!AND3PERGEL$AVID.h)NmATIONINA,OW$ENSITY5NIVERSEvScientiﬁcAmerican *ANUARY 'UTH !LANThe Inﬂationary Universe: The Quest for a New Theory of Cosmic Origins!DDISON7ESLEY 2EADING -! (AWKING 3TEPHEN7A Brief History of Time "ANTAM "OOKS4ORONTO (EDMAN -ATTHEW h0OLARIZATION OF THE #OSMIC -ICROWAVE "ACKGROUNDvAmerican Sci-entist93  (U 7AYNE AND 7HITE -ARTIN h4HE #OSMIC 3YMPHONYvScientiﬁc American &EBRUARY,EMONICK -ICHAEL $ h"EFORE THE "IG "ANGvDiscover &EBRUARY 2IORDAN-ICHAELAND3CHRAMM$AVID.The Shadows of Creation7(&REEMANAND#OMPANY .EW9ORK The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1401>>>

3EIFE #HARLESAlpha & Omega: The Search for the Beginning and End of the Universe6IKING .EW9ORK 3ILK*OSEPHThe Big Bang4HIRD%DITION7(&REEMANAND#OMPANY.EW9ORK3TRAUSS -ICHAEL! h2EADING THE "LUEPRINTS OF #REATIONvScientiﬁc American &EBRUARYTechnical!LLEN3TEVEN7h#OSMOLOGICAL#ONSTRAINTSFROM#HANDRA/BSERVATIONSOF'ALAXY#LUSTERSvPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A.360 "ENNETT # , ET AL h&IRST9EARWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy ProbeWMAP	 /BSERVATIONS 0RELIMINARY -APS AND "ASIC 2ESULTSvThe Astrophysical Journal SupplementSeries148  #ARROLL3EAN-0RESS7ILLIAM(AND4URNER%DWIN,h4HE#OSMOLOGICAL#ONSTANTvAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics30  $ODELSON3COTTh#OHERENT0HASE!RGUMENTFOR)NmATIONvNeutrinos, Flavor Physics, andPrecision Cosmology: Fourth Tropical Workshop on Particle Physics and Cosmology*OS£ & .IEVES AND 2AYMOND 2 6OLKAS EDS	!)0#ONFERENCE 0ROCEEDINGS689 %ISENSTEIN $ANIEL * ET AL h$ETECTION OF THE "ARYON !COUSTIC 0EAK IN THE ,ARGE3CALE#ORRELATION &UNCTION OF 3$33 ,UMINOUS 2ED 'ALAXIESvThe Astrophysical Journal633  &UKUGITA-ASATAKAAND0EEBLES*0%h4HE#OSMIC%NERGY)NVENTORYvThe Astrophys-ical Journal616  'OTT * 2ICHARD ))) ET AL h!-AP OF THE 5NIVERSEvThe Astrophysical Journal624 (INSHAW ' ET AL h&IRST9EARWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy ProbeWMAP	 /BSERVATIONS4HE!NGULAR 0OWER 3PECTRUMvThe Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series148  (INSHAW ' ET AL h4HIRD9EARWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy ProbeWMAP	 /BSERVATIONS4EMPERATURE!NALYSISv SUBMITTED TOThe Astrophysical Journal (U7AYNE h4HE 0HYSICS OF -ICROWAVE "ACKGROUND!NISOTROPIESvhttp://background.uchicago.edu/(U7AYNE3UGIYAMA.AOSHIAND3ILK*OSEPHh4HE0HYSICSOF-ICROWAVE"ACKGROUND!NISOTROPIESvNature386 +OLB%DWARD7AND4URNER-ICHAEL3The Early Universe!DDISON7ESLEY2EDWOOD#ITY #! 0AGE,ETALh4HREE9EARWilkinson Microwave Anisotropy ProbeWMAP	/BSERVATIONS0OLARIZATION!NALYSISv SUBMITTED TOThe Astrophysical Journal 2AINE $ * AND4HOMAS % 'An Introduction to the Science of Cosmology )NSTITUTE OF0HYSICS 0UBLISHING "RISTOL %NGLAND 2OOS-ATTSCosmology4HIRD%DITION*OHN7ILEY3ONS7EST3USSEX%NGLANDThe Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1402>>>

2YDEN "ARBARAIntroduction to Cosmology!DDISON7ESLEY 3AN &RANCISCO 3ELJAK 5ROS AND :ALDARRIAGA -ATIAS #-"&!34SOFTWAREhttp://www.cmbfast.org/3TEINHARDT0AUL*AND4UROK.EILh!#YCLIC-ODELOFTHE5NIVERSEvScience2963PRINGEL6OLKERETALh3IMULATIONSOFTHE&ORMATION%VOLUTIONAND#LUSTERINGOF'ALAXIESAND 1UASARSvNature435  The Early Universe


<<<PAGE 1403>>>



<<<PAGE 1404>>>

PROBLEM SET1or the number density of blackbody photons:n=u2.70kT=aT32.70k.Use this result along with the baryon density,ρb,0, to estimate the ratio of the number of baryonsto the number of photons in today’s universe. For convenience, assume that the universe ismade solely of hydrogen.2 (a)Suppose observations of the microlensing of stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud showedthat most of the dark matter in the Milky Way’s dark halo is in the form of ordinary browndwarfs and Jupiter-sized objects. Explain whether this would favor hot or cold dark matterfor the nonbaryonic matter in the universe, and why.(b)In fact, observations indicate that this is probablynotthe case: Less than 20% of the MilkyWay’s dark halo is in the form of ordinary brown dwarfs and Jupiter-sized objects. Howdo these observations change the conclusion you reached in part (a)?3An example of spontaneous symmetry breaking can be obtained by considering a small ballof massm=1/9.8 kg that is free to roll on a surface whose height (in meters) is given byh(x)=kx2+εx4,wherek=±1m−1andε=0.5m−3. The gravitational potential energy of the ball is thenV (x)=mgh(x).(a)Make two graphs ofV (x)fromx=−2 m tox=2 m, one for each choice of sign fork.(b)The case ofk=1m−1corresponds to the symmetric false vacuum. Where is the point ofequilibrium? Is this point stable or unstable? (In the case of stable equilibrium, if the ballis displaced slightly, it will return to the equilibrium point.)(c)The case ofk=−1m−1correspondstothebrokensymmetryofthetruevacuum.Wherearethe three points of equilibrium? Which of these points are stable, and which are unstable?(d)For the case ofk=−1m−1, consider the ball at rest at the origin. What are the implicationsoftheuncertaintyprinciple given in below equation fortheballremaininginthatposition?is this situation analogous to that of the supercooled false vacuum4Compare the energy density of CMB photons at the end of the GUTs epoch to that of the falsevacuum.5According to the standard Big Bang cosmology, what was the value of the scale factor,R,i nthe radiation era at the Planck time? When inﬂation is considered (taket/τi=100), what wasF
the value of the scale factor at the Planck time? For both situations, what was the size of thepresently observable universe at the Planck time?6Estimate the thickness of a typical cosmic string.The Early Universe
From Chapter 30 of An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicsSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.beforeinﬂation?Inwhatwaysjust/Delta1E /Delta1t≈/planckover2pi1.
,

<<<PAGE 1405>>>

7 (a)Estimate the mass of baryonic matter contained within a causally connected region(diameter=the horizon distance) whenT=109K during the radiation era. Express youranswer in solar units. How does this compare with the Jeans mass shown in Fig. 7?
(b)Show that during the radiation era, the mass of the baryonic matter inside this causallyconnected region varied asT−3. What does this say about the relative magnitudes of theregion’s mass and the Jeans mass throughout the radiation era?8Estimate the mass of baryonic matter contained within a causally connected region at the timeof the transition from the radiation era to the matter era. Express your answer in solar units.(For convenience, setφOmegaη0=1 andh=1.) From the magnitude of your answer, did most ofthe baryonic density ﬂuctuations become sub-horizon-sized during the radiation era or duringthe matter era?9Show that if a baryonic density perturbation at the present time is(δρ/ρ)0=1, then its valueat a redshiftzin the matter era wasδρ/ρ=(1+z)−1. By what factor does anyδρ/ρ <1increase between a redshiftz1and a redshiftz2(z1>z2) in the matter era? You may assumethat the universe is nearly ﬂat and thatz<1100 for baryonic ﬂuctuations.10Follow the linearization procedureand show that the variations in thetemperatureoftheCMBarerelatedtothebaryonicdensityﬂuctuationsbyEq.(30).11Assuming a ﬂat universe, ﬁnd the angular size of the largest causally connected region of theCMB.Hint:We see this region as it existed at the time of decoupling, when the CMB photonswere set free.12Estimate the value ofℓwhen Silk damping becomes important for the angular power spectrumof the CMB anisotropies.13According to the WMAP CMB polarization results, how old was the universe when the ﬁrststars ignited?10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0024681012141618
Recombination
Log10 T (K)NowMJ µ T -3MJ µ T 3/2Log10 (MJ/M  )
FIGURE 7The variation of the Jeans mass,MJ, with temperature as the universe expands. Thesharp peak at the time of recombination is actually leveled off by the presence of dark matter at aboutMJ≃1016M⊙.
δρρ=3δTT.The Early Universe: Problem SetThe Early Universe: Problem Set
(0)3


<<<PAGE 1406>>>

APPENDIXAstronomical and Physical ConstantsAstronomical ConstantsSolar mass1M⊙=1.9891×1030kgSolar irradianceS=1.365(2)×103Wm−2Solar luminosity1L⊙=3.839(5)×1026WSolar radius1R⊙=6.95508(26)×108mSolar effective temperatureTe,⊙≡L⊙/(4πσR2⊙)1/4=5777(2)KSolar absolute bolometric magnitdueMbol=4.74Solar apparent bolometric magnitudembol=−26.83Solar apparent ultraviolet magnitudeU=−25.91Solar apparent blue magnitudeB=−26.10Solar apparent visual magnitudeV=−26.75Solar bolometric correctionBC=−0.08Earth mass1M⊕=5.9736×1024kgEarth radius (equatorial)1R⊕=6.378136×106mAstronomical unit1 AU=1.4959787066×1011mLight (Julian) year1 ly=9.460730472×1015mParsec1 pc=206264.806 AU=3.0856776×1016m=3.2615638 ly(Julian)Sidereal day=23h56m04.0905309sSolar day=86400 sSidereal year=3.15581450×107s=365.256308 dTropical year=3.155692519×107s=365.2421897 dJulian year≡3.1557600×107s≡365.25 dGregorian year≡3.1556952×107s≡365.2425 dNote: Uncertainties in the last digits are indicated in parentheses. For instance,the solar radius, 1 R⊙, has an uncertainty of±0.00026×108m.
From Appendix A o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1407>>>

Physical ConstantsGravitational constantG=6.673(10)×10−11Nm2kg−2Speed of light (exact)c≡2.99792458×108ms−1Permeability of free spaceµ0≡4π×10−7NA−2Permittivity of free spaceϵ0≡1/µ0c2=8.854187817...×10−12Fm−1Electric chargee=1.602176462(63)×10−19CElectron volt1 eV=1.602176462(63)×10−19JPlanck’s constanth=6.62606876(52)×10−34Js=4.13566727(16)×10−15eV s/planckover2pi1≡h/2π=1.054571596(82)×10−34Js=6.58211889(26)×10−16eV sPlanck’s constant×speed of lighthc=1.23984186(16)×103eV nm≃1240 eV nmBoltzmann’s constantk=1.3806503(24)×10−23JK−1=8.6173423(153)×10−5eV K−1Stefan–Boltzmann constantσ≡2π5k4/(15c2h3)=5.670400(40)×10−8Wm−2K−4Radiation constanta=4σ/c=7.565767(54)×10−16Jm−3K−4Atomic mass unit1u=1.66053873(13)×10−27kg=931.494013(37)MeV/c2Electron massme=9.10938188(72)×10−31kg=5.485799110(12)×10−4uProton massmp=1.67262158(13)×10−27kg=1.00727646688(13)uNeutron massmn=1.67492716(13)×10−27kg=1.00866491578(55)uHydrogen massmH=1.673532499(13)×10−27kg=1.00782503214(35)uAvogadro’s numberNA=6.02214199(47)×1023mol−1Gas constantR=8.314472(15)J mol−1K−1Bohr radiusa0,∞≡4πϵ0/planckover2pi12/mee2=5.291772083(19)×10−11ma0,H≡(me/µ)a0,∞=5.294654075(20)×10−11mRydberg constantR∞≡mee4/64π3ϵ20/planckover2pi13c=1.0973731568549(83)×107m−1RH≡(µ/me)R∞=1.09677583(13)×107m−1Note: Uncertainties in the last digits are indicated in parentheses. For instance, the universalgravitational constant,G, has an uncertainty of±0.010×10−11Nm2kg−2.Appendix: Astronomical and Physical Constants


<<<PAGE 1408>>>

SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalBrown, T. M., and Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., “Accurate Determination of the SolarPhotospheric Radius,”The Astrophysical Journal,550, L493, 2001.Cox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Lean, Judith, “Solar Irradiance,”Encyclopedia of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Nature Pub-lishing Group, Houndmills, UK, 2001.Mohr, Peter J., and Taylor, Barry N., “CODATA Recommended Values of the FundamentalConstants: 1998,”Reviews of Modern Physics,72, 351, 2000.Appendix: Astronomical and Physical Constants


<<<PAGE 1409>>>



<<<PAGE 1410>>>

APPENDIXUnit Conversions
SI to cgs Unit ConversionsQuantitySI Unit cgs UnitConversion Factora Distancemeter (m)Centimeter10−2MassKilogram (kg) gram (g)10−3Timesecond (s)second (s)1Currentbampere (A)esu s−13.335640952 × 10−10Chargeccoulomb (C; A s) esu3.335640952 × 10−10Velocitym s−1cm s−110−2Acceleration m s−2cm s−210−2Linear momentum kg m s−1g cm s−110−5Angular momentum kg m2 s−1g cm2 s−110−7Forcenewton (N; kg m s−2) dyne (g cm s−2) 10−5Energy (work) joule (J; N m) erg (dyne cm) 10−7Power (luminosity) watt (W; J s−1) erg s−110−7Pressurepascal (Pa; N m−2) dyne cm−210−1Mass density kg m−3g cm−3103Charge density C m−3esu cm−33.335640952 × 10−4Current density A m−2esu s−1 cm−23.335640952 × 10−6Electric potential volt (V; J C−1) statvolt (erg esu−1) 2.997924580 × 102Electric ﬁeld V m−1statvolt cm−12.997924580 × 104Magnetic ﬁeld tesla (T; N A−1 m−1) gauss (G; dyne esu−1) 10−4Magnetic ﬂux weber (Wb; T m2) G cm210−8a Multiply the SI unit by the conversation factor to obtain the equivalent cgs unit; e.g., 10−2 m = 1 cm.b The ampere is the fundamental electromagnetic unit in the SI system.c The esu (electrostatic unit) is the fundamental electromagnetic unit in the cgs system.
From Appendix B o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1411>>>

SI to Miscellaneous Unit ConversionsQuantitySI Unit Misc. UnitConversion Factor (SI to Misc.)d Distancemeter (m)angstrom (Å) 10-10Distancenanometer (nm) angstrom (Å) 10-1Spectral ﬂux density W m-2 Hz-1Jansky (Jy)10-26d Multiply the SI unit by the conversion factor to obtain the equivalent Miscellaneous Unit.SI -cgs Electromagnetic Equation ConversionsSelected Equations of ElectromagnetismSI Versioncgs Version Poynting VectorS= E B1200µ0S=cEB800pCoulomb’ s LawF=qqr14122pe0F=qqr122Lorentz EquationF( E v B )=q +¥FEvB=q +c¥ÊËÁˆ¯˜Magnetic pressureP=B220µP=B28pAppendix: Unit Conversions


<<<PAGE 1412>>>

APPENDIXSolar System Data
Planetary Physical DataEquatorial Average SiderealMassaRadiusbDensity Rotation Oblateness BondPlanet(M⊕)(R⊕) (kg m−3) Period (d)(Re−Rp)/ReAlbedoMercury 0.05528 0.3825 5427 58.6462 0.00000 0.119Venus0.81500 0.9488 5243 243.018 0.00000 0.750Earth1.00000 1.0000 5515 0.997271 0.0033396 0.306Mars0.10745 0.5326 3933 1.02596 0.006476 0.250Jupiter 317.83 11.209 1326 0.4135 0.064874 0.343Saturn 95.159 9.4492 687 0.4438 0.097962 0.342Uranus 14.536 4.0073 1270 0.7183 0.022927 0.300Neptune 17.147 3.8826 1638 0.6713 0.017081 0.290Pluto0.0021 0.178 2110 6.3872 0.0000 0.4 – 0.62003 UB313 0.002? 0.188 2100?0.6?Planetary Orbital and Satellite DataSidereal Orbital Equatorial NumberSemimajor Orbital Orbital Inclination Inclination NaturalPlanet Axis (AU) Eccentricity Period (yr) to Ecliptic (◦) to Orbit (◦) SatellitesMercury 0.3871 0.2056 0.2408 7.000.01 0Venus0.7233 0.0067 0.6152 3.39 177.36 0Earth1.0000 0.0167 1.0000 0.000 23.45 1Mars1.5236 0.0935 1.8808 1.850 25.19 2Jupiter 5.2044 0.0489 11.8618 1.3043.13 63Saturn9.5826 0.0565 29.4567 2.485 26.73 47Uranus 19.2012 0.0457 84.0107 0.772 97.77 27Neptune 30.0476 0.0113 164.79 1.769 28.32 13Pluto39.4817 0.2488 247.68 17.16122.53 32003 UB313 67.89 0.4378 55943.991aM⊕=5.9736×1024kgbR⊕=6.378136×106m
From Appendix C o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1413>>>

Data of Selected Major SatellitesOrbital SemimajorParent Mass Radius Density Period AxisSatellite Planet (1022kg) (103km) (kg m−3) (d) (103km)Moon Earth 7.349 1.7371 3350 27.322 384.4Io Jupiter 8.932 1.8216 3530 1.769 421.6Europa Jupiter 4.800 1.5608 3010 3.551 670.9Ganymede Jupiter 14.819 2.6312 1940 7.155 1070.4Callisto Jupiter 10.759 2.4103 1830 16.689 1882.7Titan Saturn 13.455 2.575 1881 15.945 1221.8Triton Neptune 2.14 1.3534 2050 5.877 354.8SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalArnett, Bill,The Nine Planets: A Multimedia Tour of the Solar System,http://www.nineplanets.org/.Beatty, J. Kelly, Petersen, Carolyn Collins, and Chaikin, Andrew,The New Solar System,Fourth Edition, Sky Publishing Corporation, Cambridge, 1999.Cox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Lodders, Katharina, and Fegley, Jr., Bruce,The Planetary Scientist’ s Companion, OxfordUniversity Press, New York, 1998.National Space Science Data Center,http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov.Appendix: Solar System Data


<<<PAGE 1414>>>

APPENDIXThe Constellations
R. A. Dec.Latin NameGenitiveAbbrev. Translationh degAndromedaAndromedaeAnd Princess of Ethiopia1+40AntliaAntliaeAnt Air Pump10−35ApusApodisAps Bird of Paradise16−75AquariusAquariiAqr Water Bearer23−15AquilaAquilaeAql Eagle20+5AraAraeAra Altar17−55AriesArietisAri Ram3+20AurigaAurigaeAur Charioteer6+40BoötesBoötisBoo Herdsman15+30CaelumCaeliCae Chisel5−40Camelopardalis CamelopardisCam Giraffe6+70CancerCancriCnc Crab9+20Canes Venatici Canum Venaticorum CVn Hunting Dogs13+40Canis Major Canis MajorisCMa Big Dog7−20Canis Minor Canis MinorisCMi Little Dog8+5CapricornusCapricorniCap Goat21−20CarinaCarinaeCar Ship’s Keel9−60CassiopeiaCassiopeiaeCas Queen of Ethiopia1+60CentaurusCentauriCen Centaur13−50CepheusCepheiCep King of Ethiopia22+70CetusCetiCet Sea Monster (whale)2−10Chamaeleon ChamaeleontisCha Chameleon11−80CircinusCirciniCir Compass15−60ColumbaColumbaeCol Dove6−35Coma Berenices Comae Berenices Com Berenice’s Hair13+20Corona Australis Coronae Australis CrA Southern Crown19−40Corona Borealis Coronae Borealis CrB Northern Crown16+30CorvusCorviCrv Crow12−20CraterCraterisCrt Cup11−15CruxCrucisCru Southern Cross12−60CygnusCygniCyg Swan21+40DelphinusDelphiniDel Dolphin, Porpoise21+10DoradoDoradusDor Swordﬁsh5−65DracoDraconisDra Dragon17+65EquuleusEquuleiEqu Little Horse21+10EridanusEridaniEri River Eridanus3−20FornaxFornacisFor Furnace3−30GeminiGeminorumGem Twins7+20GrusGruisGru Crane22−45HerculesHerculisHer Son of Zeus17+30From Appendix D o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1415>>>

R. A. Dec.Latin NameGenitiveAbbrev. Translationh degHorologiumHorologiiHor Clock3−60HydraHydraeHya Water Snake10−20HydrusHydriHyi Sea Serpent2−75IndusIndiInd Indian21−55LacertaLacertaeLac Lizard22+45LeoLeonisLeo Lion11+15Leo MinorLeonis MinorisLMi Little Lion10+35LepusLeporisLep Hare6−20LibraLibraeLib Balance, Scales15−15LupusLupiLup Wolf15−45LynxLyncisLyn Lynx8+45LyraLyraeLyr Lyre, Harp19+40MensaMensaeMen Table, Mountain5−80Microscopium MicroscopiiMic Microscope21−35MonocerosMonocerotisMon Unicorn7−5MuscaMuscaeMus Fly12−70NormaNormaeNor Square, Level16−50OctansOctantisOct Octant22−85OphiuchusOphiuchiOph Serpent-bearer17 0OrionOrionisOri Hunter5+5PavoPavonisPav Peacock20−65PegasusPegasiPeg Winged Horse22+20PerseusPerseiPer Rescuer of Andromeda3+45PhoenixPhoenicisPhe Phoenix1−50PictorPictorisPic Painter, Easel6−55PiscesPisciumPsc Fish1+15Piscis Austrinus Piscis AustriniPsA Southern Fish22−30PuppisPuppisPup Ship’s Stern8−40PyxisPyxidisPyx Ship’s Compass9−30ReticulumReticuliRet Net4−60SagittaSagittaeSge Arrow20+10SagittariusSagittariiSgr Archer19−25ScorpiusScorpiiSco Scorpion17−40SculptorSculptorisScl Sculptor0−30ScutumScutiSct Shield19−10SerpensSerpentisSer Serpent17 0SextansSextantisSex Sextant10 0TaurusTauriTau Bull4+15Telescopium TelescopiiTel Telescope19−50TriangulumTrianguliTri Triangle2+30Triangulum Australe Trianguli Australis TrA Southern Triangle16−65TucanaTucanaeTuc Toucan0−65Ursa MajorUrsae MajorisUMa Big Bear11+50Ursa MinorUrsae MinorisUMi Little Bear15+70VelaVelorumVel Ship’s Sai9−50VirgoVirginisVir Maiden, Virgin13 0V olansV olantisV ol Flying Fish8−70VulpeculaVulpeculaeVul Little Fox20+25Appendix: The Constellations


<<<PAGE 1416>>>

APPENDIXThe Brightest Stars
Spectral ClassVaMVNameStar A B A B A BSiriusαCMa A1 V wdb−1.44+8.7+1.45+11.6CanopusαCar F0 Ib−0.62−5.53ArcturusαBoo K2 II Ip−0.05−0.31Rigel KentaurusαCen G2 V K0 V−0.01+1.3+4.34+5.7VegaαLyr A0 V+0.03+0.58CapellacαAur M1 III M1 V+0.08+10.2−0.48+9.5RigelβOri B8 Ia B9+0.18+6.6−6.69−0.4ProcyonαCMi F5 IV–V wdb+0.40+10.7+2.68+13.0BetelgeuseαOri M2Ib+0.45v−5.14AchernarαEri B3 Vp+0.45−2.77HadarβCen B1 III ?+0.61+4−5.42−0.8AltairαAql A7 IV–V+0.76+2.20AcruxαCru B0.5 IV B3+0.77+1.9−4.19−3.5AldebaranαTau K5 III M2V+0.87+13−0.63+12SpicaαVir B1 V+0.98v−3.55AntaresαSco M1 Ib B4eV+1.06v+5.1−5.58−0.3PolluxβGem K0 III+1.16+1.09FomalhautαPsA A3 V K4V+1.17+6.5+1.74+7.3DenebαCyg A2 Ia+1.25−8.73MimosaβCru B0.5 III B2 V+1.25v−3.92aValues labeled v designate variable stars.bwd represents a white dwarf star.cCapella has a third member of spectral class M5 V ,V=+13.7, andMV=+13.
From Appendix E o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1417>>>

Proper RadialR. A.aDec.aParallaxbDistancecMotiondVelocityName(h m s) (◦′′ ′)(′′) (pc)/parenleftbig′′yr−1/parenrightbig/parenleftBigkm s−1/parenrightBigSirius06 45 08.92−16 41 58.0 0.37921(158) 2.64 1.33942−7.7Canopus 06 23 57.11−52 41 44.4 0.01043(53) 95.88 0.03098+20.5Arcturus 14 15 39.67+19 10 56.7 0.08885(74) 11.26 2.27887−5.2Rigel Kentaurus 14 39 36.50−60 50 02.3 0.74212(140) 1.35 3.70962−24.6Vega18 36 56.34+38 47 01.3 0.12893(55) 7.76 0.35077−13.9Capella 05 16 41.36+45 59 52.8 0.07729(89) 12.94 0.43375+30.2Rigel05 14 32.27−08 12 05.9 0.00422(81) 237 0.00195+20.7Procyon 07 39 18.12+05 13 30.0 0.28593(88) 3.50 1.25850−3.2Betelgeuse 05 55 10.31+07 24 25.4 0.00763(164) 131 0.02941+21.0Achernar 01 37 42.85−57 14 12.3 0.02268(57) 44.09 0.09672+19Hadar14 03 49.40−60 22 22.9 0.00621(56) 161 0.04221−12Altair19 50 47.0+08 52 06.0 0.19444(94) 5.14 0.66092−26.3Acrux12 26 35.90−63 05 56.7 0.01017(67) 98.33 0.03831−11.2Aldebaran 04 35 55.24+16 30 33.5 0.05009(95) 19.96 0.19950+54.1Spica13 25 11.58−11 09 40.8 0.01244(86) 80.39 0.05304+1.0Antares 16 29 24.46−26 25 55.2 0.00540(168) 185 0.02534−3.2Pollux07 45 18.95+28 01 34.3 0.09674(87) 10.34 0.62737+3.3Fomalhaut 22 57 39.05−29 37 20.1 0.13008(92) 7.69 0.36790+6.5Deneb20 41 25.91+45 16 49.2 0.00101(57) 990 0.00220−4.6Mimosa 12 47 43.26−59 41 19.5 0.00925(61) 108 0.04991+10.3aRight ascension and declination are given in epoch J2000.0.bParallax data are from the Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission. Uncertainties are in parentheses;for instance, the parallax of Sirius is 0.37921′′±0.00158′′.cDistance was calculated from the parallax measurement.dProper motion data are from the Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission.SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalCox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission, European Space Agency,http://astro.estec.esa.nl/Hipparcos/.Hofﬂeit, Dorrit, and Warren, Wayne H. Jr.,The Bright Star Catalogue, Fifth Edition, YaleUniversity Observatory, New Haven, 1991.Lang, Kenneth R.,Astrophysical Data: Planets and Stars, Springer-Verlag, New York,1992.SIMBAD Astronomical Database,http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Simbad/.Appendix: The Brightest Stars


<<<PAGE 1418>>>

APPENDIXThe Nearest Stars
SpectralParallaxcDistancedNameHIPaClassVbMVB−V(′′)(pc)Proxima Centauri (αCen C) 70890 M5 Ve 11.01 15.45+1.81 0.77233(242) 1.29αCen B71681 K1 V 1.35 5.70+0.88 0.74212(140) 1.35αCen A71683 G2 V−0.01 4.34+0.71 0.74212(140) 1.35Barnard’s Star87937 M5 V 9.54 13.24+1.57 0.54901(158) 1.82Gl 41154035 M2 Ve 7.49 10.46+1.50 0.39240(91) 2.55Sirius A (αCMa)32349 A1 V−1.44 1.45+0.01 0.37921(158) 2.64Sirius B (αCMa)wd (DA) 8.44 11.33−0.03 0.37921(158)e2.64eGl 72992403 M4.5 Ve 10.37 13.00+1.51 0.33648(182) 2.97ϵEri16537 K2 V 3.72 6.18+0.88 0.31075(85) 3.22Gl 887114046 M2 Ve 7.35 9.76+1.48 0.30390(87) 3.29Ross 128 (Gl 447)57548 M4.5 V 11.12 13.50+1.75 0.29958(220) 3.346l Cyg A (Gl 820)104214 K5 Ve 5.20 7.49+1.07 0.28713(151) 3.48Procyon A (αCMi)37279 F5 IV–V 0.40 2.68+0.43 0.28593(88) 3.50Procyon B (αCMi)wd 10.7 13.0+0.00 0.28593(88)e3.50e61 Cyg B (Gl 820B) 104217 K7 Ve 6.05 8.33+1.31 0.28542(72) 3.50Gl 725B91772 M5 V 9.70 11.97+1.56 0.28448(501) 3.52Gl 725A91768 M4 V 8.94 11.18+1.50 0.28028(257) 3.57GX And1475 M2 V 8.09 10.33+1.56 0.28027(105) 3.57ϵInd108870 K5 Ve 4.69 6.89+1.06 0.27576(69) 3.63τCet8102 G8 Vp 3.49 5.68+0.73 0.27417(80) 3.65Gl 54.15643 M5.5 Ve 12.10 14.25+1.85 0.26905(757) 3.72Luyten’s Star (Gl 237) 36208 M3.5 9.84 11.94+1.57 0.26326(143) 3.80Kapteyn’s Star24186 M0 V 8.86 10.89+1.55 0.25526(86) 3.92AX Mic105090 M0 Ve 6.69 8.71+1.40 0.25337(113) 3.95Kruger 60110893 M2 V 9.59 11.58+1.61 0.24952(303) 4.01Ross 614 (GL 234A)30920 M4.5 Ve 11.12 13.05+1.69 0.24289(264) 4.12aHIP designates the Hipparcos catalog number.bValues labeled v designate variable stars.cParallax data are from the Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission. Uncertainties are in parentheses;for instance, the parallax of Proxima Centauri is 0.77233′′±0.00242′′.dDistances were calculated from the Hipparcos parallax data.eParallax and distance taken to be that of bright companion.
From Appendix F o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1419>>>

Proper Motion Radial.R. A.adec.aR. A.bdec.bVelocity.Name(h m s) (◦′′ ′)(′′yr−1)(′′yr−1) (km s−1)Proxima Centauri 14 29 42.95−62 40 46.1−3.77564(152)0.76816(182)−33.4αCen B14 39 35.08−60 50 13.8−3.60035(2610)0.95211(1975)−23.4αCen A14 39 36.50−60 50 02.3−3.67819(151)0.48184(124)−23.4Barnard’s Star 17 57 48.50+04 41 36.2−0.79784(161)10.32693(129)−112.3Gl 41111 03 20.19+35 58 11.6−0.58020(77)−4.76709(77)−85.Sirius A06 45 08.92−16 41 58.0−0.54601(133)−1.22308(124)−7.7Gl 72918 49 49.36−23 50 10.4 0.63755(222)−0.19247(145)−7.0ϵEri03 32 55.84−09 27 29.7−0.97644(98)0.01797(91)+13.Gl 88723 05 52.04−35 51 11.1 6.76726(70)1.32666(74)−6.4Ross 128 11 47 44.40+00 48 16.4 0.60562(214)−1.21923(186)−31.61 Cyg A 21 06 53.94+38 44 57.9 4.15510(95)3.25890(119)−65.Procyon A 07 39 18.12+05 13 30.0−0.71657(88)−1.03458(38)−3.261 Cyg B 21 06 55.26+38 44 31.4 4.10740(43)3.14372(59)−65.Gl 725B18 42 46.90+59 37 36.6−1.39320(1150)1.84573(1202)+1.Gl 725A18 42 46.69+59 37 49.4−1.32688(310)1.80212(358)−1.GX And00 18 22.89+44 01 22.6 2.88892(75)0.41058(63)+13.5ϵInd22 03 21.66−56 47 09.5 3.95997(55)−2.53884(42)−40.4τCet01 44 04.08−15 56 14.9−1.72182(83)0.85407(80)−16.4Gl 54.101 12 30.64−16 59 56.3 1.21009(521)0.64695(391)+37.0Luyten’s Star 07 27 24.50+05 13 32.8 0.57127(141)−3.69425(90)+18.Kapteyn’s Star 05 11 40.58−45 01 06.3 6.50605(95)−5.73139(90)+242.8AX Mic21 17 15.27−38 52 02.5−3.25900(128)−1.14699(56)+23.Kruger 60 22 27 59.47+57 41 45.1−0.87023(300)−0.47110(297)−34.Ross 614 06 29 23.40−02 48 50.3 0.69473(300)−0.61862(248)+23.2aRight ascension and declination are given in epoch J2000.0.bProper-motion data are from the Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission. Uncertainties arein parentheses; for instance, the proper motion of Proxima Centauri in right ascension is−3.77564′′yr−1±0.00152′′yr−1.SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalCox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission, European Space Agency,http://astro.estec.esa.nl/Hipparcos/.Lang, Kenneth R.,Astrophysical Data: Planets and Stars, Springer-Verlag, New York,1992.SIMBAD Astronomical Database,http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Simbad/.!PPENDIX 4HE .EAREST 3TARS


<<<PAGE 1420>>>

APPENDIXStellar Data
Main-Sequence Stars (Luminosity Class V)Sp.TeType(K) L/L⊙R/R⊙M/M⊙MbolBC MVU−BB−VO5 42000 499000 13.46 0−9.51−4.40−5.1−1.19−0.33O6 39500 324000 12.23 7−9.04−3.93−5.1−1.17−0.33O7 37500 216000 11.0—−8.60−3.68−4.9−1.15−0.32O8 35800 147000 10.02 3−8.18−3.54−4.6−1.14−0.32B0 30000 32500 6.71 7.5−6.54−3.16−3.4−1.08−0.30B1 25400 9950 5.2—−5.26−2.70−2.6−0.95−0.26B2 20900 2920 4.1—−3.92−2.35−1.6−0.84−0.24B3 18800 1580 3.87.6−3.26−1.94−1.3−0.71−0.20B5 15200 480 3.25.9−1.96−1.46−0.5−0.58−0.17B6 13700 272 2.9—−1.35−1.21−0.1−0.50−0.15B7 12500 160 2.7—−0.77−1.02+0.3−0.43−0.13B8 11400 96.72.53.8−0.22−0.80+0.6−0.34−0.11B9 10500 60.72.3—+0.28−0.51+0.8−0.20−0.07A0 9800 39.42.22.9+0.75−0.30+1.1−0.02−0.02A1 9400 30.32.1—+1.04−0.23+1.3+0.02+0.01A2 9020 23.62.0—+1.31−0.20+1.5+0.05+0.05A5 8190 12.31.82.0+2.02−0.15+2.2+0.10+0.15A8 7600 7.13 1.5—+2.61−0.10+2.7+0.09+0.25F0 7300 5.21 1.41.6+2.95−0.09+3.0+0.03+0.30F2 7050 3.89 1.3—+3.27−0.11+3.4+0.00+0.35F5 6650 2.56 1.21.4+3.72−0.14+3.9−0.02+0.44F8 6250 1.68 1.1—+4.18−0.16+4.3+0.02+0.52
From Appendix G o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1421>>>

Main-Sequence Stars (Luminosity Class V)Sp.TeType(K) L/L⊙R/R⊙M/M⊙MbolBC MVU−BB−VG0 5940 1.25 1.06 1.05+4.50−0.18+4.7+0.06+0.58G2 5790 1.07 1.03 —+4.66−0.20+4.9+0.12+0.63Suna5777 1.00 1.00 1.00+4.74−0.08+4.82+0.195+0.650G8 5310 0.656 0.96 —+5.20−0.40+5.6+0.30+0.74K0 5150 0.552 0.93 0.79+5.39−0.31+5.7+0.45+0.81K1 4990 0.461 0.91 —+5.58−0.37+6.0+0.54+0.86K3 4690 0.318 0.86 —+5.98−0.50+6.5+0.80+0.96K4 4540 0.263 0.83 —+6.19−0.55+6.7—+1.05K5 4410 0.216 0.80 0.67+6.40−0.72+7.1+0.98+1.15K7 4150 0.145 0.74 —+6.84−1.01+7.8+1.21+1.33M0 3840 0.077 0.63 0.51+7.52−1.38+8.9+1.22+1.40M1 3660 0.050 0.56 —+7.99−1.62+9.6+1.21+1.46M2 3520 0.032 0.48 0.40+8.47−1.89+10.4+1.18+1.49M3 3400 0.020 0.41 —+8.97−2.15+11.1+1.16+1.51M4 3290 0.013 0.35 —+9.49−2.38+11.9+1.15+1.54M5 3170 0.0076 0.29 0.21+10.1−2.73+12.8+1.24+1.64M6 3030 0.0044 0.24 —+10.6−3.21+13.8+1.32+1.73M7 2860 0.0025 0.20 —+11.3−3.46+14.7+1.40+1.80aValues adopted in this text.Appendix: Stellar Data


<<<PAGE 1422>>>

Giant Stars (Luminosity Class III)Sp.TeType(K) L/L⊙R/R⊙M/M⊙MbolBC MVU−BB−VO5 39400 741000 18.5—−9.94−4.05−5.9−1.18−0.32O6 37800 519000 16.8—−9.55−3.80−5.7−1.17−0.32O7 36500 375000 15.4—−9.20−3.58−5.6−1.14−0.32O8 35000 277000 14.3—−8.87−3.39−5.5−1.13−0.31B0 29200 84700 11.4 20−7.58−2.88−4.7−1.08−0.29B1 24500 32200 10.0—−6.53−2.43−4.1−0.97−0.26B2 20200 11100 8.6—−5.38−2.02−3.4−0.91−0.24B3 18300 6400 8.0—−4.78−1.60−3.2−0.74−0.20B5 15100 2080 6.77−3.56−1.30−2.3−0.58−0.17B6 13800 1200 6.1—−2.96−1.13−1.8−0.51−0.15B7 12700 710 5.5—−2.38−0.97−1.4−0.44−0.13B8 11700 425 5.0—−1.83−0.82−1.0−0.37−0.11B9 10900 263 4.5—−1.31−0.71−0.6−0.20−0.07A0 10200 169 4.14−0.83−0.42−0.4−0.07−0.03A1 9820 129 3.9—−0.53−0.29−0.2+0.07+0.01A2 9460 100 3.7—−0.26−0.20−0.1+0.06+0.05A5 8550 52 3.3—+0.44−0.14+0.6+0.11+0.15A8 7830 33 3.1—+0.95−0.10+1.0+0.10+0.25F0 7400 27 3.2—+1.17−0.11+1.3+0.08+0.30F2 7000 24 3.3—+1.31−0.11+1.4+0.08+0.35F5 6410 22 3.8—+1.37−0.14+1.5+0.09+0.43G0 5470 29 6.01.0+1.10−0.20+1.3+0.21+0.65G2 5300 31 6.7—+1.00−0.27+1.3+0.39+0.77G8 4800 44 9.6—+0.63−0.42+1.0+0.70+0.94K0 4660 50 10.91.1+0.48−0.50+1.0+0.84+1.00K1 4510 58 12.5—+0.32−0.55+0.9+1.01+1.07K3 4260 79 16.4—−0.01−0.76+0.8+1.39+1.27K4 4150 93 18.7—−0.18−0.94+0.8—+1.38K5 4050 110 21.41.2−0.36−1.02+0.7+1.81+1.50K7 3870 154 27.6—−0.73−1.17+0.4+1.83+1.53M0 3690 256 39.31.2−1.28−1.25+0.0+1.87+1.56M1 3600 355 48.6—−1.64−1.44−0.2+1.88+1.58M2 3540 483 58.51.3−1.97−1.62−0.4+1.89+1.60M3 3480 643 69.7—−2.28−1.87−0.4+1.88+1.61M4 3440 841 82.0—−2.57−2.22−0.4+1.73+1.62M5 3380 1100 96.7—−2.86−2.48−0.4+1.58+1.63M6 3330 1470 116 —−3.18−2.73−0.4+1.16+1.52Appendix: Stellar Data


<<<PAGE 1423>>>

Supergiant Stars (Luminosity Class Approximately Iab)Sp.TeType(K) L/L⊙R/R⊙M/M⊙MbolBC MVU−BB−VO5 40900 1140000 21.27 0−10.40−3.87−6.5−1.17−0.31O6 38500 998000 22.44 0−10.26−3.74−6.5−1.16−0.31O7 36200 877000 23.8—−10.12−3.48−6.6−1.14−0.31O8 34000 769000 25.32 8−9.98−3.35−6.6−1.13−0.29B0 26200 429000 31.72 5−9.34−2.49−6.9−1.06−0.23B1 21400 261000 37.3—−8.80−1.87−6.9−1.00−0.19B2 17600 157000 42.8—−8.25−1.58−6.7−0.94−0.17B3 16000 123000 45.8—−7.99−1.26−6.7−0.83−0.13B5 13600 79100 51.12 0−7.51−0.95−6.6−0.72−0.10B6 12600 65200 53.8—−7.30−0.88−6.4−0.69−0.08B7 11800 54800 56.4—−7.11−0.78−6.3−0.64−0.05B8 11100 47200 58.9—−6.95−0.66−6.3−0.56−0.03B9 10500 41600 61.8—−6.81−0.52−6.3−0.50−0.02A0 9980 37500 64.91 6−6.70−0.41−6.3−0.38−0.01A1 9660 35400 67.3—−6.63−0.32−6.3−0.29+0.02A2 9380 33700 69.7—−6.58−0.28−6.3−0.25+0.03A5 8610 30500 78.61 3−6.47−0.13−6.3−0.07+0.09A8 7910 29100 91.1—−6.42−0.03−6.4+0.11+0.14F0 7460 28800 102 12−6.41−0.01−6.4+0.15+0.17F2 7030 28700 114 —−6.41 0.00−6.4+0.18+0.23F5 6370 29100 140 10−6.42−0.03−6.4+0.27+0.32F8 5750 29700 174 —−6.44−0.09−6.4+0.41+0.56G0 5370 30300 202 10−6.47−0.15−6.3+0.52+0.76G2 5190 30800 218 —−6.48−0.21−6.3+0.63+0.87G8 4700 32400 272 —−6.54−0.42−6.1+1.07+1.15K0 4550 33100 293 13−6.56−0.50−6.1+1.17+1.24K1 4430 34000 314 —−6.59−0.56−6.0+1.28+1.30K3 4190 36100 362 —−6.66−0.75−5.9+1.60+1.46K4 4090 37500 386 —−6.70−0.90−5.8—+1.53K5 3990 39200 415 13−6.74−1.01−5.7+1.80+1.60K7 3830 43200 473 —−6.85−1.20−5.6+1.84+1.63M0 3620 51900 579 13−7.05−1.29−5.8+1.90+1.67M1 3490 60300 672 —−7.21−1.38−5.8+1.90+1.69M2 3370 72100 791 19−7.41−1.62−5.8+1.95+1.71M3 3210 89500 967 —−7.64−2.13−5.5+1.95+1.69M4 3060 117000 1220 —−7.93−2.75−5.2+2.00+1.76M5 2880 165000 1640 24−8.31−3.47−4.8+1.60+1.80M6 2710 264000 2340 —−8.82−3.90−4.9— —Appendix: Stellar Data


<<<PAGE 1424>>>

SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalCox, Arthur N. (ed.),Allen’ s Astrophysical Quantities, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag,New York, 2000.de Jager, C., and Nieuwenhuijzen, H., “A New Determination of the Statistical Relationsbetween Stellar Spectra and Luminosity Classes and Stellar Effective Temperature andLuminosity,”Astronomy and Astrophysics,177, 217, 1987.Schmidt-Kaler, Th., “Physical Parameters of the Stars,”Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Dataand Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, Group VI, V ol-ume 2b, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982.Appendix: Stellar Data


<<<PAGE 1425>>>



<<<PAGE 1426>>>

APPENDIXThe Messier Catalog
R. A.bDec.bM NGC Name Const.mVahm◦′Typec1 1952 Crab Tau 8.4: 5 34.5+22 01 SNR2 7089Aqr 6.5 21 33.5−0 49 GC3 5272CVn 6.4 13 42.2+28 23 GC4 6121Sco 5.9 16 23.6−26 32 GC5 5904Ser 5.8 15 18.6+2 05 GC6 6405Sco 4.2 17 40.1−32 13 OC7 6475Sco 3.3 17 53.9−34 49 OC8 6523 Lagoon Sgr 5.8: 18 03.8−24 23 N9 6333Oph 7.9: 17 19.2−18 31 GC10 6254Oph 6.6 16 57.1−4 06 GC11 6705Sct 5.8 18 51.1−6 16 OC12 6218Oph 6.6 16 47.2−1 57 GC13 6205Her 5.9 16 41.7+36 28 GC14 6402Oph 7.6 17 37.6−3 15 GC15 7078Peg 6.4 21 30.0+12 10 GC16 6611Ser 6.0 18 18.8−13 47 OC17 6618 SwandSgr 7: 18 20.8−16 11 N18 6613Sgr 6.9 18 19.9−17 08 OC19 6273Oph 7.2 17 02.6−26 16 GC20 6514 Triﬁd Sgr 8.5: 18 02.6−23 02 N21 6531Sgr 5.9 18 04.6−22 30 OC22 6656Sgr 5.1 18 36.4−23 54 GC23 6494Sgr 5.5 17 56.8−19 01 OC24 6603Sgr 4.5: 18 16.9−18 29 OC25Sgr 4.6 18 31.6−19 15 OC26 6694Sct 8.0 18 45.2−9 24 OC27 6853 Dumbbell Vul 8.1: 19 59.6+22 43 PN28 6626Sgr 6.9: 18 24.5−24 52 GC29 6913Cyg 6.6 20 23.9+38 32 OC30 7099Cap 7.5 21 40.4−23 11 GC31 224 Andromeda And 3.4 0 42.7+41 16 SbI–II32 221And 8.2 0 42.7+40 52 cE233 598 Triangulum Tri 5.7 1 33.9+30 39 Sc(s)II–III34 1039Per 5.2 2 42.0+42 47 OC35 2168Gem 5.1 6 08.9+24 20 OC36 1960Aur 6.0 5 36.1+34 08 OC37 2099Aur 5.6 5 52.4+32 33 OC38 1912Aur 6.4 5 28.7+35 50 OC39 7092Cyg 4.6 21 32.2+48 26 OC40UMa 8: 12 22.4+58 05 DSFrom Appendix H o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1427>>>

R. A.bDec.bM NGC Name Const.mVahm◦′Typec41 2287CMa 4.5 6 47.0−20 44 OC42 1976 OrioneOri 4: 5 35.3−5 23 N43 1982Ori 9: 5 35.6−5 16 N44 2632 Praesepe Cnc 3.1 8 40.1+19 59 OC45Pleiades Tau 1.2 3 47.0+24 07 OC46 2437Pup 6.1 7 41.8−14 49 OC47 2422Pup 4.4 7 36.6−14 30 OC48 2548Hya 5.8 8 13.8−5 48 OC49 4472Vir 8.4 12 29.8+8 00 E250 2323Mon 5.9 7 03.2−8 20 OC51 5194 WhirlpoolfCVn 8.1 13 29.9+47 12 Sbc(s)I–II52 7654Cas 6.9 23 24.2+61 35 OC53 5024Com 7.7 13 12.9+18 10 GC54 6715Sgr 7.7 18 55.1−30 29 GC55 6809Sgr 7.0 19 40.0−30 58 GC56 6779Lyr 8.2 19 16.6+30 11 GC57 6720 Ring Lyr 9.0: 18 53.6+33 02 PN58 4579Vir 9.8 12 37.7+11 49 Sab(s)II59 4621Vir 9.8 12 42.0+11 39 E560 4649Vir 8.8 12 43.7+11 33 E261 4303Vir 9.7 12 21.9+4 28 Sc(s)I62 6266Oph 6.6 17 01.2−30 07 GC63 5055 Sunﬂower CVn 8.6 13 15.8+42 02 Sbc(s)II–III64 4826 Evil Eye Com 8.5 12 56.7+21 41 Sab(s)II65 3623Leo 9.3 11 18.9+13 05 Sa(s)I66 3627Leo 9.0 11 20.2+12 59 Sb(s)II67 2682Cnc 6.9 8 50.4+11 49 OC68 4590Hya 8.2 12 39.5−26 45 GC69 6637Sgr 7.7 18 31.4−32 21 GC70 6681Sgr 8.1 18 43.2−32 18 GC71 6838Sge 8.3 19 53.8+18 47 GC72 6981Aqr 9.4 20 53.5−12 32 GC73 6994Aqr 9.1 20 58.9−12 38 OC74 628Psc 9.2 1 36.7+15 47 Sc(s)I75 6864Sgr 8.6 20 06.1−21 55 GC76 650/651Per 11.5: 1 42.3+51 34 PN77 1068Cet 8.8 2 42.7−0 01 Sb(rs)II78 2068Ori 8: 5 46.7+0 03 N79 1904Lep 8.0 5 24.5−24 33 GC80 6093Sco 7.2 16 17.0−22 59 GC81 3031UMa 6.8 9 55.6+69 04 Sb(r)I–II82 3034UMa 8.4 9 55.8+69 41 Amorph83 5236Hya 7.6: 13 37.0−29 52 SBc(s)II84 4374Vir 9.3 12 25.1+12 53 E185 4382Com 9.2 12 25.4+18 11 S0 pec86 4406Vir 9.2 12 26.2+12 57 S0/E387 4486 Virgo A Vir 8.6 12 30.8+12 24 E088 4501Com 9.5 12 32.0+14 25 Sbc(s)II89 4552Vir 9.8 12 35.7+12 33 S090 4569Vir 9.5 12 36.8+13 10 Sab(s)I–IIAppendix: The Messier Catalog


<<<PAGE 1428>>>

R. A.bDec.bM NGC Name Const.mVahm◦′Typec91 4548Com 10.2 12 35.4+14 30 SBb(rs)I–II92 6341Her 6.5 17 17.1+43 08 GC93 2447Pup 6.2: 7 44.6−23 52 OC94 4736CVn 8.1 12 50.9+41 07 RSab(s)95 3351Leo 9.7 10 44.0+11 42 SBb(r)II96 3368Leo 9.2 10 46.8+11 49 Sab(s)II97 3587 Owl UMa 11.2: 11 14.8+55 01 PN98 4192Com 10.1 12 13.8+14 54 SbII99 4254Com 9.8 12 18.8+14 25 Sc(s)I100 4321Com 9.4 12 22.9+15 49 Sc(s)I101 5457 Pinwheel UMa 7.7 14 03.2+54 21 Sc(s)I102 5866UMa 10.5 15 06.5+55 46 S0103 581Cas 7.4: 1 33.2+60 42 OC104 4594 Sombrero Vir 8.3 12 40.0−11 37 Sa/Sb105 3379Leo 9.3 10 47.8+12 35 E0106 4258CVn 8.3 12 19.0+47 18 Sb(s)II107 6171Oph 8.1 16 32.5−13 03 GC108 3556UMa 10.0 11 11.5+55 40 Sc(s)III109 3992UMa 9.8 11 57.6+53 23 SBb(rs)I110 205And 8.0 0 40.4+41 41 S0/E peca: indicates approximate apparent visual magnitude.bRight ascension and declination are given in epoch 2000.0.cType abbreviations correspond to: SNR = supernova remnant, GC = globular cluster,OC = open cluster, N = diffuse nebula, PN = planetary nebula, DS = double star.Galaxies are indicated by their morphological Hubble types.dM17, the Swan nebula, is also known as the Omega nebula.eM42 also corresponds to the Trapezium H II region.fM51 also includes NGC 5195, the satellite to the Whirlpool galaxy.SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalHirshfeld, Alan, Sinnott, Roger W., and Ochsenbein, Francois,Sky Catalogue 2000.0, Sec-ond Edition, Cambridge University Press and Sky Publishing Corporation, New York,1991.Sandage, Allan, and Bedke, John,The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies, Carnegie Institution ofWashington, Washington, D.C., 1994.Appendix: The Messier Catalog


<<<PAGE 1429>>>



<<<PAGE 1430>>>

APPENDIXConstants, A Programming Module
From Appendix I o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, Constantsis a Fortran 95 module implementation of the astronomical and physical con-stantsdata(aC++headerﬁleversionisalsoavailable).Constantsalsoincludeshigh-precisionvaluesofmathematicalconstants(π,e) and conversion factorsbetween degreesandradians.Inaddition,Constantsprovides various machine constantscharacteristicof the particular platform that a code is running on. For example, in theFortran 95implementation,Constantsincludes machine-queriedKINDdesignations forsingle,double, and quadruple precision, the smallest and largest numbers that can be rep-resented by the computer for a speciﬁc precision, and the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures thatcan be represented for each level of precision.The source code is available for download from the companion website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysics.


<<<PAGE 1431>>>



<<<PAGE 1432>>>

APPENDIXOrbit, A Planetary Orbit CodeOrbitis a computer program designed to calculate the position of a planet orbiting amassive star (or, alternatively, the orbit of the reduced mass about the center of mass of thesystem).TheprogramisbasedonKepler’slawsofplanetarymotion.References to the relevant equations are given in the comment sections of the code.The user is asked to enter the mass of the parent star (in solar masses), the semimajoraxis of the orbit (in AU), and the eccentricity of the orbit. The user is also asked to enterthe number of time steps desired for the calculation (perhaps 1000 to 100,000) and thefrequency with which the time steps are to be printed to the output ﬁle (Orbit.txt). If1000 time steps are speciﬁed with a frequency of 10, then 100 evenly spaced (in time) timesteps will be printed.The output ﬁle can be imported directly into a graphics or spreadsheet program in order togenerate a graph of the orbit. Note that it may be necessary to delete the header informationinOrbit.txtprior to importing the data columns into the graphics or spreadsheet program.The source code is available in both Fortran 95 and C++ versions. Compiled versions ofthe code are also available.The code may be downloaded from the companion website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysics.
From Appendix J o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1433>>>



<<<PAGE 1434>>>

APPENDIXTwoStars, A Binary Star Code
.A simple binary star code is developed in this appendix that incorporates a number ofthe basic features of more sophisticated codes.TwoStarsis designed to provide position,radial-velocity, and binary light curve information that can be used to determine masses (m1andm2from determination of the semimajor axes and periods of the orbits), radii (R1andR2by measuring eclipse times), effective temperature ratios (from the relative depths of theprimary and secondary minima), limb darkening, orbital eccentricity (e), orbital inclination(i), and orientation of periastron (φ). However, in order to greatly simplify the code, it isassumed that the two stars are strictly spherically symmetric, that they do not collide withone another, and that their surface ﬂuxes vary only with stellar radius (i.e., there are noanomalous star spots or localized heating).To begin, assume that the orbits of the two stars lie in thex–yplane with the center ofmassofthesystemlocatedattheoriginofthecoordinatesystem,asshowninFig.1(thez-axis is out of the page). In order to generalize the orientation of the orbit, periastronfor Star 1 (the point in the orbit closest to the center of mass) is at an angleφmeasuredcounterclockwise from the positivex-axis and in the direction of the orbital motion. It isalso assumed that the orbital plane is inclined an angleiwith respect to the plane of thesky (they′–z′plane)asshowninFig.2.Thelineofsightfromtheobservertothecenterof mass is along thex′-axis, and the center of mass is located at the origin of the primedcoordinate system. Finally, they′-axis is directed out of the page and is aligned with they-axisofFig.1.It is a straightforward process to show that the transformation between the two coordinatesystems is given byx′=zcosi+xsini(1)y′=y(2)z′=zsini−xcosi,(3)which of course simpliﬁes signiﬁcantly for the case where the centers of mass lie along thex–yplane (i.e.,z=0).From Appendix K o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, Binary star systems play a very important role in determining various stellar properties, including masses and radii. In addition, analyses using sophisticated binary-star modeling codes can provide information about variations in surface ﬂux such as limb darkening and the presence of star spots or reﬂective heating. Advanced codes can also detail the effects of gravitational tidal interactions and centrifugal forces that result in stars that deviate (some-times signiﬁcantly) from spherical symmetry. 


<<<PAGE 1435>>>

xy/H92782
211FIGURE 1The orbits of the stars in the binary system lie in thex–yplane, with thez-axisdirected out of the page. The center of mass of the system is located at the origin of the coordinatesystem. In this examplem2/m1=0.68,e=0.4, andφ=35◦. The two positions of Stars 1 and 2 areseparated byP/4, wherePis the orbital period.
xziz'x'Plane of orbitPlane of skyCenter of massTo observerFIGURE 2The plane of the orbit is inclined an angleiwith respect to the plane of the sky (they′–z′plane). The line of sight from the observer to the center of mass is along thex′-axis, and thecenter of mass is located at the origin of the primed coordinate system. They′-axis is aligned withthey-axisofFig.1,andbotharedirectedoutofthepage.Theforegroundstarinthisillustrationisthe smaller star.A careful reading of the code available on the companion website will identify severalexplicit instances of plus and minus signs associated with the variablesvr,v1r,v2r,x1,y1,x2, andy2. The choice of minus signs corresponds to the choice of the coordinate systemand its relationship to the observer. For instance, if the inclination angle isi=90◦, thenAppendix: TwoStars, A Binary Star Code
The motions of the stars in thex–yplane are determined directly by using Kepler’s lawsandinvokingtheconceptofthereducedmass.The approach issimilar to what was used inOrbit,except that no assumption is made about therelativemassesofthetwoobjectsinthe system [inOrbitit was assumed that one object(aplanet)wasmuchlessmassivethan the other object (the parent star)].


<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Plane of the skyz'
y'(y'fc, z'fc)
(y'bc, z'bc)/H9258'0
FIGURE 3The disks of the two stars projected onto the plane of the sky. The foreground star(assumed in this illustration to be the larger star) hasx′c>0, wherex′cis thex′coordinate of its centerof mass. The angle between they′-axis and the line connecting the centers of the disks of the twostars projected onto the plane of the sky isθ′0.thexandx′axes are aligned and motion in the positivexdirection corresponds to motiontoward the observer (a negative radial velocity).In order to compute the light curve for the eclipse, it is necessary to integrate the luminousﬂux over the portion of each star’s surface that is visible to the observer. This is done by ﬁrstdetermining which star is in front of the other. Given that the plane of the sky corresponds tothey′–z′plane, the center of mass of the star that is closest to the observer has the coordinatevaluex′>0 (see Fig. 3).If the star in front is partially or entirely eclipsing the background star, then the distancesbetween their centers of mass projected onto they′–z′plane must be less than the sum oftheir radii; or, for an eclipse to be taking place,/radicalbigg/parenleftBigy′fc−y′bc/parenrightBig2+/parenleftBigz′fc−z′bc/parenrightBig2<Rf+Rb,(4)where(y′fc,z′fc)and(y′bc,z′bc)are the locations of the centers of mass of the foregroundand background stars, respectively, as projected onto the plane of the sky.To optimize the computation of the integrated luminous ﬂux, it is appropriate to locate thelineofsymmetrybetweenthecentersofmassofthetwostars.AgainreferringtoFig.3,we see that the angle between they′-axis and the line connecting the projected centers ofmass is given byθ′0=tan−1/parenleftBiggz′fc−z′bcy′fc−y′bc/parenrightBigg.(5)Once the background star has been identiﬁed and the line of symmetry determined, thedecrease in the amount of light due to the eclipse can be computed by ﬁrst ﬁnding out whichparts of the background star are behind the foreground star. If a point on the eclipsed disk iswithin a distanceRfof the center of the foreground star’s disk as projected onto they′–z′Appendix: TwoStars, A Binary Star Code


<<<PAGE 1437>>>

z'y'/H92580dAdrrRbFIGURE 4The region of the background star being eclipsed is shown in dark gray. Numericalintegration of the ﬂux over arcs of various radiirand thicknessdrmakes it possible to determinehow much light is blocked by the foreground star.plane, then that point on the star’s surface is behind the foreground star. In other words, thecondition for a point(y′b,z′b)on the disk of the background star to be behind the disk of theforeground star is/radicalbigg/parenleftBigy′b−y′fc/parenrightBig2+/parenleftBigz′b−z′fc/parenrightBig2<Rf.(6)The eclipsed region can then be mapped out by starting along the line of symmetry atsome distancerfrom the center of the disk of the background star and moving at increasingangles ofηDelta1θ′fromθ′0untiltheinequalityofEq.(6)isnolongersatisﬁedoruntilηDelta1θ′exceeds 180◦. In the later case, this would imply that the entire disk within the radiusrof its center is eclipsed. Given the assumption of spherical symmetry, the region of thebackground star’s disk betweenθ′min=−ηDelta1θ′+θ′0andθ′0is identical to the region betweenθ′0andθ′max=ηDelta1θ′+θ′0for a ﬁxed value ofr(seeFig.4).Foranarc-shapedsurfaceofradiusrand widthdr, the area of the surface is given bydA=rd r/parenleftbigθ′max−θ′min/parenrightbig=2rd rηDelta1 θ′.(7)Now, if the luminous ﬂux at that radius from the center of the background star’s disk isF(r), the amount of light in that arc that has been blocked is given bydS=F(r) dA=2F(r)rdrηDelta1θ′.(8)By subtracting the loss in light due to each eclipsed arc from the total light of the uneclipsedstar, we can determine the total amount of light received from the background star during apartial or total eclipse. (Note that due to the effects of limb darkening,F(r)is not constantacross the entire disk.)Finally, all that remains is to convert the total amount of light received to magnitudes.Appendix: TwoStars, A Binary Star Code


<<<PAGE 1438>>>

TwoStarsimplements each of the ideas described. An example of the input required forTwoStars, along with the ﬁrst ten lines of model output, is shown in Fig. 5.The source code for (TwoStars), together with compiled versions of the program, isavailable for download from the companion website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysics.Specify the name of your output file: c:\YYSgr.txtEnter the data for Star #1Mass (solar masses):5.9Radius (solar radii):3.2Effective Temperature (K): 15200Enter the data for Star #2Mass (solar masses):5.6Radius (solar radii):2.9Effective Temperature (K): 13700Enter the desired orbital parametersOrbital Period (days):2.6284734Orbital Eccentricity:0.1573Orbital Inclination (deg): 88.89Orientation of Periastron (deg): 214.6Enter the x’, y’, and z’ components of the center of mass velocity vector:Notes: (1) The plane of the sky is (y’,z’)(2) If v_x’ < 0, then the center of mass is blueshiftedv_x’ (km/s)0v_y’ (km/s)0v_z’ (km/s)0The semimajor axis of the reduced mass is 0.084318 AUa1 = 0.040971 AUa2 = 0.043166 AUt/Pv1r (km/s) v2r (km/s)Mbol dS (W)0.000000 112.824494 -118.868663 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.000999 114.247263 -120.367652 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.001998 115.660265 -121.856351 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.002997 117.063327 -123.334576 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.003996 118.456275 -124.802147 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.004995 119.838940 -126.258884 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.005994 121.211155 -127.704610 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.006993 122.572755 -129.139152 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.007992 123.923575 -130.562338 -2.457487 0.000000E+000.008991 125.263455 -131.973998 -2.457487 0.000000E+00FIGURE 5An example of the input required for the Fortran 95 command-line version ofTwoStarsforthesystemYYSgr.Theﬁrsttenlinesofmodeloutputtothescreenarealso shown.Appendix: TwoStars, A Binary Star Code


<<<PAGE 1439>>>

SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalBradstreet, D. H., and Steelman, D. P., “Binary Maker 3.0—An Interactive Graphics-BasedLight Curve Synthesis Program Written in Java,”Bulletin of the American AstronomicalSociety, January 2003.Kallrath, Josef, and Milone, Eugene F.,Eclipsing Binary Stars: Modeling and Analysis,Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999.Terrell, Dirk, “Eclipsing Binary Stars: Past, Present, and Future,”Journal of the AmericanAssociation of Variable Star Observers,30, 1, 2001.Van Hamme, W., “New Limb-Darkening Coefﬁcients for Modeling Binary Star LightCurves,”The Astronomical Journal,106, 2096, 1993.Wilson, R. E., “Binary-Star Light-Curve Models,”Publications of the Astronomical Societyof the Paciﬁc,106, 921, 1994.Appendix: TwoStars, A Binary Star Code


<<<PAGE 1440>>>

APPENDIXStatStar, A Stellar Structure CodeStatStaris based on the equations of stellar structure and the constitutive relations.AnexampleoftheoutputgeneratedbyStatStaris availableon the companion website.StatStaris designed to illustrate as clearly as possible many of the most importantaspects of numerical stellar astrophysics. To accomplish this goal,StatStarmodels arerestricted to a ﬁxed composition throughout [in other words, they are homogeneous zero-agemain-sequence models (ZAMS)].The four basic stellar structure equations are computed in the functionsdPdr,dMdr,dLdr,anddTdrThe density [ρ(r)=rho] is calculated directly from the ideal gas law and the radiationpressureequationinFUNCTION Opacity,g i v e nl o c a lv a l u e sf o rt h ep r e s s u r e[P (r)=P],temperature[T (r)=T], and mean molecular weight (µ=mu, assumed heretobeforacompletely ionized gas only). Once the density is determined, both the opacity[κ(r)=kappa] and the nuclear energy generation rate [ϵ(r)=epsilon] are calculated.The opacity is determined inFUNCTION Opacityusing the bound–bound and bound–freeopacityformulae,together with electron scatteringandH−ioncontributions.TheenergygenerationrateiscalculatedinFunction Nuclearfrom the equations for the total pp chainandtheCNOThe program begins by asking the user to supply the desired stellar mass (Msolar, insolar units), the trial effective temperature (Teff, in kelvins), the trial luminosity (Lsolar,also in solar units), and the mass fractions of hydrogen (X) and metals (Z). Using the stellarstructure equations, the program proceeds to integrate from the surface of the star toward thecenter, stopping when a problem is detected or when a satisfactory solution is obtained. Ifthe inward integration is not successful, a new trial luminosity and/or effective temperaturemustbechosen.stellarstructureexistsforag i v e nm a s sa n dc o m p o s i t i o n .S a t i s f y i n gt h ec e n t r a lb o u n d a r yconditionsthereforerequiresspeciﬁcsurfaceboundaryconditions.Itisforthisreasonthatawell-deﬁnedmainsequenceexists.Since it is nearly impossible to satisfy the central boundary conditions exactly by thecrudeshooting methodemployed byStatStar, the calculation is terminated when thecore is approached. The stopping criteria used here are that the interior massMr<Mminand the interior luminosityLr<Lmin, when the radiusr<Rmin, whereMmin,Lmin, and1State-of-the-art research codes use much more sophisticated prescriptions for the equations of state.
FromAppendix L o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, .
cycle.1The V ogt–Russell theorem states that a unique
 

<<<PAGE 1441>>>

Rminare speciﬁed as fractions of the surface mass (Ms), luminosity (Ls), and radius (Rs),respectively. Once the criteria for halting the integration are detected, the conditions at thecenter of the star are estimated by an extrapolation procedure.StatStarmakes the simplifying assumptions that the pressure, temperature, and densityare all zero at the surface of the star. As a result, it is necessary to begin the calculationwith approximations to the basic stellar structure equations. This can be seen by notingthat the mass, pressure, luminosity, and temperature gradients are all proportional to thedensity and are therefore exactly zero at the surface. Curiously, it would appear that applyingthese gradients in their usual form implies that the fundamental physical parameters cannotchange from their initial values, since the density would remain zero at each step!One way to overcome this problem is to assume that the interior mass and luminosity areboth constant through a small number of surface zones. In the case of the luminosity, this isclearly a valid assumption since temperatures are not sufﬁcient to produce nuclear reactionsnear the surfaces of ZAMS stars; and furthermore, since ZAMS stars are static, changesin gravitational potential energy are necessarily zero. For the interior mass, the assumptionis not quite as obvious. However, we will see that in realistic stellar models, the density isso low near the surface that the approximation is indeed very reasonable. Of course, it isimportant to verify that the assumptions are not being violated to within speciﬁed limits.Given the surface valuesMr=MsandLr=Ls, and assuming that the surface zone isradiative,which leadstodPdT=16πac3GMsLsT3κ.Since relatively few free electrons exist in the thin outer atmospheres of stars, electronscattering and H−ion contributions to the opacity will be neglected in the surface zoneapproximation. In this caseκmay be replaced by the bound–free and free–free Kramersopacity laws, expressed in the formsκbf=Abfρ/T3.5andκff=Affρ/T3.5,respectively.DeﬁningA≡Abf+Afftoexpressthedensityintermsofthepressureandtemperaturethrough the ideal gas law (assuming thatradiation pressure may be neglected), we getdPdT=16π3GMsLsackAµmHT7.5P.Integrating with respect to temperature and solving for the pressure, we ﬁnd thatP=/parenleftbigg14.2516π3GMsLsackAµmH/parenrightbigg1/2T4.25.(1)ItisnowpossibletowriteTintermsoftheindependentvariabler,againusingtheidealgaslawandKramersopacitylaws,alongwithEq.(1)toeliminatethedependenceonpressure.IntegratingyieldsT=GMs/parenleftBigµmH4.25k/parenrightBig/parenleftbigg1r−1Rs/parenrightbigg.(2)Appendix: StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code


<<<PAGE 1442>>>

Equation(2)isﬁrstusedtoobtainavalueforT (r);thenEq.(1)givesP (r). At thispoint it is possible to calculateρ,κ, andϵfrom the usual equation-of-state routines.Averysimilarprocedureisusedinthecasethatthesurfaceisconvective.ThisgivesT=GMs/parenleftbiggγ−1γ/parenrightbigg/parenleftBigµmHk/parenrightBig/parenleftbigg1r−1Rs/parenrightbigg.(3)Now, since convection is assumed to be adiabatic in the interior of our simple model, thepressuremaybefound.TheroutineSurfacecomputesEqs.(1),(2),and (3).The conditions at the center of the star are estimated by extrapolating from the lastzonethatwascalculatedbydirectnumericalintegration.Mr=4πρ0r3/3,whereρ0istakentobetheaveragedensityofthecentralball(theregioninsidethelastzonecalculatedbytheusualprocedure),2we getdPdr=−GMrρ0r2=−4π3Gρ20r.Integrating yields/integraldisplayPP0dP=−4π3Gρ20/integraldisplayr0rd r ,and solving for the central pressure results inP0=P+2π3Gρ20r2.Other central quantities can now be found more directly. Speciﬁcally, the central densityis estimated to beρ0=Mr/(4πr3/3), whereMrandrare the values of the last zonecalculated.T0is determined from the ideal gas law and radiation pressure using an iterativeprocedure (the Newton–Raphson method). Finally, the central value for the nuclear energygeneration rate is computed usingϵ0=Lr/Mr.The numerical integration technique employed here is a Runge–Kutta algorithm. TheRunge–Kutta algorithm evaluates derivatives at several intermediate points between massshell boundaries to signiﬁcantly increase the accuracy of the numerical integration. Detailsof the algorithm will not be discussed further here; you are encouraged to consult Press,Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery (1996), for details of the implementation.The source code, together with compiled versions of the program, is available for down-load from the companion website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysics.2You might notice thatdP/drgoes to zero as the center is approached. This behavior is indicative of the smoothnatureofthesolution.Theﬁrstderivativesofmanyphysicalquantitiesgotozeroatthecenter.Appendix: StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code
Identifying


<<<PAGE 1443>>>

SUGGESTED READINGTechnicalClayton, Donald D.,Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis, McGraw-Hill,New York, 1968.DeVries, Paul L.,A First Course in Computational Physics, John Wiley and Sons, NewYork, 1994.Fowler, William A., Caughlan, Georgeanne R., and Zimmerman, Barbara A., “Thermonu-clear Reaction Rates, II,”Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics,13, 69, 1975.Hansen, C. J., Kawaler, S. D., and Trimble, V .,Stellar Interiors: Physical Principles, Struc-ture, and Evolution, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2004.Kippenhahn, Rudolf, and Weigert, Alfred,Stellar Structure and Evolution, Springer-Verlag,Berlin, 1990.Novotny, Eva,Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interiors, Oxford University Press,New York, 1973.Press, William H., Flannery, Brian P., Teukolsky, Saul A., and Vetterling, William T.,Nu-merical Recipes in FORTRAN 77: The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing, Second Edition,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996.Appendix: StatStar, A Stellar Structure Code


<<<PAGE 1444>>>

APPENDIXGalaxy, A Tidal Interaction CodeGalaxyis a program that calculates the gravitational effect of the close passage of twogalactic nuclei on a disk of stars. It is adapted from a program written by M. C. Schroederand Neil F. Comins and published inAstronomymagazine. This program is very similar tothe one used by Alar and Juri Toomre in 1972 to perform their ground-breaking studies ofthe effect of violent tides between galaxies.In the program there are two galactic nuclei of massesM1andM2. They are treated aspoint masses, and they move under the inﬂuence of their mutual gravitational attraction. Tospeed the calculations, onlyM1is surrounded by a disk of stars, with the stars initially incircular Keplerian orbits. The gravitational inﬂuence of the stars is neglected, meaning thatthey do not affect the motions of the nuclei or one another. There is no dynamical friction,andsothenucleifollowthesimpletwo-bodytrajectories.Oneadvantageofanon-self-gravitatingdiskisthatresultsdonotdependonthenumberofstarsinthedisk.Youcanexperiment,changingtheinitialconditionsbyusingjustafewstarsforafasterrunningtimeandthenincreasingthenumberofstarstoseemoredetail.Thestarsrespondonlytothegravitationalpullofthetwonuclei.The goal is to calculate the positions of the nuclei and stars through a number of timesteps separated by a time intervalηDelta1t. Let the positions of the nuclei at time stepibe[X1(i), Y1(i), Z1(i)]and[X2(i), Y2(i), Z2(i)],and let the position of a star be1[x(i), y(i), z(i)].Also, let the velocities of the nuclei and the star be[V1,x(i−1/2), V1,y(i−1/2), V1,z(i−1/2)],[V2,x(i−1/2), V2,y(i−1/2), V2,z(i−1/2)],and[vx(i−1/2), vy(i−1/2), vz(i−1/2)].1The results do not change with the number of stars used, so one star is enough to illustrate the procedure.From Appendix M o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1445>>>

The velocities are the average velocities between the present (i) and the previous (i−1)time steps, sovx/parenleftbiggi−12/parenrightbigg=x(i)−x(i−1)ηDelta1t(1)is thexcomponent of the star’s velocity. In a similar manner, thexcomponent of the star’sacceleration isax(i)=vx(i+1/2)−vx(i−1/2)ηDelta1t.(2)Thus the positions and accelerations, which are determined at each time step, “leapfrog”over the velocities, which are determined between time steps.Given these values of the positions and velocities, the program calculates thexcompo-nents of the positions and velocities for the next time step in the following way:1. Find the star’s acceleration at the present time stepi, using Newton’s law of gravity,ax(i)=GM1r31(i)[X1(i)−x(i)]+GM2r32(i)[X2(i)−x(i)],(3)wherer1(i)is the distance between the star andM1at time stepi,r1(i)=/radicalBig[X1(i)−x(i)]2+[Y1(i)−y(i)]2+[Z1(i)−z(i)]2+s2f,(4)and similarly forr2(i).Note that because the nuclei and stars are treated as points, their separations couldbecome very small, even zero (although the conservation of angular momentummakes this rather unlikely). As a result, arbitrarily large values of 1/r31and 1/r32couldcause a numerical overﬂow and bring a lengthy calculation to an abrupt halt. To avoidthis numerical disaster, asoftening factor,sf, has been included in the calculationsof all separations. This is the smallest separation permitted by the program. Its valueis large enough to prevent an overﬂow, but small enough to have little effect on theoverall results.2. Find the star’s average velocity ati+1/2,vx/parenleftbiggi+12/parenrightbigg=vx/parenleftbiggi−12/parenrightbigg+ax(i)ηDelta1t.(5)3. Find the star’s position at the next time stepi+1, usingx(i+1)=x(i)+vx/parenleftbiggi+12/parenrightbiggηDelta1t.(6)Appendix: Galaxy, A Tidal Interaction Code


<<<PAGE 1446>>>

4. Find the acceleration of the nuclei at the present time stepi, using Newton’s law ofgravity,A1,x(i)=GM2s3(i)[X2(i)−X1(i)](7)andA2,x(i)=GM1s3(i)[X1(i)−X2(i)],(8)wheres(i)is the separation of the nuclei at time stepi,s(i)=/radicalBig[X1(i)−X2(i)]2+[Y1(i)−Y2(i)]2+[Z1(i)−Z2(i)]2+s2f.(9)5. Find the velocity of the nuclei ati+1/2,V1,x/parenleftbiggi+12/parenrightbigg=V1,x/parenleftbiggi−12/parenrightbigg+A1,x(i)ηDelta1t,(10)and similarly forV2,x(i+1/2).6. Find the position of the nuclei at the next time stepi+1, usingX1(i+1)=X1(i)+V1,x/parenleftbiggi+12/parenrightbiggηDelta1t,(11)and similarly forX2(i+1).The procedure is the same for theyandzcomponents. By repeatedly applying this pre-scription, it is possible to follow the motions of the nuclei and star(s).The target galaxy (M1) is initially placed at rest at the origin. You will be asked toprovide the initial position and velocity of the intruder galaxy (M2), its mass (as a fractionofM1), and the number of stars around the target galaxy. After each time step, the resultsare displayed as two graphs showing the positions of the nuclei and stars on thex–yandx–zplanes.You will note in the source code that the program uses a special system of units to speedthe calculations. The masses are in units of 2×1010M⊙. When the program assigns thetarget galaxy a mass of 5 in these units, its mass is 1011M⊙. The unit of time is 1.2 millionyears. This is also the value used for the time interval,ηDelta1t, so (in these units)ηDelta1t=1. Asa result,ηDelta1tdoes not appear explicitly in the program. (It would just multiply the terminvolved by 1 and waste computer time.) The unit of distance is 500 pc, and so the unitof velocity is(500 pc)/(1.2 million years)≃400 km s−1. By design, in these units thegravitational constantG=1; thusGdoes not appear explicitly in the program either.The source code forGalaxy, along with executable versions, is available for downloadfrom the companion website athttp://www.aw-bc.com/astrophysics.Appendix: Galaxy, A Tidal Interaction Code


<<<PAGE 1447>>>

SUGGESTED READINGGeneralSchroeder, Michael C., and Comins, Neil F., “Galactic Collisions on Your Computer,”Astronomy, December 1988.Toomre, Alar, and Toomre, Juri, “Violent Tide between Galaxies,”Scientiﬁc American,December 1973.TechnicalToomre, Alar, and Toomre, Juri, “Galactic Bridges and Tails,”The Astrophysical Journal,178, 623, 1972.Appendix: Galaxy, A Tidal Interaction Code


<<<PAGE 1448>>>

APPENDIXWMAP Data“Best” Cosmological ParametersaDescriptionText Symbol Value+uncertainty−uncertaintyTotal densityηOmega101.02 0.020.02Equation of state of quintessencebw<−0.78 95% CLDark energy densityηOmega1ηLambda1,00.73 0.040.04Baryon densityηOmega1b,0h20.0224 0.0009 0.0009Baryon densityηOmega1b,00.044 0.004 0.004Baryon density (m−3)nb,00.25 0.010.01Matter densityηOmega1m,0h20.135 0.008 0.009Matter densityηOmega1m,00.27 0.040.04Light neutrino density (m−3)ηOmega1ν,0h2<7600 95% CLCMB temperature (K)cT02.725 0.002 0.002CMB photon density (m−3)dnγ,04.104×1080.009×1080.009×108Baryon-to-photon ratioη06.1×10−100.3×10−100.2×10−10Baryon-to-matter ratioηOmega1b,0ηOmega1−1m,00.17 0.010.01Redshift at decouplingzdec108911Thickness of decoupling (FWHM)ηDelta1zdec19522Hubble constanth0.71 0.040.03Age of universe (Gyr)t013.70.20.2Age at decoupling (kyr)tdec37987Age at reionization (Myr, 95% CL)tr18022080Decoupling time interval (kyr)ηDelta1tdec11832Redshift of matter–energy equalityzr,m3233 194210Reionization optical depthτ0.17 0.040.04Redshift at reionization (95% CL)zr20109Sound horizon at decoupling (deg)θA0.598 0.002 0.002Angular size distance (Gpc)dA14.00.20.3Acoustic scaleeℓA30111Sound horizon at decoupling (Mpc)frs14722aAll data from Bennett et al.,Ap. J. S., 148, 1, 2003.bCL means “conﬁdence level.”cFrom COBE (Mather et al.,Ap. J.,512, 511, 1999).dDerived from COBE (Mather et al.,Ap. J.,512, 511, 1999).eℓA=πθ−1AforθAin radians.fθA=rsd−1AforθAin radians.
From Appendix N o f An Introduction to Modern AstrophysicSecond Edition, Bradley W. Carroll, Dale A. Ostlie. Copyright ©2007 Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Addison-Wesley. All rights reserved.by s, 

<<<PAGE 1449>>>



<<<PAGE 1450>>>

Index
Index
3DJHUHIHUHQFHVIROORZHGE\ILQGLFDWHLOOXVWUDWHG
ILJXUHVRUSKRWRJUDSKVIROORZHGE\WLQGLFDWHVD
WDEOH
5
3HJDVL
A
$ULQJ
$EHOO
$EHUUDWLRQ
FKURPDWLF
VSKHULFDO
$EHUUDWLRQV
$EVROXWHPDJQLWXGH




DEVROXWHPDJQLWXGHV



$EVROXWH]HUR
$EVRUSWLRQ








PHGLXP

RIK\GURJHQ


RIOLJKW



RIVRGLXP
$EVRUSWLRQFRHIILFLHQW
DEVRUSWLRQOLQHV





$EVRUSWLRQVSHFWUD
DFFHOHUDWLQJXQLYHUVH
$FFHOHUDWLRQ





DQJXODU

DYHUDJH

FHQWULSHWDO
FRVPLF
GXHWRJUDYLW\
IRUFHDQG
IUHHIDOO
SDUWLFOHVDQG
UDGLDOFRPSRQHQWRI
VLPSOHKDUPRQLFPRWLRQ
$FFHOHUDWLRQGXHWRJUDYLW\
$FFHOHUDWLRQYHFWRU
$FFHOHUDWLRQYHFWRUV
$FFUHWLRQ





DFFUHWLRQGLVN




DFFUHWLRQGLVNV

DURXQGZKLWHGZDUIV
$FFXPXODWLRQ
DFHW\OHQH
DFKRQGULWHV
DFLGUDLQ
DFLGV
DFRXVWLFRVFLOODWLRQ
$FWLRQ
DFWLYHJDODFWLFQXFOHL

$FWLYHJDODFWLFQXFOHXV
$FWLYHJDOD[LHV
$FWLYHRSWLFV
$FWLYHUHJLRQ
DGDSWDWLRQ
$GDSWLYHRSWLFV
$GGLWLRQ








VLJQLILFDQWILJXUHV
DGLDEDWLFSURFHVV
DHUREUDNLQJ
DHURVROV
$LU


GHQVLW\
VSHHGRIVRXQGLQ
$LU\GLVN
DOEHGR
$OGHEDUDQ
$OJRO
$OJROSDUDGR[
DONDOLPHWDOV
$OORZHGWUDQVLWLRQV
$/0$
$OSKD&HQWDXUL
$OSKDSDUWLFOH
$OSKDSDUWLFOHV
$OSKDSURFHVV
$OWDLU
DOWLWXGH


DOWLWXGHV
$OXPLQXP

GHQVLW\
DOXPLQXPR[LGH
$OYDUH]/XLV
$OYDUH]:DOWHU
DPLQRDFLGV
$PPRQLD
$PSHUH
$PSOLWXGH


SHULRGLFPRWLRQ
$QGURPHGD

$QGURPHGDJDOD[\
$QGURPHGD*DOD[\0
$QJOHRILQFLGHQFH
$QJOHRIUHIOHFWLRQ
$QJOHRIUHIUDFWLRQ
$QJXODUGLDPHWHU


DQJXODUGLVWDQFH
$QJXODUIUHTXHQF\

VLPSOHKDUPRQLFPRWLRQ
$QJXODUPDJQLILFDWLRQ
H\HSLHFH
WHOHVFRSH
$QJXODUPRPHQWXP






FRQVHUYDWLRQRI

LQLWLDODQJXODUPRPHQWXP
RIK\GURJHQ
RUELWDO



SHUPLWWHGYDOXHVRI
TXDQWL]DWLRQRI
URWDWLRQDO

VSLQ

WUDQVIHURI
$QJXODUPRPHQWXPTXDQWXPQXPEHU
$QJXODUSRVLWLRQ
$QJXODUUHVROXWLRQ
DQJXODUVHSDUDWLRQ

$QJXODUVL]H

$QJXODUYHORFLW\

$QJXODUYHORFLW\YHFWRU
$QLPDOV
DQQLKLODWLRQ

DQWDSH[
$QWDUHV
$QWHQQDHJDOD[LHV
$QWHQQDV
$QWLPDWWHU
$QWLQHXWULQR
$QWLSDUWLFOH
$QWLSDUWLFOHV
DQWLSURWRQ
DQWLTXDUN
$QWLTXDUNV
DSHUWXUH

$SHUWXUHV
DSH[
DSKHOLRQ
$SROORPLVVLRQV
DSSDUHQWEULJKWQHVV
$SSDUHQWPDJQLWXGH


DSSDUHQWPDJQLWXGHV

$SSDUHQWPRWLRQ
DSSOLHGUHVHDUFK
$UFOHQJWK


<<<PAGE 1451>>>

DUFKDHRDVWURQRP\
DUFPLQXWHV
DUFVHFRQGV
$UFWXUXV
$UHD








$UHFLERUDGLRWHOHVFRSH
$ULVWDUFKXV
DVWHURLG

(DUWKFURVVLQJ
RUELWDOUHVRQDQFHVRI
7URMDQ
$VWHURLGEHOW

DVWHURLGV


FRPSRVLWLRQRI
PRRQVRI
QHDU(DUWK
RUELWVRI
7URMDQ
DVWKHQRVSKHUH
$VWLJPDWLVP
$VWURORJHU
DVWURPHWULFPLVVLRQV
$VWURQRPLFDOXQLW
DVWURQRP\









DQFLHQW
GHILQHG
KLVWRU\RI
VWXG\RI
XOWUDYLROHW
DVWURSK\VLFV







DV\PSWRWLFJLDQWEUDQFK$*%
$WODQWLF2FHDQ
DWPRVSKHUH








FLUFXODWLRQRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI

HYROXWLRQRI

KHDWDQG
RI(DUWK


RI0DUV
RI0HUFXU\
RI0RRQ
RIVHQXV
RSDFLW\RI
RULJLQRI
SULPDU\

VHFRQGDU\
VRODU





VWUXFWXUHRI

DWPRVSKHULFGUDJ
$WPRVSKHULFSUHVVXUH
$WPRVSKHULFWXUEXOHQFH
DWRPLFPDVV
DWRPLFPDVVXQLW
$WRPLFPDVVXQLWV
DWRPLFQXFOHXV
VWURQJQXFOHDUIRUFH
$WRPLFQXPEHU
DWRPLFRUELWDOV
$WRPLFSK\VLFV
DWRPLFWUDQVLWLRQV
DWRPV









DWRPLFPDVV
DWRPLFQXPEHU
%RKUPRGHORI
FKDUDFWHULVWLFVRI
HOHFWULFLW\DQG
HOHFWURQV




HOHPHQWV

LVRWRSHV
QHXWURQV
QXFOHRQV
SHULRGLFWDEOH
SODQHWDU\PRGHORI
SURSHUWLHVRI
SURWRQV

VL]HRI
VWUXFWXUHRI

$8





DXURUD
DXURUDDXVWUDOLV
DXURUDERUHDOLV
$XWXPQDOHTXLQR[
$YHUDJHVSHHG
$YHUDJHYHORFLW\
D[LVWLOW
D]LPXWK
B
%ULQJ
%DDGH:DOWHU
EDFNJURXQGUDGLDWLRQ

FRVPLF
%DOPHUIRUPXOD
%DOPHU-RKDQQ
%DOPHUVHULHV
EDQGZLGWK
EDU


%DUPDJQHWV
EDUUHGVSLUDOJDOD[LHV
EDUV
EDU\RQ

%DU\RQQXPEHU
EDU\RQLFPDWWHU

%DU\RQV

EDVDOW
EDVHV
%HDP

ZLGWK
%HOO-RFHO\Q
%HOO/DERUDWRULHV
EHQ]HQH
%HU\OOLXP
%HWDGHFD\
%HWDSDUWLFOH
%HWHOJHXVH

%LJ%DQJ






HYLGHQFHIRU
H[SDQGLQJXQLYHUVHDQG
%LJ%DQJPRGHO
%LJ%DQJWKHRU\
%LJ&UXQFK
%LQDU\SXOVDU
ELQDU\VWDU


HFOLSVLQJ

VSHFWURVFRSLF

YLVXDO
ELQDU\VWDUV\VWHPV

FORVH
HFOLSVLQJ
VSHFWURVFRSLF
%LQGLQJHQHUJ\

ELRGLYHUVLW\
%LRORJLFDOHYROXWLRQ
ELRORJ\
%//DFREMHFWV
EODFNKROH






VXSHUPDVVLYH



%ODFNKROHV




DQJXODUPRPHQWXPRI
HYHQWKRUL]RQDQG
IRUPDWLRQRI
JHRPHWU\
JUDYLWDWLRQDOUHGVKLIWDQG
PDVVRI


URWDWLRQRI
VL]HRI
VXSHUPDVVLYH



%ODFNERG\






%ODFNERG\UDGLDWLRQ
%ODFNERG\UDGLDWLRQ





<<<PAGE 1452>>>

%OD]DU
EOXHVWUDJJOHUV
%OXHVXSHUJLDQW
EOXHVKLIW
%RKUDWRP
%RKUPRGHO
%RKU1LHOV
%RKUUDGLXV
%RLOLQJ
%RORPHWHU
ERORPHWULFFRUUHFWLRQ
ERORPHWULFOXPLQRVLW\

%ROW]PDQQFRQVWDQW
%ROW]PDQQGLVWULEXWLRQ


%ROW]PDQQHTXDWLRQ


%ROW]PDQQ/XGZLJ
%RURQ
ERVRQ
%RVRQV

%RXQGV\VWHP
%RXQGDU\FRQGLWLRQV

%UDKH7\FKR
EUDLQ
EUHPVVWUDKOXQJ

EULJKWQHVV







DEVROXWH

DSSDUHQW

EURDGHQLQJ

QDWXUDO
SUHVVXUH
WKHUPDO'RSSOHU
=HHPDQ
EURDGOLQHUHJLRQ
%URZQGZDUI
EURZQGZDUIV

PDVVRI
%UXQR*LRUGDQR
%UXVKHV
EXOJH




LQVSLUDOJDOD[LHV
VWDUVLQ

VXSHUPDVVLYHEODFNKROHVDQG
EXOJHVWDUV
%XONPRGXOXV
%XONSURSHUWLHV
%XQVHQ5REHUW
%XR\DQF\
%XR\DQWIRUFH
%XUELGJH0DUJDUHW
%XWOHU53DXO
C
&ULQJ
&DHVDU-XOLXV
&DOFLWH
&DOFXODWLRQV






FDOGHUD
FDOHQGDU
&DORULV%DVLQ&DPHUD

H[SRVXUH
&DPHUDV
IRFDOOHQJWK
&DQDGD)UDQFH+DZDLLWHOHVFRSH
FDQFHU
&DQRSXV
&DUERQ





IRUPVRI
&DUERQDWRP
&DUERQEXUQLQJ
&DUERQGLR[LGH

DQGJOREDOZDUPLQJ
GU\LFH
JUHHQKRXVHHIIHFWDQG
RQ0DUV
FDUERQPRQR[LGH
FDUERQVWDUV
&DUERQ
&DUERQDFHRXVPHWHRULWHV
FDUULHUV
&DUV
&DUWHVLDQFRRUGLQDWHV
&DUWZKHHOJDOD[\
&DVVHJUDLQWHOHVFRSH
&DVVLQL'LYLVLRQ
&DVVLQLVSDFHFUDIW
&DVVLRSHLD$
FDWDFO\VPLFYDULDEOH

&DWDFO\VPLFYDULDEOHV
&DWDO\VWV
&&'V
FHOHVWLDOFRRUGLQDWHV
&HOHVWLDOHTXDWRU
&HOHVWLDOPHFKDQLFV
FHOHVWLDOSROH
&HOHVWLDOSROHV
FHOHVWLDOVSKHUH

FHOOV
&HQWDXU
&HQWHURIPDVV



PRWLRQRI
YHORFLW\

FHQWUDOIRUFH
&HQWUDOPD[LPXP
&HQWULIXJDOIRUFH
&HQWULSHWDODFFHOHUDWLRQ
&HQWULSHWDOIRUFH
&HSKHLGYDULDEOHVWDUV
&HSKHXV
&I$
&KDGZLFN-DPHV
&KDQGUD;5D\2EVHUYDWRU\

&KDQGUDVHNKDUPDVV
&KDQGUDVHNKDU6XEUDKPDQ\DQ
FKDQJHV







FKHPLFDO
SK\VLFDO

&KDRWLFEHKDYLRU
&KDUJHGHQVLW\
&KDUJHGSDUWLFOHV



LQWHUDFWLRQV
&KDUJHV
PRYLQJ
RSSRVLWH
VRXUFH
FKHPLFDOFRPSRVLWLRQ

FKHPLFDOGLIIHUHQWLDWLRQ
&KHPLFDOHOHPHQWV
FKHPLFDOHQHUJ\
&KHPLFDOHYROXWLRQ
FKHPLFDOSURSHUWLHV
FKHPLFDOUHDFWLRQV
HOHFWURQV
HQHUJ\
SURWRQV
FKHPLVWU\

HOHPHQWV
&KORULQH
FKRQGULWHV
FKRQGUXOHV
FKURPDWLFDEHUUDWLRQ
FKURPRVSKHUH

&LUFXODUPRWLRQ

G\QDPLFVRI
RUELWV
SHULRGRI
&LUFXODURUELWV

&LUFXODWLRQSDWWHUQV
DWPRVSKHUH
JOREDO
FLUFXPSRODUVWDUV
FLYLOWLPH
&ODVVLFDOSK\VLFV
FODVVLFDOZDYH
FOLPDWH
FORFNV

FORVHELQDU\V\VWHPV
&ORVHGXQLYHUVH

FORXGV








GHYHORSPHQW

LQWHUVWHOODU




PROHFXODU



RIDWRPLFK\GURJHQ
SUREDELOLW\
SURWRJDODFWLF
ZHDWKHU
&OXVWHU









JDOD[\







VWDU





<<<PAGE 1453>>>


FOXVWHURIJDOD[LHV



&OXVWHUV












&12F\FOH

FRDVWLQJXQLYHUVH
&REDOW
&2%(
&ROGGDUNPDWWHU

&ROOHFWLQJDUHD
FROOLVLRQ




RIJDOD[LHV
RIVWDUV

&ROOLVLRQDOEURDGHQLQJ
&ROOLVLRQDOH[FLWDWLRQ
&ROOLVLRQV






HODVWLF
HODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
LQHODVWLF
LQHODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
PHDQIUHHSDWKEHWZHHQ
PROHFXODU

RIFRPHWV
SURWRVWHOODU
&RORU



RIVWDUV

FRORULQGH[

&RORUWHPSHUDWXUH
&RORUPDJQLWXGHGLDJUDPV
FRORUV
FRPD


&RPD&OXVWHU

FRPHW

GXVWWDLO
LRQWDLO
ORQJSHULRG
VKRUWSHULRG
&RPHW+DOOH\
&RPHW+\DNXWDNH
&RPHW6KRHPDNHU/HY\
&RPHW62+2
&RPHW6ZLIW7XWWOH
&RPHW7HPSHO
&RPHW:LOG
&RPHWV



FRPSRVLWLRQRI
RUELWVRI
VL]HRI
WDLOVRIFRPPXQLFDWLRQVVDWHOOLWHV
FRPPXQLW\
FRPSHWLWLRQ
&RPSOH[QXPEHUV
&RPSRQHQWVRI





FRPSRXQGV
DURPDWLF
&RPSUHVVLRQ


&RPSUHVVLRQVWURNH
FRPSUHVVLRQV
&RPSWRQ*DPPD5D\2EVHUYDWRU\
&RPSWRQ*DPPD5D\2EVHUYDWRU\&*52
&RPSWRQVFDWWHULQJ

&RPSWRQZDYHOHQJWK
&RPSXWHUV
&RQFHQWUDWLRQ

&RQGHQVDWLRQ
&RQGXFWLRQ
KHDW
&RQGXFWLYLW\
WKHUPDO
&RQGXFWRU
FRQHV
FRQLFVHFWLRQ
FRQLFVHFWLRQV
FRQMXQFWLRQ
LQIHULRU
VXSHULRU
FRQVHUYDWLRQ



RIDQJXODUPRPHQWXP

RIHQHUJ\

RIPRPHQWXP
&RQVHUYDWLRQODZV
&RQVHUYDWLRQRIDQJXODUPRPHQWXP

&RQVHUYDWLRQRIHQHUJ\

UHODWLYLW\DQG
&RQVHUYDWLRQRIPDVV
&RQVHUYDWLRQRIPHFKDQLFDOHQHUJ\
&RQVWHOODWLRQ




FRQVWHOODWLRQV

ODWLWXGHDQG
&RQVWUXFWLYHLQWHUIHUHQFH
&RQWDFWELQDU\
FRQWLQHQWDOFUXVW
&RQWLQXRXVVSHFWUD
FRQWLQXRXVVSHFWUXP



FRQWUDFWLRQ


JUDYLWDWLRQDO

RIOHQJWK
UDGLDWLYH
&RQYHFWLRQ





PDQWOH
VRODU



FRQYHFWLRQFHOOV&RQYHFWLRQ]RQH


RIORZPDVVVWDUV
&RQYHUJLQJOHQV
&RRUGLQDWH






&RRUGLQDWHV\VWHPV
LQHUWLDOUHIHUHQFHIUDPH
RULJLQRI
FRRUGLQDWHV





FRPRYLQJ
&RSHUQLFDQUHYROXWLRQ
GHILQHG
&RSHUQLFXV1LFRODXV
FRUH













(DUWK




RI(DUWK

RI0HUFXU\
RI0RRQ
FRUHFROODSVH
&RUHK\GURJHQEXUQLQJ

&RUHRI(DUWK
&RUHFROODSVHVXSHUQRYD

&RULROLVIRUFH
FRURQD

)FRURQD
.FRURQD
&RURQDOKROH
FRURQDOKROHV
FRURQDOPDVVHMHFWLRQ
FRURQDOPDVVHMHFWLRQV
&RUUHODWLRQ



&RVPLF%DFNJURXQG([SORUHU&2%(
&RVPLF%DFNJURXQGIPDJHU
FRVPLFEDFNJURXQGUDGLDWLRQ

&RVPLFGLVWDQFHVFDOH
&RVPLFPLFURZDYHEDFNJURXQG


FRVPLFPLFURZDYHEDFNJURXQG&0%
FRVPLFQHXWULQREDFNJURXQG
&RVPLFUD\V

FRVPRORJLFDOFRQVWDQW


&RVPRORJLFDOGLVWDQFHV

&RVPRORJLFDOSULQFLSOH

&RVPRORJLFDOUHGVKLIW

&RVPRORJ\


<<<PAGE 1454>>>



%LJ%DQJ




FRVPLFPLFURZDYHEDFNJURXQG


FRVPRORJLFDOSULQFLSOH

FRVPRORJLFDOUHGVKLIW

GHILQHG
1HZWRQLDQ

UHODWLYLW\DQG
&RXORPE


&UDE1HEXOD
&UDESXOVDU
FUDWHU

FUHVWV
&ULWLFDODQJOH
&ULWLFDOGHQVLW\
FULWLFDOPDVV
&URVVSURGXFW
FUXVW

RI(DUWK
RIQHXWURQVWDUV
&U\VWDOODWWLFH
FU\VWDOOL]DWLRQ
&U\VWDOV
&W\SHDVWHURLG
&XUUHQW






FRQVHUYDWLRQRI
FUHDWLQJ
PDJQHWLFILHOGRI
&XUUHQWGHQVLW\
&XUUHQWVKHHW
FXUUHQWV
FRQYHFWLRQ
HOHFWULF
RFHDQ
VXUIDFH
&XUYDWXUHRIILHOG
FXUYHRIJURZWK
&XUYHGVSDFH
&\FORWURQ
&\FORWURQIUHTXHQF\
F\FORWURQUDGLDWLRQ
&\JQXV


&\JQXV/RRS
&\JQXV;
D
'ULQJ
'DFW\O
'DPSLQJ

'DUNHQHUJ\


'DUNKDOR
'DUNPDWWHU







FROG

GHQVLW\RI

HYLGHQFHIRULQFOXVWHUV
PDSSLQJ
RUGLQDU\
VWUXFWXUHRI


'DUNPDWWHUKDOR
'DUZLQ&KDUOHV
GD\





VLGHUHDO
VRODU



'H%URJOLHZDYHOHQJWK
GH%URJOLHZDYHV
'HFD\




H[SRQHQWLDO
QXFOHDU

UDWH

VHULHV
'HFD\FRQVWDQW
'HFD\HTXDWLRQ
'HFHOHUDWLRQ

'HFRXSOLQJ



'HHSVSDFH
GHH[FLWDWLRQ
FROOLVLRQDO
'HIHUHQW
GHJHQHUDF\


GHJHQHUDF\SUHVVXUH


HOHFWURQ

QHXWURQ
RULJLQRI
GHJUHHV


'HJUHHVRIIUHHGRP
GHOWD
'HOWDV
'HQVLW\

























DYHUDJH







FULWLFDO

LQILQLWH


RIDVWHURLGV
RIEDU\RQLFPDWWHU

RIHDUWK


RIH[WUDVRODUSODQHWV
RIJDVHV
RI-XSLWHU

RI0DUV
RI0HUFXU\
RI1HSWXQH
RI3OXWR
RI6DWXUQ

RI6XQ
RIXQLYHUVH
RI8UDQXV
RIVHQXV
RIZDWHU
XQFRPSUHVVHG
GHQVLW\SDUDPHWHU

'HQVLW\ZDYH
VSLUDO
'HULYDWLYH


GHVHUW
'HVWUXFWLYHLQWHUIHUHQFH
GHWHFWRU


'HWHFWRUV

'HXWHULXP

GHYHORSPHQW



KXPDQ
'LDPRQG
'LDWRPLFPROHFXOHV
'LIIHUHQWLDOURWDWLRQ

GLIIHUHQWLDWLRQ
RI(DUWK
'LIIUDFWLRQ

FLUFXODUDSHUWXUH
OHQVHVDQG
VLQJOHVOLW
VLQJOHVOLW
[UD\
GLIIUDFWLRQJUDWLQJ
HTXDWLRQ
LQWHUIHUHQFH
UHVROXWLRQRI
UHVROYLQJSRZHU
GLIIUDFWLRQOLPLW
GLIIXVLRQ
'LQRVDXUV
'LRGH
/('
'LSROH

GLUHFWLRQ











<<<PAGE 1455>>>





GLVNVWDUV
'LVSHUVLRQ



RIOLJKW
'LVSODFHPHQW


DQJXODU
IURPHTXLOLEULXP
QHW
'LVVLSDWLYHIRUFH
'LVWDQFH






















DQJXODU






E\VWHOODUSDUDOOD[
FRVPRORJLFDO


LQSDUVHFV
PHDVXUHPHQWRI

GLVWDQFHODGGHU
GLVWDQFHPRGXOXV

GLVWRUWLRQ
'LVWXUEDQFH
'LYHUJLQJOHQV
GLYLGHV
'1$
GRPLQDQFH
'RSSOHUEURDGHQLQJ
'RSSOHU&KULVWLDQ
'RSSOHUHIIHFW
OLJKW
'RSSOHUVKLIW


'RSSOHUVKLIWV

GRXEOHKHOL[
'RXEOHOLQHVSHFWURVFRSLFELQDU\
'RXEOHVOLWLQWHUIHUHQFH
'UDJ
'UDSHU+HQU\
'ULIW

'ULYHQRVFLOODWLRQV
'U\LFH
'XVW













LQWHUSODQHWDU\
LQWHUVWHOODU




'XVWJUDLQ
'XVWODQH
'XVWWDLO
'ZDUIHOOLSWLFDO
GZDUIHOOLSWLFDOJDOD[LHV
GZDUIJDOD[\
GZDUIQRYDH
'\QDPLFV




'\QDPRWKHRU\
E
(ULQJ
(DJOH1HEXOD
(DJOH1HEXOD0
(DUO\XQLYHUVH




%LJ%DQJ



HYROXWLRQRI
LQIODWLRQRI
VWUXFWXUHLQ
(DUWK




















DQJXODUPRPHQWXPRI
DVWKHQRVSKHUH
DWPRVSKHUHRI

D[LVWLOWRI
FLUFXPIHUHQFHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI

FRQYHFWLRQDQG
FRUH




FRUHRI

GHQVLW\







GHQVLW\RI




GLDPHWHURI


GLIIHUHQWLDWLRQRI
GLPHQVLRQVRI
HVFDSHVSHHGIURP
IHDWXUHVRI

IRUPDWLRQRI



JUDYLWDWLRQDODWWUDFWLRQ
JUDYLW\PDS
JUHHQKRXVHHIIHFWRQ
LQIUDUHGVSHFWUDRI
LQWHULRURI

LQWHULRUVWUXFWXUHRI
OLIHRQ
OLWKRVSKHUH
PDJQHWLFILHOGRI

PDQWOH
PDQWOHRI
PDVVRI




PHDVXULQJ


PRYHPHQWRI
RUELWDOPRWLRQRI
SODWHWHFWRQLFV
SURSHUWLHVRI

UDGLXVRI



URWDWLRQRI

VWUXFWXUHRI




VXUIDFHRI





VXUYH\RI
YHORFLW\RI



YROFDQLVPRQ
(DUWKTXDNH
(DUWKTXDNHV
HFOLSVH


OXQDU
SULPDU\
VRODU

(FOLSVHVHDVRQ
HFOLSVHV

(FOLSVLQJELQDU\

HFOLSWLF

HFOLSWLFSODQH
HFRV\VWHPV
(GGLQJWRQOLPLW

(GGLQJWRQOXPLQRVLW\

(IIHFWLYHIRFDOOHQJWK


<<<PAGE 1456>>>

(IILFLHQF\

(LQVWHLQ$OEHUW
(LQVWHLQ&URVV
(LQVWHLQ2EVHUYDWRU\
(LQVWHLQ5LQJ
(ODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
(ODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
SHUIHFWO\HODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
(OHFWULFFKDUJH

HOHFWULFFXUUHQWV
(OHFWULFGLSROH
(OHFWULFILHOG

(OHFWULFILHOGV
FDOFXODWLQJ
&RXORPE
(OHFWULFIRUFH
HOHFWULFSRWHQWLDO
HOHFWULFDOSRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\
HOHFWULFDOUHVLVWDQFH
(OHFWULFLW\
FKDUJHV
HOHFWULFFKDUJH
(OHFWURPDJQHWLFIRUFH
(OHFWURPDJQHWLFLQWHUDFWLRQV
(OHFWURPDJQHWLFUDGLDWLRQ


(OHFWURPDJQHWLFVSHFWUXP



HOHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYH

(OHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYHV
HQHUJ\RI
SRODUL]DWLRQ
UDGLDWLRQSUHVVXUH
VSHHGRI
VWDQGLQJ
(OHFWURPDJQHWLVP
(OHFWURPRWLYHIRUFHHPI
(OHFWURQ









SURGXFWLRQRI
VSLQRI
(OHFWURQGHJHQHUDF\

(OHFWURQGHJHQHUDF\SUHVVXUH

HOHFWURQPLFURVFRSHV
HOHFWURQQHXWULQR
(OHFWURQVSLQ
(OHFWURQWUDQVLWLRQV
(OHFWURQYROW
(OHFWURQSRVLWURQSDLUV
(OHFWURQV











DFFHOHUDWLRQRI
ELQGLQJHQHUJ\RI
FKDUJHRI
FRQGXFWLRQ
GH%URJOLHZDYHOHQJWK
GLVFRYHU\RI
HQHUJ\OHYHOVRI
HQHUJ\RI


ORVLQJ
PDJQHWLFIRUFHRQ
PDVVRI



QDWXUHRI

RUELWV
SDWKRI
VHDRI
VSLQRI
YHORFLW\RI
ZDYHOHQJWKVRI
(OHFWURVFRSHV
HOHFWURZHDNHUD
(OHFWURZHDNIRUFH
(OHFWURZHDNWKHRU\
(OHPHQW




IRUPDWLRQRI
SULPRUGLDO
HOHPHQWV





KHDY\

HOOLSVH
HFFHQWULFLW\
IRFL
SULQFLSDOIRFXV
VHPLPDMRUD[LV
VHPLPLQRUD[LV
HOOLSWLFDOJDOD[LHV



GDUNPDWWHULQ
GZDUI

(OOLSWLFDOJDOD[\


(OOLSWLFDORUELWV

HORQJDWLRQ
JUHDWHVW
(PI
HPLVVLRQ












QRQWKHUPDO
VSRQWDQHRXV
VWLPXODWHG
(PLVVLRQOLQH

HPLVVLRQOLQHV





HPLVVLRQQHEXODH
(PLVVLRQVSHFWUXP
(PLVVLYLW\
(QFNHJDS
HQGRWKHUPLFUHDFWLRQV
(QHUJ\


























ELQGLQJ

ERQG
FKHPLFDO


FRQVHUYDWLRQRI


FRQVHUYDWLRQRIHQHUJ\

GDUN





GDUNHQHUJ\


HOHFWURVWDWLF
LQPDJQHWLFILHOGV
LQWHUQDO




LRQL]DWLRQHQHUJ\

NLQHWLF







NLQHWLFHQHUJ\







QXFOHDUELQGLQJ
QXFOHDUHQHUJ\

RIHOHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYHV
RISKRWRQ
RISKRWRQV


SRWHQWLDO








SRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\






<<<PAGE 1457>>>



TXDQWL]DWLRQRI
UHODWLYLVWLF





UHODWLYLW\DQG

UHVW




URWDWLRQDO

VRODU







VRXUFHVRI


VWRUHG
WKHUPDO






WUDQVIHURI
WUDQVIRUPDWLRQRI
WUDQVLWLRQV

XQFHUWDLQW\SULQFLSOH

XQLWVRI


YDFXXP

ZRUN



(QHUJ\GHQVLW\



(QHUJ\IOX[
(QHUJ\OHYHOV

HQHUJ\WUDQVSRUW

FRQYHFWLYH
UDGLDWLYH
(QJLQHV
(QWURS\
HQYLURQPHQW




HSLFHQWHU
HSLF\FOH
(SLF\FOHV
HSRFKV
(4
























(TXDWLRQRIPRWLRQ
HTXDWLRQRIVWDWH



(TXDWLRQV







(TXDWLRQVRIPRWLRQ
VLPSOHKDUPRQLFPRWLRQ
(TXDWLRQVRIVWDWH
HTXDWRU




HTXDWRULDOFRRUGLQDWHV\VWHP
(TXLOLEULXP









FRQGLWLRQVIRU
G\QDPLF
HOHFWURVWDWLF
K\GURVWDWLF



PHFKDQLFDO

SKDVH

URWDWLRQDO
VWDEOH

VWDWLF

WKHUPDO


WKHUPDOHTXLOLEULXP

XQVWDEOH
HTXLQR[
DXWXPQDO
YHUQDO
(TXLSRWHQWLDOVXUIDFHV
HTXLYDOHQFHSULQFLSOH
HTXLYDOHQWZLGWK:
HUDV
HURVLRQ
RQ(DUWK
RQ0DUV
RQVHQXV
(6$


HVFDSHVSHHG
HVFDSHYHORFLW\

(WD&DULQDH
HWKDQH
(WKHU
(XFOLG
(XFOLGHDQJHRPHWU\
(XGR[XV
(XURSHDQ6RXWKHUQ2EVHUYDWRU\
(XURSHDQ6SDFH$JHQF\

(XURSHDQ6SDFH$JHQF\(6$
HV



(YDSRUDWLRQ
(YHQWKRUL]RQ

(YHQWV




WLPHRI
HYROXWLRQ















ELRORJLFDO
FKHPLFDO


FRVPLF

HYLGHQFHRI

SDFHRI
(YROXWLRQDU\WUDFN

H[FLWDWLRQ

FROOLVLRQDO
H[FLWHGVWDWH

([FLWHGVWDWHV

([FOXVLRQSULQFLSOH

H[HUFLVH



H[RSODQHW
H[RVSKHUH
H[RWKHUPLFUHDFWLRQV
([SDQGLQJXQLYHUVH


([SDQVLRQ










([SHULPHQW


([SORVLRQV
([SRQHQWLDOGHFD\
H[SRQHQWLDOJURZWK
H[SRVXUHWLPH
([WHUQDOIRUFHV
H[WLQFWLRQ



LQWHUVWHOODU




<<<PAGE 1458>>>

([WLQFWLRQFRHIILFLHQW
H[WLQFWLRQV
&UHWDFHRXV
PDVV
(\H

OHQV
UHVROXWLRQ
VWUXFWXUH
(\HSLHFH
DQJXODUPDJQLILFDWLRQ
FKURPDWLFDEHUUDWLRQ
OHQV
F
)ULQJ
)DEHU-DFNVRQUHODWLRQ
IDFW











)DOOLQJREMHFWV
IDXOW
IDXOWV
)HUPL(QULFR
IHUPLRQ
)HUPLRQV

)HUULV7LPRWK\
)H\QPDQ5LFKDUG
)LFWLWLRXVIRUFHV
)LHOGHTXDWLRQV

)LHOGOLQHV



)LHOGRIYLHZ
)LHOGV






JUDYLWDWLRQDO

)LOP
)LOWHUV
FRORU
)LQDOYHORFLW\
)LUHZRUNV
)LUVWODZRIWKHUPRG\QDPLFV
)LVVLRQ
)ODWQHVVSUREOHP
)ORDWLQJ
)OXLGIULFWLRQ
)OXLGPHFKDQLFV
GHQVLW\
SUHVVXUH
)OXWHV
)OX[






IO\E\
)RFDOOHQJWK

HIIHFWLYH
RIDOHQV
V\VWHP
WKLQOHQV
IRFDOSODQH
)RFDOSRLQW
RIDOHQV
IRFDOUDWLR
IRFXV

&DVVHJUDLQ
1HZWRQLDQ
SULPH
IRJ
)RPDOKDXW
)RUFH









EXR\DQW
EXR\DQWIRUFH
FHQWULIXJDO
FHQWULIXJDOIRUFH
FHQWULSHWDOIRUFH
FRPELQLQJ
GHILQLWLRQRI
GLVVLSDWLYHIRUFH
HOHFWULF

HOHFWULFIRUFH
H[WHUQDO
H[WHUQDOIRUFHV
ILFWLWLRXV
IULFWLRQ
JUDYLWDWLRQDO






JUDYLWDWLRQDOIRUFH



LQQDWXUH
PDJQHWLF


PDJQHWLFIRUFH
PHDVXULQJ
QHW

QRUPDO
QXFOHDUIRUFH
SRODUL]DWLRQ
UHVWRULQJ
UHVXOWDQW
VXSSRUW
WHQVLRQ
WRWDOIRUFH
W\SHV
XQLWVRI
ZRUN

)RUFHSDLU
)RUFHSHUXQLWDUHD
IRUFHYHFWRU
)RUFHV




IRUHVWV
IRUPDOGHK\GH
)RUZDUGGLUHFWLRQ
)RVVLOUHFRUG
)RXULHUVHULHV
IUDFWXUH
)UDJPHQWDWLRQ
)UDPHRIUHIHUHQFH

IUDPHVRIUHIHUHQFH
IUHHIDOO


)UHHIDOOYHORFLW\
)UHHO\IDOOLQJREMHFWV
IUHH]LQJ
)UHH]LQJSRLQW
)UHTXHQF\






DQJXODU



F\FORWURQ
'RSSOHUHIIHFW
IXQGDPHQWDO
QDWXUDO
SHULRGRI
UHVRQDQFH
VLPSOHKDUPRQLFPRWLRQ
ZDYH

)ULFWLRQ

NLQHWLF
PRGHORI
WLGDO
)ULHGPDQQHTXDWLRQ

)ULQJHV
)URQW



IURQWV
IURVW
)XHO
IXOO0RRQ
IXQGDPHQWDOFKDUJH
)XQGDPHQWDOIRUFHV
)XQGDPHQWDOIUHTXHQF\
)XQGDPHQWDOSDUWLFOHV
)XQGDPHQWDOXQLWRIFKDUJH
)XVH
)XVLRQ


FDUERQ
GHXWHULXP
KHOLXP

QXFOHDU

SURWRQ
G
J


















*ULQJ
*$I$PLVVLRQ
*DODFWLFDFWLYLW\
*DODFWLFEXOJH
*DODFWLFFHQWHU






*DODFWLFGLVN


LQWHUVWHOODUJDVLQ
JDODFWLFIRXQWDLQ
*DODFWLFKDOR


<<<PAGE 1459>>>

*DODFWLFQXFOHXV
*DODFWLFURWDWLRQ
*DODFWLFURWDWLRQFXUYH
*DOD[LHV










DFWLYH

DFWLYHJDODFWLFQXFOHXV
EODFNKROHVLQ
FHQWHUVRI

FODVVLI\LQJ
FROOLGLQJ
FROOLVLRQVRI
FRVPRORJ\DQG
GHILQHG


GZDUI




HOOLSWLFDO






HOOLSWLFDOJDOD[LHV



HUDRI
HYROXWLRQRI



IRUPDWLRQ







IRUPDWLRQDQGHYROXWLRQRI
IRUPDWLRQRI



JDVEHWZHHQ
JLDQW


JURXSVRI

LQWHUDFWLRQRI
LUUHJXODU

LUUHJXODUJDOD[LHV
OHQWLFXODU

PDVVHVRI

PDVVWROLJKWUDWLRRI
QRUPDO


SURSHUWLHVRI

UDGLR




UHFHGLQJ
6H\IHUW

VSLUDO








VSLUDOJDOD[LHV





VWDUEXUVW
VXUYH\VRI
YLVLEOH




JDOD[\















DFWLYH




GZDUIHOOLSWLFDO
GZDUIVSKHURLGDO

HOOLSWLFDO






LUUHJXODU

OHQWLFXODU
UDGLR





6

6H\IHUW

6H\IHUW
6H\IHUW
VSLUDO







VWDUEXUVW
JDOD[\FOXVWHUV
GDUNPDWWHULQ
JDOD[\HYROXWLRQ
*DOLOHDQPRRQV

&DOOLVWR
(XURSD
*DQ\PHGH
IR
*DOLOHDQVDWHOOLWHV
*DOLOHDQWUDQVIRUPDWLRQ*DOLOHL*DOLOHR
FRQFHSWRILQHUWLD
IRUFH
LQHUWLD
*DOLOHR*DOLOHL
*DOLOHRVSDFHFUDIW
*DPPD



*DPPDUD\
*DPPDUD\V

*DPPDUD\DVWURQRP\
*DPPDUD\EXUVW
JDPPDUD\EXUVWV
*DPPDUD\SKRWRQ
JDPPDUD\WHOHVFRSHV
*DPRZ*HRUJH
JDSV
*DV























JUHHQKRXVH
LQWHUVWHOODU





LQWUDFOXVWHU

SUHVVXUHLQ
JDVJLDQWV
*DVHV




DWRPLFK\GURJHQ
FRPSUHVVLRQ
GHQVLW\

H[SDQVLRQ
JUHHQKRXVH
LGHDO
PRQDWRPLF
SUHVVXUH

VSHFLILFKHDWVRI
*DXVVLDQVXUIDFH
*HLJHUFRXQWHU
*HPLQJDSXOVDU
*HQHUDOUHODWLYLW\


*HQHUDOWKHRU\RIUHODWLYLW\

JUDYLWDWLRQDOOHQVLQJDQG
SXOVDUVDQG
WHVWLQJ
WHVWVRI
JHRFHQWULFPRGHO
*HRFHQWULFXQLYHUVH
JHRGHVLF
QXOO
JHRORJLFDODFWLYLW\
JHRORJ\


<<<PAGE 1460>>>

JHRPDJQHWLFVWRUP
*HRPHWU\




(XFOLGHDQ
RIVSDFH
JHRV\QFKURQRXVRUELW
JLDQWHOOLSWLFDOJDOD[LHV
*LDQWHOOLSWLFDOJDOD[\
JLDQWJDOD[LHV
JLDQWPROHFXODUFORXGV

*LDQWSODQHW
JLDQWVWDU
*LDQWVWDUV
*LDQWV


EOXH
UHG
*LRWWRVSDFHFUDIW
JODFLHUV
JODUH
*ODVKRZ6KHOGRQ
*ODVV
LQGH[RIUHIUDFWLRQRI
JODVV\
JOREDOZDUPLQJ
JOREXODUFOXVWHU


JOREXODUFOXVWHUV





*OXRQV
*ROG
GHQVLW\
*ROG7KRPDV
*RQGZDQDODQG
*UDQG8QLILHG7KHRULHV*87V
*UDSK



*UDSKLWH
*UDWLQJ
FRQVWDQW
JUDYLWDWLRQ

ODZRI
*UDYLWDWLRQDODWWUDFWLRQ

*UDYLWDWLRQDOFRQVWDQW

JUDYLWDWLRQDOFRQWUDFWLRQ
*UDYLWDWLRQDOILHOG

*UDYLWDWLRQDOIRUFH



*UDYLWDWLRQDOIRUFHV
*UDYLWDWLRQDOLQWHUDFWLRQV
JUDYLWDWLRQDOOHQV

*UDYLWDWLRQDOOHQVLQJ

*UDYLWDWLRQDOPDVV
*UDYLWDWLRQDOSRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\




*UDYLWDWLRQDOUDGLDWLRQ

*UDYLWDWLRQDOUHGVKLIW

JUDYLWDWLRQDOWLPHGLODWLRQ
JUDYLWDWLRQDOZDYHV
*UDYLW\








DFFHOHUDWLRQRI

DQG0RRQ
DQGSUHVVXUH
DQGVSHHG
DQGZHLJKW
DWPRVSKHUHDQG
FHQWHURI

GDUNPDWWHUDQG
LQJHQHUDOUHODWLYLW\
ODZRIXQLYHUVDOJUDYLWDWLRQ
RIQHXWURQVWDUV
RQ0DUV
TXDQWXP

URWDWLRQDQG
VRODU


VWUHQJWKRI
WKHRU\RI

XQLYHUVDOJUDYLWDWLRQDOFRQVWDQW
XQLYHUVDOODZRI
]HUR

*UDYLW\3UREH%
*UDYLW\ZDYH
JUD]LQJLQFLGHQFHPLUURUV
*UHDW$WWUDFWRU
*UHDW'DUN6SRW
*UHDW'HEDWH
*UHDW5HG6SRW
*UHDW:DOO
*UHHNDOSKDEHW
JUHHQKRXVHHIIHFW
RQVHQXV
UXQDZD\
*UHHQKRXVHJDV
JUHHQKRXVHJDVHV
*UHJRULDQFDOHQGDU
JURXQGVWDWH



*URXQGVWDWHV
JURXSVRIJDOD[LHV

*XOD0RQV
*87
*XWK$ODQ
*87V
H
+LLUHJLRQ

+IIUHJLRQV


+DELWDEOH]RQH
VWHOODU
+DGOH\FHOOV
+DGOH\FLUFXODWLRQ
+DGURQV
+DOIOLIH

+DOIOLYHV
+DOO$VDSK
+DOOH\(GPRQG
+DOOH\(GPXQG
KDORVWDUV
+DUPRQLFZDYH
+DUPRQLFV

+DUYDUG&ROOHJH2EVHUYDWRU\
+DUYDUG6PLWKVRQLDQ&HQWHUIRU$VWURSK\VLFV&I$

+DZDLLDQIVODQGV
+DZNLQJUDGLDWLRQ
+DZNLQJ6WHSKHQ
+D\DVKLWUDFN
KEDU
+'+'
KHDUW
+HDW





DQGWHPSHUDWXUH
GHILQHG
ODWHQW
PHDVXULQJ
TXDQWLW\
WKHUPDOHQHUJ\
WKHUPDOHTXLOLEULXP
+HDWHQJLQHV
KHDY\ERPEDUGPHQW
KHDY\HOHPHQWV

+HLVHQEHUJXQFHUWDLQW\SULQFLSOH
+HLVHQEHUJ:HUQHU
KHOLRFHQWULFPRGHO
KHOLRVHLVPRORJ\
+HOLXP









GLVFRYHU\RI
LQVWDUV
KHOLXPDWRP
KHOLXPEXUQLQJ
+HOLXPIODVK
+HOLXPZKLWHGZDUI
KHOLXPZKLWHGZDUIV
KHOLXP
KHOLXP
+HOLXPEXUQLQJVKHOO
+HUELJ+DUR
+HUELJ+DURREMHFW
+HUELJ+DURREMHFWV
+HUVFKHOFUDWHU
+HUVFKHO:LOOLDP
+HUW]
+HUW]+HLQULFK
+HUW]VSUXQJ(MQDU
+HUW]VSUXQJ5XVVHOOGLDJUDP
+HUW]VSUXQJ5XVVHOO+5GLDJUDP
RIVWDUV
+HZLVK$QWKRQ\
KLJKPDVVVWDUV
+LOOUDGLXV
+LPDOD\DV
+LSSDUFKXV
+LSSDUFRVPLVVLRQ
KRUL]RQ




HYHQW

KRUL]RQGLVWDQFH

KRUL]RQSUREOHP
KRUL]RQWDOEUDQFK
+RUVHKHDG1HEXOD
+RWGDUNPDWWHU
KRW-XSLWHU
KRW-XSLWHUV
KRWVSRW
+RWVWDU
KRXU


+RXUJODVV
+5GLDJUDPV
+XEEOH(GZLQ

+XEEOHIORZ


+XEEOHODZ



<<<PAGE 1461>>>

+XEEOHSDUDPHWHU
+XEEOHVHTXHQFH

+XEEOH6SDFH7HOHVFRSH




+XEEOH6SDFH7HOHVFRSH+67
+XEEOH8OWUD'HHS)LHOG
+XOVH5XVVHOO
KXPDQEHKDYLRU
+XPDQERG\
KXPDQV
HYROXWLRQRI
KXPLGLW\
+X\JHQV&KULVWLDQ
+X\JHQVSUREH
+\DGHVFOXVWHU
+\DNXWDNH&RPHW
K\GURFDUERQV
+\GURJHQ

















DEVRUSWLRQ




DQJXODUPRPHQWXPRI
%RKUK\GURJHQDWRP
H[FLWDWLRQRI
LQPROHFXODUFORXGV
LQVWDUV
LRQL]DWLRQHQHUJ\RI
LRQL]DWLRQRI

LVRWRSHV
PHWDOOLF
VSHFWUXPRI

ZDYHIXQFWLRQVRI
+\GURJHQDWRP


PDVV
+\GURJHQHQYHORSH
K\GURJHQIXVLRQ
+\GURJHQLRQ
K\GURJHQVKHOOEXUQLQJ
+\GURJHQVSHFWUXP
K\GURVWDWLFHTXLOLEULXP



+\SHUEROD
K\SHUEROLFJHRPHWU\
+\SHUQRYD
K\SHUVSDFH
+\SRWKHVLV


+]


I
I$8
IFH




GHQVLW\
LQFRPHWV
IGHDOEODFNERG\
IGHDOJDV



FRPSUHVVLRQ
FRROLQJ
SURSHUWLHV
LGHDOJDVODZ



IPDJH









IPDJHGLVWDQFH
LPDJLQJ

IPSDFWFUDWHU
IPSXOVH
IPSXOVHDSSUR[LPDWLRQ
IQFOLQDWLRQ

LQFOXVLRQ
IQGH[RIUHIUDFWLRQ

IQGXFWLRQ
ILHOG
LQHODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
IQHODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
IQHUWLD


ODZRILQHUWLD
WKHUPDO
IQHUWLDOIUDPHRIUHIHUHQFH
IQHUWLDOPDVV
LQHUWLDOUHIHUHQFHIUDPHV

IQIHULRUFRQMXQFWLRQ
LQIHULRUSODQHWV
IQILQLWHGHQVLW\
IQIUDUHG$VWURQRP\6DWHOOLWHI5$6
IQIUDUHGOLJKW
IQIUDUHGUDGLDWLRQ
IQIUDUHGWHOHVFRSH
LQIUDUHGWHOHVFRSHV
IQLWLDODQJXODUPRPHQWXP
IQLWLDOFRQGLWLRQV
IQQHUFRUH
LQQHUSODQHWV
LQVWDELOLW\VWULS
IQWHQVLW\




RIOLJKW

LQWHQVLW\RIOLJKW
IQWHUDFWLRQ





LQWHUDFWLRQV





IQWHUIHUHQFH

FRQVWUXFWLYH
FRQVWUXFWLYHLQWHUIHUHQFH
GHVWUXFWLYH
GHVWUXFWLYHLQWHUIHUHQFH
RIOLJKW
RIPDWWHUIQWHUIHUHQFHIULQJHV
IQWHUIHURPHWHU
IQWHUIHURPHWU\
UDGLR
LQWHUJDODFWLFPHGLXP
LQWHUPHGLDWHPDVVVWDUV
IQWHUQDOHQHUJ\

IQWHUQDOUHIOHFWLRQ
IQWHUQDWLRQDO$VWURQRPLFDO8QLRQ
IQWHUQDWLRQDO$VWURQRPLFDO8QLRQI$8
IQWHUVWHOODUFORXG
IUDJPHQWDWLRQ
LQWHUVWHOODUFORXGV

LQWHUVWHOODUGXVW

LQWHUVWHOODUJDV
IQWHUVWHOODUPHGLXP



FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHILQHG
GHQVLW\RI

HPLVVLRQQHEXODH
JDVDQGGXVW
PROHFXOHVRI
LQWHUVWHOODUUHGGHQLQJ
LQWHUVWHOODUWUDYHO
IQWUDFOXVWHUJDV

LQWUDFOXVWHUPHGLXP
LQYHUVHVTXDUHODZ

IRUOLJKW
LQYHUVHVTXDUHODZ
IRWRUXV
IRGLQH
IRQ



IRQWDLO
IRQL]DWLRQ






FROOLVLRQDO
SKRWRLRQL]DWLRQ
IRQL]DWLRQHQHUJ\

IRQL]LQJUDGLDWLRQ
IRQV



IRUPDWLRQRI
PROHFXODULRQV
IULGLXP
IURQ




GHQVLW\


IURQPHWHRULWH
IUUDGLDQFH
LUUHJXODUJDOD[LHV
LVODQGXQLYHUVHV
IVRWRSH


IVRWRSHV

RIFDUERQ
RIKHOLXP
UDGLRDFWLYH

IVRWURS\
FRVPLF
J


<<<PAGE 1462>>>

-DPHV:HEE6SDFH7HOHVFRSH-:67
-DQVN\.DUO
-HDQVPDVV

-HIIHUVRQ7KRPDV
-HW


TXDVDU
MHWVWUHDPV
MHWV



SURWRVWHOODU
MRXOH
-XOLDQFDOHQGDU
MXPSLQJ
-XSLWHU





DVWHURLGVDQG
DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI

IHDWXUHVRI
IRUPDWLRQRI

JUDYLW\RI
*UHDW5HG6SRW
LQWHULRURI
PDVVDQGUDGLXVRI
PDVVRI


PRRQVRI

RUELWRI

SURSHUWLHVRI
UDGLXVRI


ULQJRI
ULQJVRI
YLHZVRI
-:67
K
.DQWIPPDQXHO
.%2V
.HOYLQ/RUG
.HSOHU-RKDQQHV
.HSOHUPLVVLRQ
.LORJUDP
NLORJUDPNJ
.LQHPDWLFV

.LQHWLFHQHUJ\






DQGPRPHQWXP
HTXDWLRQIRU
PRPHQWXPDQG
URWDWLRQDO

URWDWLRQDONLQHWLFHQHUJ\

WRWDONLQHWLFHQHUJ\
.LUFKKRII*XVWDY
.LUNZRRGJDSV
.7ERXQGDU\
.XLSHU%HOW

.XLSHU%HOW2EMHFWV.%2V
L
/DQG7GZDUIV
/DJUDQJLDQSRLQWV
ODQGHU/DUJH0DJHOODQLF&ORXG

/DUJH0DJHOODQLF&ORXG/0&
ODUJHVFDOHVWUXFWXUHV
/DUPRUUDGLXV
/DVHU
ODWHQWKHDW
ODWLWXGH


ODWLWXGHV
ODWWLFH
ODYD
ODZ















/DZRIJUDYLWDWLRQ
/DZRIJUDYLW\

/DZRILQHUWLD
/DZRIUHIUDFWLRQ
/DZRIWKHUPRG\QDPLFV
ODZRIXQLYHUVDOJUDYLWDWLRQ
/DZVRIWKHUPRG\QDPLFV
/HDG




GHQVLW\

LVRWRSHV
/HDGLVRWRSHV
/HDQLQJ7RZHURI3LVD
OHDS\HDUV
/HDYLWW+HQULHWWD
/HQJWKFRQWUDFWLRQ
OHQV


FDPHUD
FRQYHUJLQJ
GHVLJQ
GLYHUJLQJ
H\H
UHVROXWLRQ
/HQVHV

DEHUUDWLRQV
FRQYHUJLQJ
GLYHUJLQJ
IRFDOOHQJWK
LQFRPELQDWLRQ
/HQWLFXODUJDOD[LHV
OHSWRQ
/HSWRQV
OHYHU
/HYHUDUP
/HYHUULHU8UEDLQ
/LFN2EVHUYDWRU\
OLIH





FKDUDFWHULVWLFVRI
H[WUDWHUUHVWULDO
KLVWRU\RI
RQ(DUWK
RQ0DUV
RULJLQRI
/LIHWLPH



OLIW
/LJKW
























DEVRUSWLRQRI
DQGFRORU
EHQGLQJRI
FRKHUHQW
FRORU

FRUSXVFXODUWKHRU\RI
GLIIUDFWLRQ

GLVSHUVLRQ

GLVSHUVLRQRI
'RSSOHUHIIHFW
GRXEOHVOLWLQWHUIHUHQFH
HOHFWURPDJQHWLFVSHFWUXP


HOHFWURPDJQHWLFVSHFWUXPDQG
HPLVVLRQRI

HQHUJ\RI



IUHTXHQFLHVRI
LQWHUIHUHQFH

LQWHUIHUHQFHRI
LQYHUVHVTXDUHODZIRU
PRGHOVRI

PRQRFKURPDWLFOLJKW
QDWXUHRI



SRODUL]DWLRQ

SRODUL]DWLRQRI
SRZHURI
SULVP
SURSDJDWLRQRI
SURSHUWLHVRI

TXDQWD
UDGLDWLRQDQG

UHIUDFWLRQ

UHIUDFWLRQRI
VFDWWHULQJ



VFDWWHULQJRI

VRXUFHVRI

VSHHGRI





<<<PAGE 1463>>>





VWDQGLQJZDYHVRI
WUDQVSDUHQW

XOWUDYLROHW




YLVLEOH








YLVLEOHOLJKW


ZDYHPRGHORI
ZDYHSURSHUWLHVRI
ZKLWH



/LJKWFORFN
/LJKWFXUYH



OLJKWFXUYHV


/LJKWSROOXWLRQ
/LJKWUD\V

/LJKWZDYHV
/LJKWQLQJ
OLJKW\HDU
/LJKW\HDUV
OLPEGDUNHQLQJ

OLPHVWRQH
/LPLW










/LPLWRIUHVROXWLRQ
OLQHRIQRGHV
/LQHVSHFWUD
/LQHVSHFWUXP
/LQHDUPRPHQWXP
/LQHDUSRODUL]DWLRQ
/LQHVSHUPLOOLPHWHU
/LTXLG

/LTXLGV
GHQVLW\
VWUXFWXUHRI
OLWKLXP
OLWKRVSKHUH
/0&;
/RFDO*URXS

ORFDOQRRQ
/RFDO6XSHUFOXVWHU
ORFDOWKHUPRG\QDPLFHTXLOLEULXP/7(

/RJDULWKPLFVFDOH
ORQJLWXGH

GHWHUPLQLQJ
*DODFWLF

ULJKWDVFHQVLRQDQG
]HUR
ORQJLWXGLQDOZDYHVORRNEDFNWLPH
/RRS
/RUHQW]IRUFH
/RUHQW]WUDQVIRUPDWLRQ

/RUHQW]WUDQVIRUPDWLRQV

YHORFLW\WUDQVIRUPDWLRQV
/RZHOO3HUFLYDO
ORZPDVVVWDUV

FRQYHFWLRQLQ
OXPLQRVLW\




















ERORPHWULF


FODVVHVRI
RI&HSKHLGV
RIQRYD
RITXDVDUV
RIVSLUDOJDOD[LHV
RIVWDUV







RIVXSHUQRYDH
VWHOODU









WRWDO




;UD\



OXPLQRVLW\FODVV
OXPLQRVLW\IXQFWLRQ

RIJDOD[LHV

/XPLQRXVPDWWHU
/XQDPLVVLRQV
OXQDUKLJKODQGV
OXQDUPDULD
/\PDQVHULHV
/\PDQDOSKDIRUHVW
M
0DFKLQH
PDFKLQHV
0$&+2V
0$&+2V0DVVLYH&RPSDFW+DOR2EMHFWV
PDFURVFRSLFOHYHO
0DJHOODQVSDFHFUDIW
0DJHOODQLF&ORXGV
PDJPD
0DJQHWLFILHOG







LQWHUVWHOODU

RI(DUWK

RI0HUFXU\
RIVHQXV
0DJQHWLFILHOGOLQHV



0DJQHWLFILHOGV





HQHUJ\LQ
RIFXUUHQW
XQLIRUP
0DJQHWLFIOX[
0DJQHWLFIRUFH
0DJQHWLFOLQHVRIIRUFH
0DJQHWLFPRQRSROH
0DJQHWLFPRQRSROHV
0DJQHWLFSROH
0DJQHWLFSROHV
0DJQHWLVP
0DJQHWRVSKHUH
PDJQHWRVSKHUHV
0DJQHWV
EDUPDJQHWV
0DJQLILFDWLRQ
DQJXODU
H\HSLHFH
WHOHVFRSH
0DJQLI\LQJJODVV
PDJQLWXGH












DEVROXWH





DEVROXWHERORPHWULF

DSSDUHQW





DSSDUHQWERORPHWULF
0DJQLWXGHVFDOH
PDJQLWXGHV\VWHP
PDLQVHTXHQFH




GHILQHG
OHDYLQJ
OLIHWLPHRQ
PDLQVHTXHQFHOLIHWLPH
PDLQVHTXHQFHVWDU





<<<PAGE 1464>>>

0DMRUD[LV

PDPPDOV
PDQWOH

0DUF\*HRIIUH\:
0DUV


DWPRVSKHUHRI
D[LVWLOWRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI
HVFDSHYHORFLW\RI
IHDWXUHVRI
OLIHRQ
PDVVRI
PRRQVRI
2O\PSXV0RQV
SRODUFDSV
UDGLXVRI
VWXG\RI
VXUIDFHRI
VDOOHV0DULQHULV
YROFDQLVP
YROFDQLVPRQ
ZDWHU

ZDWHURQ
0DUV([SORUDWLRQ5RYHU
0DUV([SORUDWLRQ5RYHUV
0DUV*OREDO6XUYH\RU
0DUV2G\VVH\
0DUV3DWKILQGHUPLVVLRQ
0DUV5HFRQQDLVVDQFH2UELWHU
0DVV































DQGGHQVLW\


DQGYROXPH
DQGZHLJKW
DWRPLF

FHQWHURI










FRQVHUYDWLRQRI


IRUFHDQGJUDYLWDWLRQDO















LQHUWLDO

PHDVXULQJ

XQLWVRI



0DVVGHQVLW\





PDVVH[FKDQJH
PDVVH[WLQFWLRQV
0DVVIXQFWLRQ

PDVVLQFUHDVH
0DVVQXPEHU
PDVVHQHUJ\
PDVVLYHFRPSDFWKDORREMHFWV0$&+2V
0DWKHPDWLFV
0DWWHU

















DQWLPDWWHU
EDU\RQLF



GDUNPDWWHU







LQWHUDFWLRQRIOLJKWDQG
OXPLQRXVPDWWHU
QDWXUHRI


QRUPDO

SURSHUWLHVRI
VXSHUFRQGXFWLQJ
WKHUPDOSURSHUWLHVRI
0DWWHU(UD

0DWWHUZDYHV
GH%URJOLHZDYHOHQJWK
PDWWHUGRPLQDWHGXQLYHUVH

0DXQD.HD+DZDLL
0DXQGHUPLQLPXP
0DXU\$QWRQLD0D[ZHOO%ROW]PDQQGLVWULEXWLRQ

0D\RU0LFKHO
PHDQIUHHSDWK

0HDQGHULQJ
0HDVXUHPHQW





XQFHUWDLQWLHV
XQLWV
0HFKDQLFDOHQHUJ\

FRQVHUYDWLRQRI
FRQVHUYDWLRQRIHQHUJ\
JUDYLWDWLRQDOSRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\
NLQHWLFHQHUJ\
WRWDOPHFKDQLFDOHQHUJ\
0HFKDQLFV



0HGLFLQH:KHHOV
0HGLXP





RIUHIUDFWLRQ
RIZDYHV
PHJDSDUVHF
0HOWLQJ
0HUFXU\


DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\
IHDWXUHVRI
LQWHULRURI
PDVVRI
RUELWRI
UDGLXVRI
URWDWLRQRI
URWDWLRQSHULRGRI
VXUIDFHRI

0HUJHU


JDOD[\


PHULGLDQ
]HQLWK
0HVRQV
0HVVLHU&DWDORJ
0HVVLHU&KDUOHV
PHWDOOLFK\GURJHQ
0HWDOV


DONDOL
WUDQVLWLRQ
PHWHRU
PHWHRUVKRZHU
PHWHRUVKRZHUV
PHWHRULWH

LURQ
VWRQ\
PHWHRULWHV


OXQDU
W\SHVRI
PHWHRURLG
0HWHRURLGV
PHWHRURORJ\
PHWHRUV
PHWKDQH

PHWKDQRO
PHWULF



<<<PAGE 1465>>>

0LFKHOVRQ0RUOH\H[SHULPHQW
0LFUROHQVLQJ
PLFURPHWHRULWHV
0LFURVFRSH
0LFURVFRSHV
HOHFWURQ
OLJKW
0LFURZDYHV
0LG$WODQWLF5LGJH
0LHVFDWWHULQJ
PLJUDWLRQ
0LON\:D\











0LON\:D\*DOD[\






EXOJH
FHQWHURI

GLDPHWHURI
GLVN


IRUPDWLRQRI
*DODFWLFFHQWHU

KDOR

OXPLQRVLW\


PDVV



PDVVRI

PHDVXULQJ
SODQHRI
VL]HRI
VSLUDOVWUXFWXUHRI
0LOOLVHFRQGSXOVDU
PLOOLVHFRQGSXOVDUV
PLQHUDOV
GHQVLW\
IRUPDWLRQ
IRUPDWLRQRI
VLOLFDWHV
0LQNRZVNL+HUPDQQ
0LQRUSODQHW
PLQXWH
0LUURU

SODQH
VSKHULFDO
0LUURUV

JUD]LQJLQFLGHQFH
SODQH
VSKHULFDO
WHOHVFRSHPLUURUV
PL[WXUHV
PRGHO


















0RGHOLQJ


0RGHOV









SDUWLFOHPRGHO
ZDYHPRGHORIOLJKW
0RGHV

0ROH
PROHFXODUEDQGV
0ROHFXODUERQGV
0ROHFXODUFORXG


FRUHRI
IUDJPHQWDWLRQRI
0ROHFXODUFORXGFRPSOH[
PROHFXODUK\GURJHQ


PROHFXODUQLWURJHQ
0ROHFXODUVSHHGV
0ROHFXODUZHLJKW

0ROHFXOH

NLQHWLFHQHUJ\
PROHFXOHV





LQWHUVWHOODU

LRQL]DWLRQRI
SRODU
0RPHQW


0RPHQWRILQHUWLD

0RPHQWXP








DQGFROOLVLRQV
DQGNLQHWLFHQHUJ\
DQJXODU







DQJXODUPRPHQWXP







FHQWHURIPDVV

FROOLVLRQV
FRPSRQHQWV
FRQVHUYDWLRQODZV
FRQVHUYDWLRQRI

FRQVHUYDWLRQRIDQJXODUPRPHQWXP

GHFUHDVLQJ
HODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
HODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
LPSXOVH
LQFUHDVLQJ
LQHODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
LQHODVWLFFROOLVLRQV
NLQHWLFHQHUJ\DQG
OLQHDU
OLQHDUPRPHQWXP
RIHOHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYHV
UHODWLYLVWLF


UHODWLYLVWLFPRPHQWXP

URFNHWSURSXOVLRQ
WRWDO



WRWDOPRPHQWXP
0RQRFKURPDWLFOLJKW
PRQWK
0RRQ






HFOLSVHV
IXOO0RRQ
JUDYLW\RI
KLJKODQGV
PDULD
QHZ0RRQ
RUELWRI
SKDVHVRI
VRODUHFOLSVH
0RRQWKH
RULJLQRI
0RWLRQ












DFFHOHUDWLRQ


DSSDUHQW


DWRPLF
GHVFULELQJ

GLXUQDO
IUHHIDOO
*DOLOHR
NLORJUDP
QDWXUDO
QHWIRUFH
SURMHFWLOH
SURMHFWLOHPRWLRQ
SURSHU


UDGLDO





UHWURJUDGH



<<<PAGE 1466>>>

URWDWLRQDO
VSHHG





VWHOODU




WUDQVYHUVH


W\SHVRI
XQLIRUP
YHORFLW\







YLROHQW
ZDYH


0RXQW(YHUHVW
PRXQWDLQV
YROFDQRHV
0XOWLSOHVWDUV\VWHPV
0XRQ
0XRQV
N
1DNHGVLQJXODULW\
1DQRPHWHUQP
QDUURZOLQHUHJLRQ
1$6$









1DWLRQDO$FDGHP\RI6FLHQFHV
1DWLRQDO$VWURQRPLFDO2EVHUYDWRU\RI-DSDQ

1DWLRQDO5DGLR$VWURQRP\2EVHUYDWRU\

QDWXUDOIUHTXHQF\
QDWXUDOSKLORVRSK\
QDWXUDOVHOHFWLRQ
1D]FDSODWH
QHDSWLGHV
QHDU(DUWKDVWHURLGV
1($56KRHPDNHU
QHEXOD






HPLVVLRQ

LRQL]DWLRQ
SODQHWDU\


VSLUDO

1HJDWLYHFXUYDWXUH
1HJDWLYHSUHVVXUH
1HJDWLYHZRUN
1HSWXQH



DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI
GLVFRYHU\RI
IHDWXUHVRI*UHDW'DUN6SRWRI
LQWHULRURI
.%2VDQG
PDVVDQGUDGLXVRI
PDVVRI
PRRQVRI
3OXWRDQG
UDGLXVRI
ULQJVRI
QHWIRUFH
1HWZRUNV
QHXWULQR


HOHFWURQ


VRODU
WDX
1HXWULQRGHWHFWRU
1HXWULQRRVFLOODWLRQV
1HXWULQRV




1HXWURQ






IXVLRQRI
1HXWURQFDSWXUH
1HXWURQGHJHQHUDF\SUHVVXUH
QHXWURQVWDU




GHILQHG
SURSHUWLHVRI
SXOVDUV

URWDWLRQRI
QHXWURQVWDUV




GLVFRYHU\RI
VWUXFWXUHRI
1HXWURQL]DWLRQ
1HXWURQV



PDVVRI

QHZ0RRQ
1HZ7HFKQRORJ\7HOHVFRSH177
1HZWRQIVDDF
ODZVRIPRWLRQ
QDWXUHRIOLJKWDQG
1HZWRQLDQPHFKDQLFV

1*&





1*&
1LFNHO

QLJKWVN\

1LWURJHQ


OLTXLG
PROHFXODU
QREOHJDVHV
1RGDOOLQHV
QRGH
1RGHV
1RLVH
QRQEDU\RQLFPDWWHUQRUPDO




1RUPDOJDOD[\
1RUPDOPDWWHU
1RUPDOL]DWLRQ
1RUWK$PHULFDQSODWH
QRUWKFHOHVWLDOSROH
1RUWK3ROH
1RUWK6WDU
QRUWKHUQOLJKWV
QRYD

GZDUI

UHFXUUHQW
1RYD3HUVHL
1RYDH

1XFOHDUELQGLQJHQHUJ\
1XFOHDUHQHUJ\

1XFOHDUIRUFH
1XFOHDUIXVLRQ
1XFOHDUSK\VLFV
1XFOHDUSRZHU
1XFOHDUSRZHUSODQWV
1XFOHDUUHDFWLRQV



QXFOHDUZLQWHU
QXFOHL








DWRPLF
RIFRPHW
1XFOHRQV

1XFOHRV\QWKHVLV



SULPRUGLDO
VWHOODU


1XFOHXV






DWRPLF
EHWDGHFD\
ELQGLQJHQHUJ\
FRPHW
GLVFRYHU\RI
SURSHUWLHVRI
UDGLXVRI

VWDELOLW\
1XFOLGHV
1XPEHUGHQVLW\






O
2%DVVRFLDWLRQ
2EMHFWGLVWDQFH
2EMHFWLYHOHQV
REVFXULQJWRUXV
REVHUYDEOHXQLYHUVH

REVHUYDWRULHV



<<<PAGE 1467>>>



JURXQGEDVHG
LQVSDFH
RFHDQFXUUHQWV
RFHDQLFFUXVW
RFHDQRJUDSK\
RFHDQV
HYROXWLRQRI
WLGHV
2FWDYH
2*/(
2OEHUV+HLQULFK
2O\PSXV0RQV
2RUW&ORXG

2RUW-DQ
2SDFLW\





2SHQXQLYHUVH

2SKLXFKXV
2SSHQKHLPHU5REHUW
RSSRVLWLRQ
2SWLFDOD[LV
2SWLFDOGRXEOH
2SWLFDOLQWHUIHURPHWU\
2SWLFV

DFWLYH
DGDSWLYH
RUELWDODQJXODUPRPHQWXP

RUELWDOGLVWDQFH
RUELWDOHFFHQWULFLW\

RUELWDOHQHUJ\
RUELWDOLQFOLQDWLRQ

2UELWDOPRWLRQ


FHQWHURIPDVV
2UELWDOSHULRG





RIH[WUDVRODUSODQHWV
RUELWDOUHVRQDQFH
ULQJV
RUELWDOVSHHG

RIVWDUV
RUELWHU
RUELWV







FLUFXODU



HOOLSWLFDO

JHRV\QFKURQRXV
RIFRPHWV
2UFXV
2UGHURIPDJQLWXGHHVWLPDWH
2UGLQDU\PDWWHU
2UJDQ
2UJDQSLSH
2UJDQLFFRPSRXQGV
2ULRQFRQVWHOODWLRQ
2ULRQ1HEXOD

2ULRQ1HEXOD0
2VFLOODWLRQ


QHXWULQRV
2VFLOODWLRQV




DPSOLWXGHRI
DQJXODUIUHTXHQF\
GDPSHG
GULYHQ
IUHTXHQF\RI
LQLWLDOFRQGLWLRQV
OLIHWLPHRI
QHXWULQR
SKDVHRI
VRODU

YHUWLFDO
2VFLOODWRUVWUHQJWK
2VFLOODWRUV
2XWHUFRUH
RXWHUSODQHWV
-XSLWHU
1HSWXQH
6DWXUQ
8UDQXV
RXWJDVVLQJ
RQ(DUWK
RQVHQXV
2:/
2[\JHQ



LRQL]DWLRQRI
PROHFXODU
R]RQH
P
3ZDYHV
3DFLILFSODWH
3$+V
3DLUSURGXFWLRQ
3DQJDHD
SDUDEROD
SDUDGLJP
SDUDOOD[


DQQXDO
VSHFWURVFRSLF

VWHOODU

3DUVHF
3DUWLDOPHOWLQJ
3DUWLFOHPRGHO
3DUWLFOHSK\VLFV

3DUWLFOHDQWLSDUWLFOHDQQLKLODWLRQ
3DUWLFOHDQWLSDUWLFOHSDLU
3DUWLFOHV













DQJXODUPRPHQWXPRI
V\VWHPRI
ZDYHSDUWLFOHGXDOLW\
3DVFKHQVHULHV
3DWK






3DXOLH[FOXVLRQSULQFLSOH
3DXOL:ROIJDQJ
SF









3HDNSRZHU
SHFXOLDUYHORFLW\


3HQGXOXP
SHQXPEUD
3HQ]LDV$UQR
3HUIHFWO\HODVWLFFROOLVLRQ
SHULKHOLRQ

3HULRG












RIRVFLOODWLRQ
RUELWDO







URWDWLRQ




VLGHUHDO
V\QRGLF
ZDYH

3HULRGLFPRWLRQ
3HULRGLFWDEOH
JURXSV
SHULRGLFLW\
SHULRGOXPLQRVLW\UHODWLRQ

SHULRGV





SHUPDIURVW
3HUPHDELOLW\
3HUPLWWLYLW\
3KDVH







SKDVHV

3KRWRGLVLQWHJUDWLRQ
3KRWRGLVVRFLDWLRQ
3KRWRHOHFWULFHIIHFW
3KRWRPHWHU
3KRWRPHWU\
3KRWRPXOWLSOLHU
3KRWRQ







<<<PAGE 1468>>>







HQHUJ\RI


JDPPDUD\
UHGVKLIWRI
3KRWRQV













DEVRUSWLRQRI

HPLVVLRQRI

HQHUJ\RI



IUHTXHQF\DQGZDYHOHQJWK
JDPPDUD\SKRWRQ
ZDYHOHQJWKRI

[UD\SKRWRQV
SKRWRVSKHUH




VRODU



3KRWRV\QWKHVLV
3K\VLFDOFRQVWDQWV
3K\VLFDOODZV
SK\VLFDOSURSHUWLHV
3K\VLFDOWKHRULHV
SK\VLFV









3L

YDOXHRI
3LDQR
3LD]]L*LXVHSSH
3LH]RHOHFWULF
3LRQHHU
3LRQV
3LWFK
SL[HO
3L[HOV
SODJH
SODLQV
3ODQFNHUD
3ODQFNIXQFWLRQ

3ODQFN0D[
3ODQFNWLPH
3ODQH











YHORFLW\LQ
3ODQHJHRPHWU\
3ODQHRISRODUL]DWLRQ
SODQHW







GZDUI
-RYLDQ
WHUUHVWULDO



SODQHWIRUPDWLRQ
SODQHWDU\PRGHO
3ODQHWDU\PRWLRQ

ODZVRI
3WROHPDLFPRGHORI
SODQHWDU\QHEXOD

SODQHWDU\ULQJV
3ODQHWDU\V\VWHP

GLVFRYHU\
VWDUVZLWK
SODQHWHVLPDO
SODQHWHVLPDOV

3ODQHWV





GDWDRQ
(DUWK





H[WUDVRODU

-XSLWHU





0DUV

0HUFXU\

1HSWXQH



RUELWDOPRWLRQ
UHODWLYHVL]HVRI
6DWXUQ



8UDQXV



VHQXV


SODQWV
SODVPD


FRPSUHVVLQJ
LQVXQVSRWV
SODWHERXQGDULHV
SODWHVFDOH
SODWHWHFWRQLF
SODWHWHFWRQLFVHDUWKTXDNHV
SODWHV

3ODWR
3OHLDGHV
3OXWLQRV
3OXWR


DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI
GLVFRYHU\RI
PDVVRI
PRRQVRI
RUELWRI
UDGLXVRI
VL]HRI
3RODU



SRODULFH
RQ0DUV
3RODULV
3RODUL]DWLRQ


OLQHDUSRODUL]DWLRQ
RIOLJKW
3RODUL]DWLRQRIOLJKW
3ROOX[
3RO\F\FOLFDURPDWLFK\GURFDUERQV
SRO\F\FOLFDURPDWLFK\GURFDUERQV3$+V
SRSXODWLRQ



JURZWKRI
VWXGLHVRI
SRSXODWLRQGHQVLW\
3RSXODWLRQI

3RSXODWLRQIDQGIIVWDUV
SRSXODWLRQIVWDUV
3RSXODWLRQII

SRSXODWLRQIIVWDUV
SRURVLW\
3RVLWLRQ










3RVLWLRQYHFWRU

3RVLWLYHFXUYDWXUH
3RVLWLYHZRUN
3RVLWURQ


3RVLWURQV

3RWHQWLDO









FDOFXODWLRQRI
HTXLSRWHQWLDOVXUIDFHV
3RWHQWLDOGLIIHUHQFH
3RWHQWLDOHQHUJ\








<<<PAGE 1469>>>

FDOFXODWLQJ
FKHPLFDO
HOHFWULF
HOHFWULFDO
JUDYLWDWLRQDO





JUDYLWDWLRQDOSRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\





RIQXFOHRQV
ZRUNDQG
]HURRI
3RWHQWLDOZHOOV
3RZHU







PDFKLQHV
RIOLJKW

RIVRXQG
SURGXFWLRQRI
VRODU

XQLWVRI
3RZHUVSHFWUXP

3R\QWLQJYHFWRU
3UHFHVVLRQ
3UHVVXUH















DWPRVSKHULF

DWPRVSKHULFSUHVVXUH
GHJHQHUDF\


LQJDV
LQOLTXLG
PHDVXULQJ
QHJDWLYHSUHVVXUH
RIJDVHV
UDGLDWLRQ






WKHUPDO


XQLWV
XQLWVRI

YDSRU
3UHVVXUHEURDGHQLQJ
SUHVVXUHJUDGLHQW

SUHYDLOLQJZLQGV
3ULPDU\PLUURU
3ULPHIRFXV
3ULQFHWRQ8QLYHUVLW\

3ULQFLSDOTXDQWXPQXPEHU
3ULQFLSDOTXDQWXPQXPEHUQ
3ULQFLSOHRIHTXLYDOHQFH
3ULQFLSOHRIUHODWLYLW\
3ULVP
3ULVPV
3UREDELOLW\


SUREH



3URF\RQ
3URF\RQ%
SURGXFWV

SURMHFWLOH
3URMHFWLOHPRWLRQ
3URMHFWLRQ
SURPLQHQFH
SURSDQH
SURSHUGLVWDQFH


3URSHUOHQJWK
3URSHUPRWLRQ

3URSHUWLPH

3URSRUWLRQDOLW\
SURSRUWLRQV
GLUHFW
3URSXOVLRQ
SURWRJDODFWLFFORXG
GHQVLW\RI
3URWRQ




PDVVRI
3URWRQV





FKDUJHRI
PDVVRI

3URWRSODQHW
SURWRVWDU

SURWRVXQ
3UR[LPD&HQWDXUL
SDUDOOD[RI
3WROHPDLFPRGHO
3WROHP\
3WROHP\&ODXGLXV
SXOVDU


SXOVDUV


ELQDU\


JDPPDUD\
PLOOLVHFRQG
3XOVDWLQJYDULDEOHVWDU
SXSLO
3\WKDJRUDV
Q
TXDGUDWXUH
4XDOLW\
4XDQWD
4XDQWL]DWLRQ
DWRPLF
RIDQJXODUPRPHQWXP
RIHQHUJ\
4XDQWL]HG
4XDQWXPJUDYLW\
TXDQWXPPHFKDQLFDOWXQQHOLQJ
4XDQWXPPHFKDQLFV
KLVWRU\RI
PRGHOV
3DXOLH[FOXVLRQSULQFLSOH
WXQQHOLQJ
4XDQWXPQXPEHU
DQJXODUPRPHQWXPTXDQWXPQXPEHU
PDJQHWLF
RUELWDO
SULQFLSDO
SULQFLSDOTXDQWXPQXPEHU
VSLQ
4XDQWXPSK\VLFV
TXDQWXPVWDWH

4XDRDU
4XDUN
4XDUNDQWLTXDUNSDLU
4XDUNV
W\SHVRI
4XDUW]
TXDVDU



UDGLRORXG
UDGLRTXLHW
TXDVDUV



UDGLRJDOD[LHVDQG
VSHFWUDRI

4XLHVFHQWSURPLQHQFH
TXLQWHVVHQFH
R
5$
UDG

UDGDU
SODQHWDU\
5DGLDOPRWLRQ
5DGLDOYHORFLW\





RIVWDU
5DGLDQ
5DGLDQV

5DGLDQW

UDGLDQWHQHUJ\
5DGLDWLRQ



















DOSKD
DVSDUWLFOHV
EDFNJURXQG


EHWD
EODFNERG\





FRVPLFEDFNJURXQG


<<<PAGE 1470>>>


GHILQHG

GLVWULEXWLRQRI

'RSSOHUHIIHFW
HOHFWURPDJQHWLF




HQYLURQPHQWDO
JDPPD

JUDYLWDWLRQDO






KDOIOLIH
+DZNLQJ
LRQL]LQJ
ODZVRI
OLJKWDQG
QRQWKHUPDO
SDUWLFOH



VRODU




V\QFKURWURQ


WHUUHVWULDO

WKHUPDO



W\SHVRI

XOWUDYLROHW


XQLWVRI

UDGLDWLRQFXUYHV
RIVWDUV
VRODU
5DGLDWLRQ(UD


5DGLDWLRQSUHVVXUH




UDGLDWLRQ]RQH
UDGLDWLYHWUDQVIHU
HTXDWLRQRI
UDGLRDVWURQRP\

UDGLRJDOD[LHV

5DGLRJDOD[\

5DGLROREH
UDGLROREHV

5DGLRVLJQDOV
5DGLRWHOHVFRSH

LQWHUIHURPHWHU
5DGLRWHOHVFRSHV

5DGLRZDYHV

UDGLRDFWLYHGDWLQJ
UDGLRDFWLYHGHFD\

UDGLRDFWLYHLVRWRSH
5DGLRDFWLYHLVRWRSHV
5DGLRDFWLYLW\
5DGLXV























DQJXODUPRPHQWXPDQG
RI(DUWK

RI-XSLWHU


RI0DUV
RI0HUFXU\
RI3OXWR
RI6DWXUQ
RIVWDUV








RI6XQ
RI8UDQXV
5DGLXVRIFXUYDWXUH

5DLQERZ
UDQGRPZDON
5DQGRPQHVV
UDQJHV


5DUHIDFWLRQ
5DUHIDFWLRQV
5DWHHTXDWLRQ
UDWHRIHQHUJ\SURGXFWLRQ
5D\OHLJKFULWHULRQ
5D\OHLJKVFDWWHULQJ
EOXHVN\
5HDFWLRQ




UHDFWLRQUDWH

5HDFWLRQUDWHV

UHFRPELQDWLRQ


5HFRQQHFWLRQ
5HFXUUHQWQRYD
5HGGZDUI
UHGJLDQW

UHGJLDQWEUDQFK

5HGJLDQWUHJLRQ
UHGJLDQWV
UHGOLJKW

5HG6SRW
5HGVXSHUJLDQW
UHGGHQLQJ

UHGVKLIW







FRVPRORJLFDO




JUDYLWDWLRQDO



TXDVDU



UHGXFWLRQ
UHIHUHQFHIUDPHV


DFFHOHUDWLQJ
LQHUWLDO

5HIHUHQFHSRLQW
5HIOHFWDQFH
5HIOHFWLQJWHOHVFRSH
5HIOHFWLRQ


ODZ
ODZRI
WRWDOLQWHUQDO
5HIOHFWLRQJUDWLQJ
5HIOHFWLRQQHEXOD
5HIUDFWLQJWHOHVFRSH
5HIUDFWLRQ

RIOLJKW

WKLQOHQV
ZDYHV
UHIUDFWLRQRIOLJKW
UHJROLWK
5HODWLYHPRWLRQ
YHORFLW\
5HODWLYHYHORFLW\

5HODWLYLVWLFNLQHWLFHQHUJ\
5HODWLYLVWLFYHORFLW\WUDQVIRUPDWLRQ
5HODWLYLW\




HQHUJ\DQG
HYHQWV

JHQHUDO




JHQHUDOWKHRU\RI

LQHUWLDOIUDPHRIUHIHUHQFH
OHQJWKFRQWUDFWLRQ
/RUHQW]WUDQVIRUPDWLRQ

/RUHQW]WUDQVIRUPDWLRQV

PHDVXUHPHQWV
PRPHQWXPDQG
RIOHQJWK
RIPRWLRQ
RIVLPXOWDQHLW\
RIWLPH

SURSHUWLPH

UHODWLYHYHORFLW\
UHODWLYLVWLFPRPHQWXP
UXEEHUVKHHWDQDORJ\RI
VLPXOWDQHLW\
VSHFLDO


<<<PAGE 1471>>>


VSHHGRIOLJKW


WKHRU\RI



WLPHGLODWLRQ

UHVHDUFK



DSSOLHG
EDVLF
5HVLGXDOFDS
5HVLVWDQFH

LQWHUQDO
5HVROXWLRQ




DQJXODU

H\H
OHQV
VSHFWUDO
WHOHVFRSH


5HVROYLQJSRZHU
JUDWLQJ
5HVRQDQFH

5HVWHQHUJ\


5HVWIUDPH

5HVWPDVV
5HVWRULQJIRUFH
5HVXOWDQW
UHWURJUDGHPRWLRQ
5HWURJUDGHURWDWLRQ
5HYHUEHUDWLRQ
UHYHUEHUDWLRQPDSSLQJ
5LFKWHUVFDOH
5LJHO
ULJKWDVFHQVLRQ


5LJLGERG\
5LQJV\VWHP

RI-XSLWHU
RI6DWXUQ
RI8UDQXV
51$
URERWLFVSDFHFUDIW
5RFKH(GRXDUG
5RFKHOLPLW

5RFKHOREHV
URFN


EDVDOW
HURVLRQ
IRUPDWLRQ

LJQHRXV
ODYD
OXQDU
PDJPD
W\SHV
5RFNHWSURSXOVLRQ
URFNV

YROFDQLF
5RRWPHDQVTXDUHVSHHG
5RSHV
5RWDWLRQ











GLIIHUHQWLDO


*DODFWLF



JUDYLW\DQG
.HSOHULDQ
NLQHWLFHQHUJ\RI
PROHFXODU

RI(DUWK


RI0HUFXU\
RIVRODUV\VWHP
UDWHRI

ULJLGERG\
VRODU






VSHHGVRI
5RWDWLRQFXUYH


*DODFWLF

URWDWLRQFXUYHV

5RWDWLRQSHULRG


VRODU
URWDWLRQUDWH

URWDWLRQDODQJXODUPRPHQWXP

5RWDWLRQDOHQHUJ\
5RWDWLRQDOIODWWHQLQJ
5RWDWLRQDONLQHWLFHQHUJ\

5RWDWLRQDOPRWLRQ
URYHUV
USURFHVV
55/\UDHVWDU
UXEEHU
5XELQVHUD
5XQDZD\JUHHQKRXVHHIIHFW
5XWKHUIRUG(UQHVW
5\GEHUJFRQVWDQW
5\GEHUJ-RKDQQHV
S
6ZDYHV
6DJDQ&DUO
6DJLWWDULXV$
6DJLWWDULXVGZDUIJDOD[\
6DKDHTXDWLRQ

6DODP$EGXV
6DQ$QGUHDV)DXOW
VDWHOOLWHV


DQJXODUPRPHQWXPRI
FLUFXODURUELWV
FRPPXQLFDWLRQV
RUELWV
SODQHWDU\
6DWXUQ



DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRIGHQVLW\RI

IHDWXUHVRI
LQWHULRURI
PDVVRI

PRRQVRI

UDGLXVRI

ULQJSDUWLFOHV
ULQJV

ULQJVRI
URWDWLRQRI
VKDSHRI
6%JDOD[\
6FDODUTXDQWLWLHV
6FDOHIDFWRU




VFDOHKHLJKW



6FDUS
VFDWWHULQJRIOLJKW
6FKPLGW0DDUWHQ
6FKPLGWWHOHVFRSH
6FKZDU]VFKLOG.DUO
6FKZDU]VFKLOGUDGLXV


VFLHQFH





DQGWHFKQRORJ\
DVWURQRP\


LQWHJUDWHG
PDWKHPDWLFV
PRGHOVRI
QDWXUHRI

SK\VLFV


WHFKQRORJ\DQG
6FLQWLOODWLRQ
6FUHHQLQJ
VHDVRQV
RQ0DUV
VHFRQG













6HFRQGODZRIWKHUPRG\QDPLFV
6HFRQGDU\LPDJH
6HFRQGDU\PLUURU
6HGQD
VHHGV
6HHLQJ

VHLVPLFZDYHV
VHLVPRORJ\
6HOHFWLRQHIIHFW
6HOHFWLRQUXOHV
6HOISURSDJDWLQJVWDUIRUPDWLRQ
6HPLGHWDFKHGELQDU\

6HPLPDMRUD[LV




<<<PAGE 1472>>>

VH[WDQW
6H\IHUWJDOD[LHV

6H\IHUWJDOD[\
6KDGRZ]RQH
6KDSOH\+DUORZ
6KDSOH\&XUWLV'HEDWH
6KHDUZDYHV
VKHOO





VKHSKHUGPRRQV
6KLHOGYROFDQR
6KRFNZDYH

6KX)UDQN
6IXQLWV
6LGHUHDOGD\
6LGHUHDORUELWDOSHULRG
VLGHUHDOWLPH
6LGHUHDO\HDU
6LJQFRQYHQWLRQ
6LJQLILFDQWILJXUHV
VLOLFDWHV
VLOLFRQ

6LOYHU
6LPXOWDQHLW\
6LQJOHOLQHVSHFWURVFRSLFELQDU\
6LQJOHVOLWGLIIUDFWLRQ
6LQJXODULW\

6LULXV


6LULXV$
6LULXV%

6/
6ORDQ'LJLWDO6N\6XUYH\

6ORDQ'LJLWDO6N\6XUYH\6'66

6PDOO0DJHOODQLF&ORXG
6PDOODQJOHDSSUR[LPDWLRQ
6PRJ
VQRZ
6RGLXP
6RGLXPDWRP
62+2VSDFHFUDIW
62+2&RPHW
VRLO
6RMRXUQHU
VRODUDFWLYLW\
6RODUDQG+HOLRVSKHULF2EVHUYDWRU\62+2
6RODUFRQVWDQW
VRODUFRUH
VRODUF\FOH
6RODUGD\
VRODUHFOLSVH
6RODUHQHUJ\
6RODUIODUH
VRODUJUDQXODWLRQ
VRODUPDVV
VRODUPDVVHV

6RODUPD[LPXP
VRODUQHEXOD

VRODUQHXWULQR
SUREOHP
6RODUQHXWULQRSUREOHP
6RODUQHXWULQRV
VRODUSURPLQHQFHV
VRODUUDGLDWLRQ
6RODUV\VWHP






DJHRI
DVWHURLGEHOW

DVWHURLGV
EODFNKROHV
FRPHWWDLOV
FRPHWV



FRVPRORJ\
GLIIHUHQWLDWLRQRI
HFOLSWLF

IHDWXUHVRI
IRUPDWLRQRI


LQQHU


LQQHUSODQHWV
.XLSHUEHOW

OLIHLQ
PHWHRULWH

PHWHRURLGV
PHWHRUV
0LON\:D\
0RRQ



2RUWFORXG

RXWHUSODQHWV
SURSHUWLHVRI
UDGLDWLRQSUHVVXUH
URWDWLRQRI
VFDOHRI
VWXG\LQJ
VXQ




WHOHVFRSHV
VRODUWLPH
VRODUZLQG


FRURQDOKROHVDQG
PDVVORVVUDWH
6ROLGV
FU\VWDOOLQH
PROHFXOHV
VROVWLFH
VXPPHU
ZLQWHU
VROXEOH
VROXWLRQV

EDVLF
FRQFHQWUDWLRQ
FRQFHQWUDWLRQRI
6RXQG



QDWXUHRI
SRZHURI
VKRFNZDYH
VSHHGRI

6RXQGZDYHV

VSHHGRIVRXQG
VWDQGLQJ
6RXUFHVRIHQHUJ\
VRXWKFHOHVWLDOSROH
6RXWKHUQ&URVV
VRXWKHUQOLJKWV
6SDFH
















DW















EODFNKROHV



FRVPRORJ\


FXUYDWXUHRI

JHRPHWU\RI
WHOHVFRSHV


VSDFHPRWLRQ
6SDFH6KXWWOH
VSDFHWLPH




FXUYHG


JHRPHWU\RI

PDVVDQG
UXEEHUVKHHWDQDORJ\IRU
WLPHDQG
6SDFHWLPHFRRUGLQDWHV
VSDFHWLPHGLDJUDP
6SDFHWLPHLQWHUYDO
6SHFLDOUHODWLYLW\

6SHFLDOWKHRU\RIUHODWLYLW\
VSHFLHV


6SHFLILFKHDW
6SHFWUD







FRQWLQXRXV

FRQWLQXRXVVSHFWUD
HOHFWURPDJQHWLF

OLQHVSHFWUD
RITXDVDUV
VFKHPDWLF
WKHUPDOUDGLDWLRQ
W\SHVRI

YLVLEOHVSHFWUXP
VSHFWUDOFODVV

6SHFWUDOOLQH


VSHFWUDOUHVROXWLRQ


<<<PAGE 1473>>>

VSHFWUDOW\SH


WHPSHUDWXUHDQG
VSHFWURJUDSK
VSHFWURJUDSKV
6SHFWURPHWHU
VSHFWURVFRSH
6SHFWURVFRSLFELQDU\

VSHFWURVFRSLFELQDU\V\VWHPV
6SHFWURVFRSLFSDUDOOD[
6SHFWURVFRS\

VSHFWUXP












DEVRUSWLRQ




HPLVVLRQ





6SHHG














DYHUDJH




DYHUDJHVSHHG
HVFDSH


LQXQLWV
LQVWDQWDQHRXV
PROHFXODU

RIOLJKW







RIVRXQG

URRWPHDQVTXDUHUPV
XQLWVRI

ZDYH


6SHHGRIOLJKW





LQDYDFXXPUHODWLYLW\


6SHHGRIVRXQG
6SKHULFDODEHUUDWLRQ
6SKHULFDOVXUIDFH

6SKHULFDOV\PPHWU\

VSKHURLGDOFRPSRQHQW
6SLFD
VSLFXOH
VSLQ


RIHOHFWURQ
6SLQTXDQWXPQXPEHU
VSLUDODUP
WUDLOLQJ
VSLUDODUPV


6SLUDOGHQVLW\ZDYH
VSLUDOGHQVLW\ZDYHV
VSLUDOJDOD[LHV




EDUUHG
GDUNPDWWHULQ
JURXSVRI
OXPLQRVLW\RI
6SLUDOJDOD[\

VSLUDOQHEXODH
6SLW]HU6SDFH7HOHVFRSH
6SRQWDQHRXVHPLVVLRQ
VSULQJWLGHV
6SULQJV
VSURFHVV
66
VWDELOLW\

6WDEOHHTXLOLEULXP
6WDEOHLVRWRSHV
VWDQGDUGFDQGOH
VWDQGDUGFDQGOHV
6WDQGDUGGHYLDWLRQ
6WDQGDUGPRGHO
6WDQGDUG6I
6WDQGDUG6RODU0RGHO
VWDQGLQJZDYH
6WDQGLQJZDYHV
HOHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYHV
RIOLJKW
VLQXVRLGDO
VRXQGZDYHV
VWDU
























PDLQVHTXHQFH




VWDUFDWDORJV
6WDUFOXVWHU
JOREXODU
VWDUFOXVWHUV
VWDUFRXQWV

VWDUIRUPDWLRQ






PRGHOLQJ
REVHUYDWLRQDOHYLGHQFHRI
UDWHRI


UHJLRQVRI

VHOISURSDJDWLQJ
]HURDJHPDLQVHTXHQFH=$06
VWDUV\VWHP

VWDUEXUVWJDOD[LHV
6WDUEXUVWJDOD[\
6WDUOLJKW


6WDUV
VWDUV
























ELQDU\






EULJKWQHVV




FRORURI
FRQVWHOODWLRQV
+HUW]VSUXQJ5XVVHOOGLDJUDP
6WDUV
PDVVRI
VWDUV
QHXWURQ





QHXWURQVWDU



SURWRVWDU

UDGLDWLRQFXUYHV
UHGJLDQWV
VWDUEXUVWJDOD[\
VXSHUJLDQWV


<<<PAGE 1474>>>

VXSHUQRYD






ZKLWHGZDUIV



6WHDP
6WHIDQ-RVHI
6WHIDQ%ROW]PDQQFRQVWDQW
6WHIDQ%ROW]PDQQHTXDWLRQ

6WHIDQ%ROW]PDQQODZ

VWHOODUGLVN
6WHOODUHYROXWLRQ



WKHRU\RI
VWHOODUOXPLQRVLWLHV
6WHOODUQXFOHRV\QWKHVLV

6WHOODUSDUDOOD[
6WHOODUSRSXODWLRQV
6WHOODUUHPQDQW
VWHOODUVWUXFWXUH



HQHUJ\JHQHUDWLRQ

HQHUJ\WUDQVSRUW
HTXDWLRQVRI

K\GURVWDWLFHTXLOLEULXP

6WHOODUZLQG
VWHOODUZLQGV

6WLPXODWHGHPLVVLRQ
6WRQHKHQJH
VWRUPV
6WUDLJKWOLQHPRWLRQ
YHORFLW\
6WUDLQ
VWUDWD
VWUHDPV
6WUHVV
VWUHVVHV
6WULQJV
VWURQJIRUFH
6WURQJLQWHUDFWLRQ
VWURQJQXFOHDUIRUFH
6XEDUXWHOHVFRSH
VXEGXFWLRQ
VXEGXFWLRQ]RQH
VXEGZDUI
6XEJLDQW
6XEJLDQWEUDQFK
6XEOLPDWLRQ
VXEVRODUSRLQW
6XEWUDFWLRQ
VXFFHVVLRQ
6XOIXU
VXOIXUGLR[LGH
VXOIXULFDFLG
6XPPHUVROVWLFH
6XQ

















DEVRUSWLRQOLQHVRI
DFWLYH


DQJXODUVL]HRI
DWPRVSKHUHRI

FODVVLILFDWLRQVRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI


FRQYHFWLRQDQG
GHQVLW\RI





GLDPHWHURI

HVFDSHVSHHGIURP
HYROXWLRQRI



IHDWXUHVRI

JUDYLW\RI
LQWHULRURI

OXPLQRVLW\RI



PDVVRI





QHXWULQRVRI
RUELWRI

RVFLOODWLRQV

SDWKRI
SK\VLFDOSURSHUWLHVRI
UDGLDWLRQRI
UDGLXVRI



UHJLRQVRI


URWDWLRQRI

VSHFWUXPRI


VWUXFWXUHRI





VXUIDFHJUDYLW\RI
WHPSHUDWXUHRI




6XQOLJKW

VXQVSRW
6XQVSRWF\FOH
VXQVSRWV
VXSHUFOXVWHU

VXSHUFOXVWHUV

6XSHUFRPSXWHUV
VXSHUJLDQW



PDVVORVVIURPUHG
VXSHUJLDQWV

6XSHUJUDQXODWLRQ
6XSHULRUFRQMXQFWLRQ
VXSHULRUSODQHWV
6XSHUPDVVLYHEODFNKROH


JDOD[\IRUPDWLRQDQG
LQJDODFWLFQXFOHL
VXSHUQRYD









OXPLQRVLW\RI

W\SHID


W\SHIE
W\SHII

ZKLWHGZDUI

6XSHUQRYD$
6XSHUQRYDH[SORVLRQ


VXSHUQRYDUHPQDQW


&UDE
.HSOHU
6XSHUQRYDH






6XSHUSRVLWLRQ
6XSHUSRVLWLRQSULQFLSOH
VXUIDFHDUHD

VXUIDFHWHPSHUDWXUH


VXUIDFHZDWHU
6ZLIW7XWWOH&RPHW
6\PPHWU\




6\QFKURQRXVRUELW
V\QFKURQRXVURWDWLRQ
RI0HUFXU\
RI3OXWR
V\QFKURWURQUDGLDWLRQ


6\VWHP















6\VWHPV






<<<PAGE 1475>>>




HQHUJ\RI


LVRODWHG
RUGHUHG
T
7GZDUIV
77DXULVWDU
7DLORIFRPHW
WDQJHQWLDOYHORFLW\
WDXQHXWULQR
WD[RQRP\
7D\ORU-RVHSK
7HFKQHWLXP
7HFKQHWLXP
WHFKQRORJ\

WHFWRQLFSODWHV
WHFWRQLFV
WHOHVFRSH









DQJXODUPDJQLILFDWLRQ
&DVVHJUDLQ
GHILQHG
IRFXVRI
*DOLOHDQ
+DOH
KLJKHQHUJ\
KLJKUHVROXWLRQ
LQIUDUHG


LQWHUIHURPHWU\
LQYHQWLRQRI
OLJKWJDWKHULQJSRZHURI
QHXWULQR
1HZWRQLDQ
RSWLFDO


SKRWRPHWU\
UDGLR


UHIOHFWLQJ
UHIUDFWLQJ
UHIUDFWRU
UHVROXWLRQ


UHVROYLQJSRZHURI
6FKPLGW
VL]HRI

XOWUDYLROHW
7HOHVFRSHV



+XEEOH6SDFH7HOHVFRSH

UHVROXWLRQRI
7HPSHUDWXUH





















DEVROXWH

DWPRVSKHULF


EODFNERG\UDGLDWLRQDQG
HQHUJ\DQG
HTXLOLEULXPEODFNERG\
PDVVDQG

PHDQIUHHSDWKDQG
RIVWDUV






RQ0DUV
VSHFLILFKHDWDQG
VSHFWUDOW\SHDQG
7HPSHUDWXUHJUDGLHQW


7HPSHUDWXUHLQYHUVLRQ
7HQVLRQ
7HUUHVWULDO3ODQHW)LQGHU73)
WHUUHVWULDOSODQHWV

IRUPDWLRQRI

LQWHULRUVRI
VXUIDFHVRI
7KHRUHWLFDOPRGHO
7KHRU\









7KHRU\RIHYHU\WKLQJ72(
7KHRU\RIUHODWLYLW\

7KHUPDOFRQGXFWLYLW\
WKHUPDOHQHUJ\



DEVROXWH]HUR
KHDW
WHPSHUDWXUH


7KHUPDOHTXLOLEULXP

7KHUPDOH[SDQVLRQ
YROXPH
WKHUPDOSUHVVXUH
WKHUPDOSXOVHV
7KHUPDOUDGLDWLRQ
7KHUPRG\QDPLFHTXLOLEULXP


7KHUPRG\QDPLFV

HQWURS\
ILUVWODZRI
ODZVRI
VHFRQGODZRI
WKHUPRQXFOHDUIXVLRQ
7KHUPRQXFOHDUUHDFWLRQV
7KLQOHQV
IRFDOOHQJWK
7KRPVRQVFDWWHULQJ
7KUHVKROGHQHUJ\
7KUXVW
7KXEDQ7KXQGHUVWRUPV
7LGDOEXOJH
WLGDOEXOJHV
WLGDOIRUFHV

WLGDOIULFWLRQ
WLGH
7LGHV
7LPH




























EHJLQQLQJRI

GLODWLRQ

HTXDWLRQRI


JUDYLW\DQG

ORRNEDFN
PHDVXUHPHQWRI


RIHYHQWV
3ODQFN

SURSHUWLPH

UHODWLYLW\DQG


VLGHUHDO
VLPXOWDQHLW\
XQFHUWDLQW\SULQFLSOH

XQLWVRI



7LPHGHOD\
7LPHGLODWLRQ

SURSHUWLPH
WLVVXH
WLWDQLXP
7LWLXV%RGH5XOH
712V
7RUTXH
DQJXODUPRPHQWXPDQG
7RWDODQJXODUPRPHQWXP

7RWDOHOHFWULFFKDUJH
7RWDOHQHUJ\


7RWDOIRUFH
7RWDOLQWHUQDOUHIOHFWLRQ
IUXVWUDWHG
7RWDONLQHWLFHQHUJ\
WRWDOOXPLQRVLW\

7RWDOPDVV


<<<PAGE 1476>>>





7RWDOPHFKDQLFDOHQHUJ\
7RWDOPRPHQWXP
7RWDOVRODUHFOLSVH
WRXFK
7UDFHUV
WUDGHZLQGV
7UDMHFWRU\
7UDQVIHURIKHDW
UDGLDWLRQ
7UDQVLHQWV
WUDQVLW
ORZHU
XSSHU
7UDQVLWLRQV


DOORZHG
YLEUDWLRQDO
7UDQVLWV
SODQHWDU\
VRODU
VWHOODU
WUDQVODWLRQ
7UDQVPLVVLRQ
7UDQV1HSWXQLDQ2EMHFWV712V
7UDQVSDUHQF\
7UDQVYHUVH'RSSOHUVKLIW
WUDQVYHUVHZDYHV
7UDYHOLQJZDYHV
IUHTXHQF\RI
7U(6
7ULDQJXODWLRQ
WULJRQRPHWU\
WULWLXP
7URMDQDVWHURLGV
7URSLFDO\HDU
WURXJKV
WVXQDPL
7XOO\)LVKHUUHODWLRQ

7XQJXVNDHYHQW
7XUEXOHQFH

DWPRVSKHULF
JDV
WZLQNOLQJ
7\FKR%UDKH
U
8OWUD'HHS)LHOG
8OWUDYLROHWDVWURQRP\
XOWUDYLROHWOLJKW
8OWUDYLROHWUDGLDWLRQ

8O\VVHVVSDFHFUDIW
XPEUD
8QFHUWDLQW\





8QFHUWDLQW\SULQFLSOH

8QLIRUPPRWLRQ
8QLWYHFWRUV
8QLWYROXPH



8QLWV








DVWURQRPLFDO

DWRPLFPDVV
RIUDGLDWLRQ
8QLYHUVDOFRQVWDQW
8QLYHUVDOJUDYLWDWLRQ8QLYHUVDOJUDYLWDWLRQDOFRQVWDQW
8QLYHUVDOODZRIJUDYLW\
XQLYHUVH











DFFHOHUDWLRQRI

DJHRI



ELJEDQJ






ELUWKRI
EODFNKROHV


FORVHG



FRPSRVLWLRQRI

FRVPRORJLFDOFRQVWDQWDQG
FULWLFDO

GHQVLW\RI





H[SDQVLRQRI





IDWHRI

IODW






JDOD[LHV








JHRFHQWULF
JHRPHWU\RI

PDWWHUGRPLQDWHG

QLJKWVN\

RSHQ



TXDVDUV


UDGLDWLRQLQ
UDGLDWLRQGRPLQDWHG
UHODWLYLW\DQG
VWDUV







8QVWDEOHHTXLOLEULXP
8SSHUPDQWOH
8UDQLXP
LVRWRSHV
8UDQXV



DWPRVSKHUHRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI
GLVFRYHU\RI
IHDWXUHVRI
LQWHULRURI
PDVVDQGUDGLXVRI
PDVVRI
PRRQVRI
UDGLXVRI
ULQJVRI
URWDWLRQRI
8UVD0DMRU
87

87&
V
VDFXXP


SHUIHFW
YDFXXPHQHUJ\
YDSRU
YDULDEOHVWDU

SXOVDWLQJ
YDULDWLRQ





VHFWRU




VHFWRUVXP
VHFWRUV

DUHD
FRPSRQHQW
FRPSRQHQWVRI
GLVSODFHPHQW
IRUFH
SRVLWLRQ

UHVXOWDQW
XQLW
YHORFLW\
]HUR
VHJD

UDGLDOYHORFLW\RI
VHORFLW\




















<<<PAGE 1477>>>

DQJXODUYHORFLW\

DYHUDJH





HVFDSH


IUHHIDOO
LQDSODQH
LQVWDQWDQHRXV
PRPHQWXPDQG
RI(DUWK


SHFXOLDU



UDGLDO









UHFHVVLRQDO

UHODWLYH





UHODWLYHYHORFLW\

UHODWLYLVWLFYHORFLW\WUDQVIRUPDWLRQ
VLPSOHKDUPRQLFPRWLRQ
VWUDLJKWOLQHPRWLRQ
WDQJHQWLDO
WUDQVYHUVH



ZDYH


VHORFLW\YHFWRUV
VHQHUDPLVVLRQV
VHQXV


DWPRVSKHUHRI
D[LVWLOWRI
EULJKWQHVVRI
FRPSRVLWLRQRI
GHQVLW\RI
IHDWXUHVRI
JUHHQKRXVHHIIHFWRQ
PDVVRI
RUELWRI
SURSHUWLHVRI
UDGLXVRI
UHWURJUDGHURWDWLRQ
VXUIDFHRI

VHUQDOHTXLQR[

VHU\/DUJH$UUD\V/$
VHU\/DUJH7HOHVFRSHV/7
YLEUDWLRQV
VLNLQJPLVVLRQV
YLROHWOLJKW
VLUJR&OXVWHU



YLULDOWKHRUHP




YLUWXDOSDUWLFOHVVLVFRVLW\

VLVLEOHJDOD[\
VLVLEOHOLJKW


VFDWWHUHG
VLVLEOHVSHFWUXP

VLVLRQ
VLVXDOELQDU\
V/$

YRLG
VRLGV
YRODWLOHPDWHULDO
YROFDQLFURFN
YROFDQLVP
RQ(DUWK
RQ0DUV
RQVHQXV
YROFDQRHV
VROFDQRV
VROWDJH
YROWDJHGLIIHUHQFH
VROWV
VROXPH











DQGGHQVLW\
XQLWYROXPH



XQLWVRI

W
ZDONLQJ
ZDUSGULYH
:DWHU





ERLOLQJ
GHQVLW\

GHQVLW\RI

IRUPV
KHDY\
RFHDQ
RQ(DUWK

RQ(XURSD
RQ0DUV
ZDWHUYDSRU
:DWW
ZDWWV
:DYHHTXDWLRQ
:DYHIXQFWLRQ
:DYHIXQFWLRQV
:DYHPRGHORIOLJKW
:DYHSURSDJDWLRQ
:DYHIRUP
:DYHIRUPV
KDUPRQLF
VWDQGLQJ
:DYHIURQW
:DYHOHQJWK












RIHOHFWURQV

RIUDGLRZDYHV
UHVW

:DYHOHQJWKV












RIHOHFWURPDJQHWLFZDYHV
:DYHSDUWLFOHGXDOLW\
:DYHV






DPSOLWXGH
DQGUHIUDFWLRQ
ERG\
FLUFXODU
FRPSUHVVLRQ

'RSSOHUHIIHFW
HOHFWURPDJQHWLF

HOHFWURQ

IUHTXHQF\

KHUW]
LQIUDUHG
LQWHQVLW\
LQWHUIHUHQFH
ORQJLWXGLQDO
ORQJLWXGLQDOZDYHV
PRWLRQ


PRWLRQRI

SKDVHRI
SODQH
SRZHURI
UDGLR


UDUHIDFWLRQ
UHIUDFWLRQ
UHVRQDQFH
VHLVPLF
VKHDU
VRXQG

VRXQGZDYHV

VSHHG


VSHHGRI


VWDQGLQJZDYHV
VXUIDFH


WUDQVYHUVH
WUDQVYHUVHZDYHV
W\SHVRI
ZDYHOHQJWK


ZHDNIRUFH
:HDNLQWHUDFWLRQ


<<<PAGE 1478>>>

ZHDNO\LQWHUDFWLQJPDVVLYHSDUWLFOHV:I03V
:HDWKHU
FRQYHFWLRQ
RFHDQFXUUHQWV
RQ(DUWK
ZLQG
ZHHN

:HLJKW


WUXH
:HLQEHUJ6WHYHQ
ZHVWHUOLHV
:KHHOHU-RKQ
ZKLWHGZDUI





KHOLXP

ZKLWHGZDUIV




ZKLWHOLJKW
:LHQ:LOKHOP
:LONLQVRQ0LFURZDYH$QLVRWURS\3UREH:0$3

:LOVRQ5REHUW
:LPSV
ZLQGV


SUHYDLOLQJ
WUDGH
:LQWHUVROVWLFH
:0$3






:ROODVWRQ:LOOLDP
:RRG
:RUN





DQGSRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\
KHDWDQG
XQLWVRI
:RUNIXQFWLRQ
ZRUOGOLQH
ZRUPKROH
X
[D[LV
;UD\ELQDULHV

;UD\EXUVWHU
;UD\EXUVWHUV
;UD\EXUVWV
;UD\OXPLQRVLW\

;UD\SKRWRQV
;UD\WHOHVFRSH
;UD\WHOHVFRSHV
Y
\D[LV
\HDU






*DODFWLF

OHDS
VLGHUHDOWURSLFDO
<HUNHVREVHUYDWRU\
<RXQJ7KRPDV
Z
=HHPDQHIIHFW
=HHPDQVSOLWWLQJ
]HQLWK
]HUR









DEVROXWH
ORQJLWXGH
RISRWHQWLDOHQHUJ\
=HURDJHPDLQVHTXHQFH=$06
]RGLDFDOOLJKW
=ZLFN\)ULW]


<<<PAGE 1479>>>

