
<<<PAGE 1>>>



<<<PAGE 2>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 i
SIXTH EDITION
Jerrold E. Marsden
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
Anthony Tromba
University of California, Santa Cruz
W. H. Freeman and Company ·New York

<<<PAGE 3>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 ii
Publisher: Ruth Baruth
Executive Editor: Terri Ward
Executive Marketing Manager: Jennifer Somerville
Associate Editor: Katrina Wilhelm
Senior Media Editor: Laura Capuano
Editorial Assistant: Tyler Holzer
Project Editor: Vivien Weiss
Art Director: Diana Blume
Director of Production: Ellen Cash
Illustration Coordinator: Bill Page
Illustrations: Network Graphics
Photo Editor: Ted Szczepanski
Compositor: MPS Limited, a Macmillan Company
Manufacturer: Quad Graphics
Cover Image: Robert Wilson
Politics is for the moment.
An equation is for eternity.
A. E INSTEIN
Some calculus tricks are quite easy.Some are enormously difﬁcult. The foolswho write the textbooks ofadvanced mathematics seldom take the troubleto show you how easy the easy calculations are.
S
ILVANUS P. T HOMPSON ,CALCULUS MADEEASY,MACMILLAN (1910)
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011931725
ISBN-13: 978-1-4292-1508-4
ISBN-10: 1-4292-1508-9
c/circlecopyrt2012, 2003, 1996, 1988, 1981, 1976 by W . H. Freeman and Company
All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaFirst printingW . H. Freeman and Company Publishers
41 Madison AvenueNew Y ork, NY 10010Houndmills, Basingstoke RG21 6XS, Englandwww.whfreeman.com

<<<PAGE 4>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 iii
Contents
Preface ix
Acknowledgements xiHistorical Introduction: A Brief Account xiiiPrerequisites and Notation xxiii
1The Geometry of Euclidean Space 1
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 1
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 19
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 31
1.4 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 52
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 60
Review Exercises for Chapter 1 70
2Differentiation 75
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 76
2.2 Limits and Continuity 88
2.3 Differentiation 105
2.4 Introduction to Paths and Curves 116
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 124
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 135
Review Exercises for Chapter 2 144
3Higher-Order Derivatives:
Maxima and Minima 149
3.1 Iterated Partial Derivatives 150
3.2 Taylor’s Theorem 158
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 166
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 185
3.5 The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional] 203
Review Exercises for Chapter 3 211
iii

<<<PAGE 5>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 iv
iv Contents
4Vector-Valued Functions 217
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 217
4.2 Arc Length 228
4.3 Vector Fields 236
4.4 Divergence and Curl 245
Review Exercises for Chapter 4 260
5Double and Triple Integrals 263
5.1 Introduction 263
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 271
5.3 The Double Integral Over More General Regions 283
5.4 Changing the Order of Integration 289
5.5 The Triple Integral 294Review Exercises for Chapter 5 304
6The Change of Variables Formula and
Applications of Integration 307
6.1 The Geometry of Maps from R2toR2308
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 314
6.3 Applications 329
6.4 Improper Integrals [Optional] 339
Review Exercises for Chapter 6 347
7Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces 351
7.1 The Path Integral 351
7.2 Line Integrals 358
7.3 Parametrized Surfaces 375
7.4 Area of a Surface 383
7.5 Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces 393
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 400
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics,
and Forms of Life 413
Review Exercises for Chapter 7 423

<<<PAGE 6>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 v
Contents v
8The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis 427
8.1 Green’s Theorem 428
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 439
8.3 Conservative Fields 453
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 461
8.5 Differential Forms 476
Review Exercises for Chapter 8 490
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 493
Index 533Photo Credits 545

<<<PAGE 7>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 8>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vii
To Jerrold E. Marsden, 1942--2010
Jerry Marsden, Carl F . Braun distinguished Professor at the
California Institute of Technology, Fellow of the Royal Society(as was Isaac Newton), and one of the world’ s pre-eminent
applied mathematicians, passed away on September 21, 2010,while working on the sixth edition of V ector Calculus. Jerry’ s
interests were unusually broad; his work inﬂuenced physicists,engineers, life scientists, and mathematicians across the scientiﬁcand engineering spectrum. In addition to his many publications(over 400 archival and conference papers and 21 books) andmajor scientiﬁc prizes, he was a brilliant expositor and teacher.He motivated and encouraged colleagues and students alike,around the world and across an astonishing array of disciplines.He was a wonderful person and a close friend for almost half acentury. He will be sorely missed.
—Anthony Tromba

<<<PAGE 9>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 10>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 ix
Preface
This text is intended for a one-semester course in the calculus of functions of several
variables and vector analysis, which is normally taught at the sophomore level. In addi-tion to making changes and improvements throughout the text, we have also attemptedto convey a sense of excitement, relevance, and importance of the subject matter.
Prerequisites
Sometimes courses in vector calculus are preceded by a ﬁrst course in linear algebra,but this is not an essential prerequisite. We require only the bare rudiments of matrixalgebra, and the necessary concepts are developed in the text. If this course is precededby a course in linear algebra, the instructor will have no difﬁculty enhancing the material.However, we do assume a knowledge of the fundamentals of one-variable calculus—theprocess of differentiation and integration and their geometric and physical meaning aswell as a knowledge of the standard functions, such as the trigonometric and exponentialfunctions.
The Role of Theory
The text includes much of the basic theory as well as many concrete examples andproblems. Some of the technical proofs for theorems in Chapters 2 and 5 are givenin optional sections that are readily available on the Book Companion Web Site atwww.whfreeman.com/marsdenvc6e (see the description on the next page). Section 2.2,on limits and continuity, is designed to be treated lightly and is deliberately brief. Moresophisticated theoretical topics, such as compactness and delicate proofs in integrationtheory, have been omitted, because they usually belong to a more advanced course inreal analysis.
Concrete and Student-Oriented
Computational skills and intuitive understanding are important at this level, and wehave tried to meet this need by making the book concrete and student-oriented. Forexample, although we formulate the deﬁnition of the derivative correctly, it is doneby using matrices of partial derivatives rather than abstract linear transformations. Wealso include a number of physical illustrations such as ﬂuid mechanics, gravitation,and electromagnetic theory, and from economics as well, although knowledge of thesesubjects is not assumed.
Order of Topics
A special feature of the text is the early introduction of vector ﬁelds, divergence, and curlin Chapter 4, before integration. Vector analysis often suffers in a course of this type,and the present arrangement is designed to offset this tendency. To go even further, onemight consider teaching Chapter 3 (Taylor’ s theorems, maxima and minima, Lagrangemultipliers) after Chapter 8 (the integral theorems of vector analysis).
New to This Edition
This sixth edition was completely redesigned, but retains and improves on the balancebetween theory, applications, optional material, and historical notes that was present inearlier editions.
ix

<<<PAGE 11>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 x
x Preface
We are excited about this new edition of V ector Calculus, especially the inclusion of
many new exercises and examples. The exercises have been graded from less difﬁcult
to more difﬁcult, allowing instructors to have more ﬂexibility in assigning practiceproblems. The modern redesign emphasizes the pedagogical features, making the textmore concise, student-friendly, and accessible. The quality of the art work has beensigniﬁcantly improved, especially for the crucial three-dimensional ﬁgures, to betterreﬂect key concepts to students. We have also trimmed some of the historical material,making it more relevant to the mathematics under discussion. Finally, we have movedsome of the more difﬁcult discussions in the ﬁfth edition—such as those on ConservationLaws, the derivation of Euler’ s Equation of a Perfect Fluid, and a discussion of the HeatEquation—to the Book Companion Web Site. We hope that the reader will be equallypleased.
Supplements
The following electronic and print supplements are available with V ector Calculus, Sixth
Edition:
1.Book Companion Web Site. www.whfreeman.com/marsdenvc6e The Book
Companion Web Site contains the following materials:
•Additional Content contains additional material suitable for projects as well as
technical proofs and sample examinations with complete solutions. Also
included are discussions of the second derivative test for constrained extrema, alook at Kepler’ s laws and the solution to the two-body problem, a furtherdiscussion of Feynman’ s view of The Principle of Least Action and of how catsfall and astronauts reorient themselves in space, a look at some furtherdifferential equations in Mechanics, and an examination of Green’ s functionmethods in partial differential equations.
•PowerPoint and KeyNote Slides for instructors to use in presentations of the
text’ s ﬁgures, as well as section-by-section summaries.
•L
ATEX and PDF Files of Sample Exams (on instructor’ s password-protected site)
2.Student Study Guide with Solutions. This student guide contains helpful hints
and summaries for the material in each section, and the solutions to selectedproblems. Problems whose solutions appear in the Student Study Guide have acolored number in the text for easy reference. The guide has been revised and resetfor the Sixth Edition of V ector Calculus.
3.Instructor’s Manual with Solutions. This supplement contains material available
only to instructors. This includes summaries of material and additional worked-outexamples that are helpful in the preparation of lectures. It also contains additionalsolutions to problems and sample exams (some of them with complete solutions).
4.Final Exam Questions. There are practice exams available on the Book
Companion Web Site as well as in the Instructor’ s Manual. The level and choice oftopics and the lengths of ﬁnal exams will vary from instructor to instructor. Workingthese problems requires a knowledge of most of the main material of the book,and solving 10 of these problems should take the reader about 3 hours to complete.
Jerry Marsden and Tony Tromba,Caltech and UC Santa Cruz, Summer 2010.

<<<PAGE 12>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xi
Acknowledgments
Many colleagues and students in the mathematical community have made valuable
contributions and suggestions since this book was begun. An early draft of the book waswritten in collaboration with Ralph Abraham. We thank him for allowing us to drawupon his work. It is impossible to list all those who assisted with this book, but we wishespecially to thank Michael Hoffman and Joanne Seitz for their help on earlier editions.We also received valuable comments from Mary Anderson, John Ball, Patrick Brosnan,Andrea Brose, David Drasin, Gerald Edgar, Michael Fischer, Frank Gerrish, MohammadGohmi, Jenny Harrison, Jan Hogendijk, Jan-Jaap Oosterwijk, and Anne van Weerden(Uterecht), David Knudson, Richard Kock, Andrew Lenard, William McCain, GordonMcLean, David Merriell, Jeanette Nelson, Dan Norman, Keith Phillips, Anne Perleman,Oren Walter Rosen, Kenneth Ross, Ray Sachs, Diane Sauvageot, Joel Smoller, FrancisSu, Melvyn Tews, Ralph and Bob Tromba, Steve Wan, Alan Weinstein, John Wilker,and Peter Zvengrowski. The students and faculty of Austin Community College deservea special note of thanks, as do our students at both Caltech and UC Santa Cruz.
We owe a very special thanks to Stefan Hildebrandt and Robert Palais for their
historical advice.
We are grateful to the following instructors who have provided detailed reviews of
the manuscript: Dr. Michael Barbosu, SUNY Brockport; Brian Bradie, ChristopherNewport University; Mike Daven, Mount Saint Mary; Elias Deeba, University ofHouston–Downtown; John Feroe, Vassar; David Gurari, Case Western Reserve; AlanHorowitz, Penn State; Rhonda Hughes, Bryn Mawr; Frank Jones, Rice University; LeslieKay, Virginia Tech; Richard Laugesen, University of Michigan; Namyong Lee, Min-nesota State University; Tanya Leiese, Rose Hullman Institute; John Lott, University ofMichigan; Gerald Paquin, Universit´ ed uQ u ´ ebec ` a Montr´ eal; Joan Rand Moschovakis,
Occidental College; A. Shadi Tahvildar-Zadeh, Princeton University; Howard Swann,San Jose State University; Denise Szecsei, Stetson University; Edward Taylor, Wes-leyan; and Chaogui Zhang, Case Western Reserve. For the ﬁfth edition, we want tothank all the reviewers, but especially Andrea Brose, UCLA, for her detailed and valu-able comments. For the present edition we would like to thank Eliot Brenner, Universityof Minnesota; Bueno Cachadina Maribel, UCSB; Evan Merrill Bullock, Rice University;Xiaodong Cao, Cornell University; Der-Chen Chang, Georgetown University; LennyFukshansky, Claremont McKenna College; Ralph Kaufmann, Purdue University; Mo-hammed Kazemi, University of North Carolina; Min-Lin Lo, California State UniversitySan Bernardino; Douglas Meade, University of South Carolina; Steven Miller, BrownUniversity; Doug Moore, UCSB; Eric J. Moore, University of Toronto Scarborough;Peter Nyikos, University of South Carolina; Olga Radko, UCLA; David Russell, Vir-ginia Tech; Francisco J. Sayas, University of Minnesota; Ryan Scott, Rice University;Shagi Di Shih, University of Wyoming; Joel Spruck, Johns Hopkins University; GraemeWilkin, Johns Hopkins University; I Wu, Johns Hopkins University. Most important ofall are the readers and users of this book whose loyalty for over 35 years has made thesixth edition possible.
A ﬁnal word of thanks goes to those who helped in the preparation of the manuscript
and the production of the book. For the earlier editions, we thank Connie Calica, NoraLee, Marnie McElhiney, Ruth Suzuki, Ikuko Workman, and Esther Zack for their ex-cellent typing of various versions and revisions of the manuscript; Herb Holden of
xi

<<<PAGE 13>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xii
xii Acknowledgements
Gonzaga University and Jerry Kazdan of the University of Pennsylvania for suggesting
and preparing early versions of the computer-generated ﬁgures; Jerry Lyons and HollyHodder for their roles as our previous mathematics editors; Christine Hastings for edi-torial supervision; and Trumbull Rogers for his expert copyediting.
For the sixth edition we would like to acknowledge the strong support of our acqui-
sitions editor Terri Ward, our project editor Katrina Wilhelm, and once again VivienWeiss, our copy and production editor, as well as Brittney Corrigan-McElroy, with-out all of whose dedicated and talented efforts this new edition would not have beenpossible. The addition of so many excellent new exercises was made possible by thecontributions of Corey Shanbrom and Paul Tokorcheck, both of whom have extensiveexperience teaching out of this text.
Finally, the current edition would have been impossible without the tireless efforts
and total dedication of Wendy McKay and Naﬁseh Khoram as well as the generoussupport of the California Institute of Technology. Jerry Marsden was particularly proudto be associated with this outstanding institution.

<<<PAGE 14>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xiii
Historical Introduction:
A Brief Account
This, therefore, is Mathematics; she reminds you of the invisible form of the soul; she
gives life to her own discoveries; she awakens the mind and puriﬁes the intellect; she
brings light to our intrinsic ideas; she abolishes oblivion and ignorance which is oursby birth. ---Proclus, c. 450
Cum Deus Calculat Fit Mundus.(As God calculates, so the world is created ). ---Leibniz, c. 1700
The word mathematics derives from the Greek word mathema, meaning knowledge,
cognition, understanding, or perception, suggesting that the study of what we now call
mathematics began by asking questions about the world. In fact, the historical evidencesuggests that mathematics began about 2700 years ago as an attempt to comprehendnature. Unfortunately, in most mathematical expositions, historical motivations andcontexts are often sacriﬁced. In this new edition, the authors continue to address thisproblem by including the discussion of historical and contextual material where appro-priate. Therefore, before we dive into the mathematics of V ector Calculus, we brieﬂy
discuss the development of mathematics prior to and including the discovery of calculus.
Egyptian, Babylonian, and Greek Mathematics
It is generally acknowledged that mathematics developed in the seventh and sixth cen-turies
B.C., somewhat after the Greeks had developed a uniform alphabet. This is not to
say, however, that mathematical knowledge did not exist before the Greeks. In fact,the Egyptians and Babylonians knew many empirical facts centuries before the rise ofthe Greek civilization. For example, they could solve quadratic equations, compute theareas of certain geometric ﬁgures, such as squares, rectangles, and triangles, and theypossessed a reasonably good formula for the area of a circle, using the value of 3.16 forπ. They also knew how to compute certain volumes like the size of cubes, rectangles,
rectangular solids, cones, cylinders, and (not surprisingly) pyramids. The ancients werealso acquainted with the Pythagorean theorem (at least empirically).
The Greeks, who settled throughout the Mediterranean, must have played an
important role in preserving and spreading the mathematical knowledge of the Egyp-tians and the Babylonians. However, the Greeks were aware that there were differentformulas for the same area or volumes. For example, the Babylonians had one formulafor the volume of a frustum of a pyramid with a square base, and the Egyptians hadanother (see Figure 1).
It is not surprising that the Egyptians (with the experience in pyramid construc-
tion) had the correct formula. Now, given two formulas, it was clear that only one could
xiii

<<<PAGE 15>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xiv
xiv Historical Introduction
habL
Pﬁgure 1Volume of a frustum of a pyramid with a
square base: V=1
3h(a2+ab+b2).
be correct. But how could one decide such an answer? Certainly it is not a question
for debate, as would be the question of the quality of works of art. It is likely that thenecessity to determine the answers to such questions is what led to the development ofmathematical proof and to the method of deductive reasoning.
The person usually credited for the invention of rigorous mathematical proof
was a merchant named Thales of Miletus (624–548
B.C.). It is Thales who is said
to be the creator of Greek geometry, and it was this geometry (earth measure) as anabstract mathematical theory (rather than a collection of empirical facts) supported byrigorous deductive proofs that was one of the turning points of scientiﬁc thinking. It ledto the creation of the ﬁrst mathematical model for physical phenomena.
For example, one of the most beautiful geometric theories developed during
antiquity was that of conic sections. See Figure 2.
Conics include the straight line, circle, ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola. Their discov-
ery is attributed to Menaechmus, a member of the school of the great Greek philosopherPlato. Plato, a student of Socrates, founded his school The Academy (see Figure 3) in a sa-
cred area of the ancient city of Athens, called Hekadameia (after the hero Hekademos).All later academies obtained their name from this institution, which existed withoutinterruption for about 1000 years until it was dissolved by the Roman EmperorJustinian in 529
C.E.
A
B
C
Dﬁgure 2The conic sections: (A) hyperbola,
(B) parabola, (C) ellipse, (D) circle.

<<<PAGE 16>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xv
Historical Introduction xv
ﬁgure 3Plato’s Academy
(mosaic found in Pompeii, Villa
of T. Siminius Stephanus,86×85 cm, Naples,
Archaeological Museum). Withcertainty the seven men havebeen identiﬁed as Plato (thirdfrom the left) and six otherphilosophers, who are talkingabout the universe, the celestialspheres, and the stars. Themosaic shows Plato’s Academy,with the city of Athens in thebackground. It is probably acopy (from the ﬁrst century
B.C.)
of a Hellenistic painting.
Plato suggested the following problem to his students:
Explain the motion of the heavenly bodies by some geometrical theory.Why was this a question of interest and puzzlement for the Greeks? Observed
from the Earth, these motions appear to be quite complicated. The motions of the
sun and the moon can be roughly described as circular with constant speed, but the de-viations from the circular orbit were troublesome to the Greeks and they felt challengedto ﬁnd an explanation for these irregularities. The observed orbits of the planets areeven more complicated, because as they go through a revolution, they appear to reversedirection several times.
The Greeks sought to understand this apparently wild motion by means of their
geometry. Eudoxus, Hipparchus, and then Apollonius of Perga (262–190
B.C.) suggested
that the celestial orbits could be explained by combinations of circular motion (that is,through the construction of curves called epicycles traced out by circles moving onother circles). This idea was to become the most important astronomical theory ofthe next two thousand years. This theory, known by us through the writings of theGreek astronomer Ptolemy of Alexandria, ultimately becomes known as the “Ptolemaictheory.” See Figures 4 and 5.
Most of Greek geometry was codiﬁed by Euclid in his Elements (of Mathematics).
Actually the Elements consist of thirteen books, in which Euclid collected most of
the mathematical knowledge of his age (circa 300
B.C.), transforming it into a lucid,
logically developed masterpiece. In addition to the Elements, some of Euclid’ s other
writings were also handed down to us, including his Optics and the Catoptrica (theory
of mirrors).
The success of Greek mathematics had a profound effect on views of nature. The
Platonists, or followers of Plato, distinguished between the world of ideas and the worldof physical objects. Plato was the ﬁrst to propose that ultimate truth or understanding

<<<PAGE 17>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xvi
xvi Historical Introduction
ﬁgure 4Woodcut from Georg von Peurbach’s
Theoricae novae planetarum, edited by Oronce
Fine as a teaching text for the University of Paris
(1515). It was the canonical description of theheavens until the end of the sixteenth century,and even Copernicus was to a large extentunder the inﬂuence of this work. Peurbachdescribed the solid sphere representations ofPtolemaic planetary models, which he probablybased on Ibn al-Haytham’s work “On theconﬁguration of the world” (translated into Latinin the thirteenth century). The same frontispiecewas used for the Sacrosbosco edition of the ﬁrstfour books of Euclid’s Elements (in excerpts),
which appeared under the title Textus de
Sphaera in Paris (1521).
ﬁgure 5Ptolemy observing the stars with
a quadrant, together with an allegoricAstronomia. (From Gregorius Reish, Margarita
Philosophica nova, Strasbourg, 1512, an earlycompendium of philosophy and science.) Inthose days, Ptolemy was often depicted as aking, because he was erroneously thought to bedescended from the Ptolemaic dynasty thatruled Egypt after Alexander.
could not come from the material world, which is constantly subject to change, but only
from mathematical models or constructs. Thus, infallible knowledge could be attainedonly through mathematics. Plato not only wished to use mathematics in the study ofnature, but he actually went so far as to attempt to substitute mathematics fornature.
For Plato, reality lies only within the realm of ideas, especially mathematical ideas.
Not everyone in antiquity agreed with this point of view. Aristotle, a student of Plato,
criticized Plato’ s reduction of science to the study of mathematics. Aristotle thought thatthe study of the material world was one’ s primary source of reality. Despite Aristotle’ scritique, the view that mathematical laws governed the universe took a ﬁrm hold onclassical thought. The search for the mathematical laws of nature was underway.
After the death of Archimedes in 212
B.C., Greek civilization went into a period of
slow decline. The ﬁnal blow to Greek civilization came in 640 A.D.with the Moslem

<<<PAGE 18>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xvii
Historical Introduction xvii
conquest of Egypt. The remaining Greek texts housed in the great library in Alexandria
were burned. Those scholars who survived migrated to Constantinople (now part ofTurkey), which had become the capitol of the Eastern Roman Empire. It was in thisgreat city that what survived of Greek civilization was preserved for its rediscovery byEuropean civilization some ﬁve hundred years later.
Indian and Arabian Mathematics
Mathematical activity did not, however, cease with the decline of Greek civilization. Inthe middle of the sixth century, somewhere in the Ganges Valley in India, our modernsystem of numeration evolved. The Indians developed a number system based on ten,with ten rather abstract symbols from zero to nine looking “roughly” as they do today.They developed rules for addition, multiplication, and division (as we have today), asystem inﬁnitely superior to the Roman abacus, which was used (by a special classof servants called arithmeticians) throughout Europe until the ﬁfteenth century. See
Figure 6.
After the fall of Egypt, came the rise of Arab civilization centered in Baghdad. Schol-
ars from Constantinople and India were invited to study and to share their knowledge.It was through these contacts that the Arabs came to acquire the learning of the ancientsas well as the newly discovered Indian system of numeration. See Figure 7.
ﬁgure 6Arithmetician performing a calculation
on a counter-abacus.
ﬁgure 7Detail from the Codex
Vigilanus (976 A.D. northern
Spain). The ﬁrst known
occurrence of the nine Indo-Arabic numerals in WesternEurope. (Escurial Library, Madrid.)


<<<PAGE 19>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xviii
xviii Historical Introduction
It was the Arabs who gave us the name Algebra, which comes from the book by
the astronomer Mohammed ibn Musa al-Khuwarizmi titled “Al-Jabr w’al muqabola,”
which means “restoring” or “balancing” (equations). Al-Khuwarizmi is also responsiblefor a second profoundly inﬂuential book entitled “Kitab al jami’ wa’l tafriq bi hisab alhind” (Indian Technique of Addition and Subtraction), which described and clariﬁedthe Indian decimal place value system.
The decline of Arab civilization coincided with the rise of European civilization.
The dawn of the modern age began when Richard the Lionhearted reached the wallsof Jerusalem. From approximately 1192 through around 1270, the Christian knightsbrought the learning of the “inﬁdels” back to Europe. Around 1200–1205, Leonardo ofPisa (also known as Fibonacci), who had traveled extensively in Africa and Asia Minor,wrote his interpretation (in Latin) of Arabic and Greek mathematics. His historic textsbrought the work of al-Khuwarizmi and Euclid to the attention of a large audience inEurope.
European Mathematics
Around 1450 Johann Gutenberg invented the printing press with movable type. This,combined with the advent of linen and cotton paper obtained from the Chinese, dramat-ically increased the rate of the dissemination of knowledge. The steep rise in trade andmanufacturing fueled the growth of wealth and dramatic change in European societiesfrom feudal to city-states. In Italy, the mother of the Renaissance, we see the rise ofextraordinarily wealthy states such as Venice under the Doges and Florence under theMedicis.
The needs of the rising merchant class accelerated the adoption of the Indian system
of numeration. The teachings of the Catholic Church, which rested on absolute authorityand dogma, began to be challenged by the ideas of Plato. From Plato, scholars learned thatthe world was rational and could be understood, and that the means of understandingnature was through mathematics. But this sharply contradicted the teachings of thechurch, which taught that God designed the universe. The only possible resolution ofthis apparent contradiction was that “God designed the universe mathematically” or that“God is a mathematician.”
It is perhaps surprising how much this point of view inspired the work of many
sixteenth- to eighteenth-century mathematicians and scientists. For if this were indeedthe case, then by understanding the mathematical laws of the universe, one could comecloser to an understanding of the Creator himself. Believe it or not, this point of viewsurvives to this day. The following is a quote from Paul Dirac, a Nobel Prize–winningphysicist and a creator of modern quantum mechanics.
It seems to be one of the fundamental features of nature that fundamental physical
laws are described in terms of a mathematical theory of great beauty and power,needing quite a high standard of mathematics for one to understand it. You maywonder: Why is nature constructed along these lines? One can only answer thatour present knowledge seems to show that nature is so constructed. We simplyhave to accept it. One could perhaps describe the situation by saying that God isa mathematician of a very high order, and He used very advanced mathematics inconstructing the universe. Our feeble attempts at mathematics enable us tounderstand a bit of the universe, and as we proceed to develop higher and highermathematics we can hope to understand the universe better.
Mathematics began to see further advances and applications. In the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, al-Khuwarizmi’ s algebra was signiﬁcantly advanced by Cardano,
Vieta, and Descartes. The Babylonians had solved the quadratic equation, but now two

<<<PAGE 20>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xix
Historical Introduction xix
thousand years later, del Ferro and Tartaglia solved the cubic equation, which in turn
led to the discovery of imaginary numbers. These imaginary numbers were later toplay a fundamental role, as we shall see, in the development of vector calculus. In theearly seventeenth century, Descartes, perhaps motivated by the grid technique used byItalian fresco painters to locate points on a wall or canvas, created, in a moment of greatmathematical inspiration, coordinate (or analytic) geometry. This new mathematicalmodel enables one to reduce Euclid’ s geometry to algebra and provides a precise andquantitative method to describe and calculate with space curves and surfaces.
Early on, Archimedes’ great work in statics and equilibrium (centers of gravity,
the principle of the lever—which we study in this book) was absorbed and improvedupon, leading to dramatic engineering achievements. In a building spree that remainsastonishing to this day, engineering advances made possible the rise of an incrediblenumber of cathedrals throughout Europe, including the stunning Duomo in Florence,Notre Dame in Paris, and the Great Cathedral in Cologne, to mention a few. See Figure 8.
ﬁgure 8Duomo.
ﬁgure 9Nicolaus Copernicus
(1473–1543).However, as in Greek times, it was astronomy that was to give mathematics its greatest
impetus. It is not surprising that the Greek astronomers placed the Earth and not thesun at the center of our universe, because on a daily basis we see the sun both rise andset. Still, it is interesting to ask if the Greeks, who were such marvelous thinkers, atleast tested the heliocentric theory, which places the sun at the center of the universe.In fact, they did. In the third century
B.C., Aristarchus of Samus taught that the Earth
and other planets move in circular orbits around a ﬁxed sun. His hypotheses were, forseveral reasons, rejected. First, the opposing astronomers reasoned that if the Earth wereindeed moving, one should be able to sense it. Second, how would objects, circulatingwith us, be able to stay on a moving Earth? Third, why are the clouds not lagging behindthe moving Earth?
Such arguments were to be used again in the sixteenth century against the Polish
astronomer Nicolas Copernicus (see Figure 9), who in 1543 introduced the heliocentrictheory (the planets move in orbit around the sun). His book Revolutionibus Orbium
Coelestium (On the Revolution of the Heavenly Orbits) was to initiate the “Copernican
revolution” in science and to give the world a new word, revolutionary.

<<<PAGE 21>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xx
xx Historical Introduction
ﬁgure 10Johannes Kepler
(1571–1630).
ﬁgure 11The motion of Mars.
From Kepler’s Astronomia Nova
(1609).In 1619, the German astronomer Johannes Kepler (see Figure 10), using the astro-
nomical calculations of the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, showed that the planetary
orbits were in fact elliptical, the same ellipses that the Greeks had studied as abstractforms some 2000 years earlier (see Figure 11).
But Kepler’ s law of elliptical orbits was only one of three laws he discovered govern-
ing planetary motion. Kepler’ s second law states that if a planet moves from a pointAto another point Bin a certain amount of time T, and also moves from A
/primeto
B/primein the same time, and if Sis a focus of the orbital ellipse, then the sections SAB
areSA/primeB/primehave equal areas (see Figure 12). Kepler’ s third law was that the square of
B'
SB
AA'
ﬁgure 12Kepler’s second law.time Ta planetary body requires to complete an orbit is proportional to a3, where a
is the great axis of the elliptical orbit. In equation form, T2=Ka3, where Kis some
constant (we shall derive this law for circular orbits in Chapter 4).
Profound as these observations were, an explanation of why these laws held was
lacking. However, by the middle of the seventeenth century, it was fully understoodthat a change of velocity requires the action of forces, but how these forces inﬂuencedmotion was not at all clear. In 1674 Robert Hooke, in an attempt to explain Kepler’ slaws, assumed the existence of an attractive force the sun must exert on the plan-ets, a force that decreased with planetary distance. Hooke’ s theory, however, was onlyqualitative.
Newton
What was also seriously lacking was a quantitative, precise deﬁnition of both velocityand acceleration. This was ultimately solved by the invention of calculus by both IsaacNewton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (see Figure 13). Hooke was never able to achievean understanding of the profound ideas behind the inﬁnitesimal calculus. However,during the period of 1679–1680 Hooke discussed his ideas with Newton, including hisconjecture that the force the sun exerts on the planets was actually inversely proportionalto the square of the planetary distance.
After Sir Christopher Wren, amateur astronomer, architect of the city of London
and London’ s magniﬁcent St. Paul’ s Cathedral, issued a public challenge to “theoretically

<<<PAGE 22>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xxi
Historical Introduction xxi
ﬁgure 13Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716).
ﬁgure 14Isaac Newton, one of the greatest
scientiﬁc and mathematical intellects of all time,
created the notion of a vector through hisconception of forces as being vectorial. Hereyou see him depicted in 1725 (with his naturalhair) just two years before his death, leaﬁngthrough the pages of his masterpiece, thePhilosopiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,arguably the most inﬂuential and profoundscientiﬁc work ever written and the true startingpoint of vector calculus. (Source: Courtesy ofthe National Portrait Gallery, London)
determine” the orbits of the planets, Isaac Newton took a serious interest in the problem.
Perhaps acting on rumors, the great British astronomer Edmund Halley (1656–1743)in August 1684 visited Newton in Cambridge and asked him directly what the orbitof a planet would be under an inverse square force. Newton answered that it had tobe an ellipse. As the stunned Halley asked him how he knew this, Newton’ s famousreply was “Why I have calculated it.” Halley ultimately urged Newton to publish hisresults as a book, and these appeared in 1686 in Newton’ s now legendary Principia.
See Figure 15.
This book, often and justly referred to as the foundation of modern science, had
an immediate dramatic impact. Alexander Pope wrote:
Nature and nature’ s laws lay hid at night,
God said, “Let Newton be” and all was light.
In Figure 14, we see Newton holding open a copy of his Principia.
Although Newton did not use calculus in the Principia, convincing arguments
have been put forward that Newton originally used his calculus to derive the trajectories

<<<PAGE 23>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xxii
xxii Historical Introduction
ﬁgure 15The frontispiece of the
two-lines print of the Principia,
carrying the imprint “Prostat
apud plures Bibliopolas,” which issometimes called the “ﬁrst issue”of the ﬁrst edition. The “exportcopy” (with the three lines“Prostant Venales apud SamSmith ...aliosq; nonnullosBibliopolas”) is called the secondissue of the ﬁrst edition. Thisdistinction between the ﬁrst andsecond issues seems to be quiteunfounded. It has beensuggested that Halley made anagreement with Smithconcerning foreign sales; in fact,most of Smith’s ﬁfty copies wereapparently sold on thecontinent.
of the planetary orbits from the inverse square law.∗ThePrincipia provided profound
evidence that the universe, as the early Greeks had understood, was indeed designed
mathematically. Incidentally, it was Newton who ﬁrst conceptualized force as a vector,
although he provided no formal deﬁnition of what a vector was. Such a formal deﬁnitionhad to wait for William Rowan Hamilton, a century and a half after the Principia.
The invention of the calculus and the subsequent development of vector calculus was
the true beginning of modern science and technology, which has changed our world sodramatically. From the mathematics of Newton’ s mechanics to the profound intellectualconstructs of Maxwell’ s electrodynamics, Einstein’ s relativity, and Heisenberg’ s andSchr¨ odinger’ s quantum mechanics, we have seen the discoveries of radio, television,wireless communications, ﬂight, computers, space travel, and countless engineeringmarvels.
Underlying all these developments was mathematics, an exciting adventure of the
mind and a celebration of the human spirit. It is in this context that we begin our accountof vector calculus.
∗We shall study the problem of planetary orbits in Section 4.1 and further in the Internet supplement.

<<<PAGE 24>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xxiii
Prerequisites and Notation
We assume that students have studied the calculus of functions of a real variable, in-
cluding analytic geometry in the plane. Some students may have had some exposure tomatrices as well, although what we shall need is given in Sections 1.3 and 1.5.
We also assume that students are familiar with functions of elementary calculus,
such as sin x, cos x,e
x, and log x(we write log xor ln xfor the natural logarithm,
which is sometimes denoted logex). Students are expected to know, or to review as the
course proceeds, the basic rules of differentiation and integration for functions of onevariable, such as the chain rule, the quotient rule, integration by parts, and so forth.
We now summarize the notations to be used later. Students can read through these
quickly now, then refer to them later if the need arises.
The collection of all real numbers is denoted R. Thus Rincludes the integers, ...,
−3,−2,−1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...; the rational numbers, p/q, where pandqare integers
(q/negationslash=0); and the irrational numbers, such as√
2,π, and e. Members of Rmay be
visualized as points on the real-number line, as shown in Figure P .1.
ﬁgure P. 1The geometric
representation of points on the
real-number line.−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 2 3 e π1
2
When we write a∈Rwe mean that ais a member of the set R, in other words, that
ais a real number. Given two real numbers aandbwith a<b(that is, with aless than
b), we can form the closed interval [a,b], consisting of all xsuch that a≤x≤b, and
theopen interval (a,b), consisting of all xsuch that a<x<b. Similarly, we can form
half-open intervals ( a,b] and [ a,b) (Figure P .2).
ﬁgure P. 2The geometric
representation of the intervals
(a,b), (c,d), and (e ,f).ab c de f
Closed Open Half open
Theabsolute value of a number a∈Ris written |a|and is deﬁned as
|a|=/braceleftBigaifa≥0
−aifa<0.
For example, |3|=3, |−3|=3, |0|=0, and |−6|=6. The inequality |a+b|≤
|a|+| b|always holds. The distance from atobis given by |a−b|. Thus, the distance
from 6 to 10 is 4 and from −6 to 3 is 9.
If we write A⊂R, we mean Ais asubset ofR. For example, Acould equal the set
of integers {...,−3,−2,−1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...}. Another example of a subset of Ris the
setQof rational numbers. Generally, for two collections of objects (that is, sets) Aand
B,A⊂Bmeans Ais a subset of B; that is, every member of Ais also a member of B.
The symbol A∪Bmeans the union ofAandB, the collection whose members are
members of either AorB(or both). Thus,
{...,−3,−2,−1, 0}∪{ − 1, 0, 1, 2, ...}={...,−3,−2,−1, 0, 1, 2, ...}.
xxiii

<<<PAGE 25>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xxiv
xxiv Prerequisites and Notation
Similarly, A∩Bmeans the intersection ofAandB; that is, this set consists of those
members of AandBthat are in both AandB. Thus, the intersection of the two sets on
the preceding page is {−1, 0}.
We shall write A\Bfor those members of Athat are not in B. Thus,
{...,−3,−2,−1, 0}\{−1, 0, 1, 2, ...}={...,−3,−2}.
We can also specify sets as in the following examples:
{a∈R|ais an integer}={ ...,−3,−2,−1, 0, 1, 2, ...}
{a∈R|ais an even integer}={ ...,−2, 0, 2, 4, ...}
{x∈R|a≤x≤b}=[ a,b].
Afunction f:A→Bis a rule that assigns to each a∈Aone speciﬁc member f(a)o f
B. We call Athedomain offandBthetarget off. The set {f(x)|x∈A}consisting
of all the values of f(x) is called the range off. Denoted by f(A), the range is a subset
of the target B. It may be all of B, in which case fis said to be onto B. The fact that
the function fsends atof(a) is denoted by a/mapsto→f(a). For example, the function
f(x)=x3/(1−x) that assigns the number x3/(1−x) to each x/negationslash=1i nR can also
be deﬁned by the rule x/mapsto→x3/(1−x). Functions are also called mappings, maps,o r
transformations. The notation f:A⊂R→Rmeans that Ais a subset of Rand that
fassigns a value f(x)i nRto each x∈A. The graph offconsists of all the points
(x,f(x)) in the plane (Figure P .3).
(x,  f (x)) 
A  =  domainxy
Graph  of  f 
xﬁgure P. 3The graph of a function with
the half-open interval Aas domain.
The notation/summationtextn
i=1aimeans a1+···+ an, where a1,...,anare given numbers. The
sum of the ﬁrst nintegers is
1+2+···+n =n/summationdisplay
i=1i=n(n+1)
2.
Thederivative of a function f(x) is denoted f/prime(x), or
df
dx,

<<<PAGE 26>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 xxv
Prerequisites and Notation xxv
and the deﬁnite integral is written
/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx.
If we set y=f(x), the derivative is also denoted by
dy
dx.
Readers are assumed to be familiar with the chain rule, integration by parts, and other
basic facts from the calculus of functions of one variable. In particular, they should know
how to differentiate and integrate exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions.Short tables of derivatives and integrals, which are adequate for the needs of this text,are printed at the front and back of the book.
The following notations are used synonymously: e
x=expx,l nx=logx, and
sin−1x=arcsin x.
The end of a proof is denoted by the symbol ■, while the end of an example or remark
is denoted by the symbol ▲.

<<<PAGE 27>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 28>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 1
1
The Geometry of
Euclidean Space
Quaternions came from Hamilton ...and have been an unmixed evil to those who have
touched them in any way. Vector is a useless survival ...and has never been of the slightest
use to any creature. ---Lord Kelvin
In this chapter we consider the basic operations on vectors in two- and
three-dimensional space: vector addition, scalar multiplication, and the
dot and cross products. In Section 1.5 we generalize some of these no-tions to n-space and review properties of matrices that will be needed
in Chapters 2 and 3.
1.1Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space
Points P in the plane are represented by ordered pairs of real numbers ( a1,a2); the
numbers a1anda2are called the Cartesian coordinates of P . We draw two perpendicular
lines, label them as the xandyaxes, and then drop perpendiculars from P to these axes,
as in Figure 1.1.1. After designating the intersection of the xandyaxes as the origin
and choosing units on these axes, we produce two signed distances a1anda2as shown
in the ﬁgure; a1is called the xcomponent of P , and a2is called the ycomponent.
xy
a P
12 1
2a = ,( )
aa
ﬁgure 1.1.1 Cartesian
coordinates in the plane.Points in space may be similarly represented as ordered triples of real numbers. To
construct such a representation, we choose three mutually perpendicular lines that meet
at a point in space. These lines are called xaxis, yaxis, and zaxis, and the point at
which they meet is called the origin (this is our reference point). We choose a scale on
these axes, as shown in Figure 1.1.2.
The triple (0, 0, 0) corresponds to the origin of the coordinate system, and the arrows
on the axes indicate the positive directions. For example, the triple (2, 4, 4) representsa point 2 units from the origin in the positive direction along the xaxis, 4 units in the
positive direction along the yaxis, and 4 units in the positive direction along the zaxis
(Figure 1.1.3).
Because we can associate points in space with ordered triples in this way, we often
use the expression “the point ( a
1,a2,a3)” instead of the longer phrase “the point P
that corresponds to the triple ( a1,a2,a3).” We say that a1is the xcoordinate (or ﬁrst
1

<<<PAGE 29>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 2
2 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
123
3 21
1
2
3y
xz
ﬁgure 1.1.2 Cartesian coordinates in space.
xyz
2
46
4
44
4 2
2
2( ),,ﬁgure 1.1.3 Geometric representation of the point
(2, 4, 4) in Cartesian coordinates.
coordinate), a2is the ycoordinate (or second coordinate), and a3is the zcoordinate
(or third coordinate) of P . It is also common to denote points in space with the letters
x,y, and zin place of a1,a2, and a3. Thus, the triple ( x,y,z) represents a point whose
ﬁrst coordinate is x, second coordinate is y, and third coordinate is z.
We employ the following notation for the line, the plane, and three-dimensional
space:
(i) The real number line is denoted R1or simply R.
(ii) The set of all ordered pairs ( x,y) of real numbers is denoted R2.
(iii) The set of all ordered triples ( x,y,z) of real numbers is denoted R3.
When speaking of R1,R2, andR3simultaneously, we write Rn, where n=1, 2, or 3; or
Rm, where m=1, 2, 3. Starting in Section 1.5 we will also study Rnforn=4, 5, 6, ...,
but the cases n=1, 2, 3 are closest to our geometric intuition and will be stressed
throughout the book.
Vector Addition and Scalar Multiplication
The operation of addition can be extended from RtoR2andR3.F o rR3, this is done as
follows. Given the two triples ( a1,a2,a3) and ( b1,b2,b3), we deﬁne their sum to be
(a1,a2,a3)+(b1,b2,b3)=(a1+b1,a2+b2,a3+b3).

<<<PAGE 30>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 3
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 3
example 1 (1, 1, 1) +(2,−3, 4) =(3,−2, 5),
(x,y,z)+(0, 0, 0) =(x,y,z),
(1, 7, 3) +(a,b,c)=(1+a,7+b,3+c)▲
The element (0, 0, 0) is called the zero element (or just zero)o fR3. The element
(−a1,−a2,−a3) is the additive inverse (ornegative)o f( a1,a2,a3), and we will write
(a1,a2,a3)−(b1,b2,b3) for ( a1,a2,a3)+(−b 1,−b 2,−b 3).
The additive inverse, when added to the vector itself, of course produces zero:
(a1,a2,a3)+(−a1,−a2,−a3)=(0, 0, 0).
There are several important product operations that we will deﬁne on R3. One of
these, called the inner product, assigns a real number to each pair of elements of R3.
We shall discuss it in detail in Section 1.2. Another product operation for R3is called
scalar multiplication (the word “scalar” is a synonym for “real number”). This product
combines scalars (real numbers) and elements of R3(ordered triples) to yield elements of
R3as follows: Given a scalar αand a triple ( a1,a2,a3), we deﬁne the scalar multiple by
α(a1,a2,a3)=(αa1,αa2,αa3).
example 2 2(4,e,1 )=(2·4, 2·e,2·1)=(8, 2e,2 ) ,
6(1, 1, 1) =( 6 ,6 ,6 ) ,
1(u,v,w)=(u,v,w),
0(p,q,r)=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) ▲
Addition and scalar multiplication of triples satisfy the following properties:
(i) (αβ)(a1,a2,a3)=α[β(a1,a2,a3)] (associativity)
(ii) (α+β)(a1,a2,a3)=α(a1,a2,a3)+β(a1,a2,a3) (distributivity)
(iii)α[(a1,a2,a3)+(b1,b2,b3)]=α(a1,a2,a3)+α(b1,b2,b3) (distributivity)
(iv)α( 0 ,0 ,0 ) =(0, 0, 0) (property of zero)
(v) 0( a1,a2,a3)=(0, 0, 0) (property of zero)
(vi) 1( a1,a2,a3)=(a1,a2,a3) (property of the
unit element)
The identities are proven directly from the deﬁnitions of addition and scalar multi-
plication. For instance,
(α+β)(a1,a2,a3)=((α+β)a1,(α+β)a2,(α+β)a3)
=(αa1+βa1,αa2+βa2,αa3+βa3)
=α(a1,a2,a3)+β(a1,a2,a3).
ForR2, addition and scalar multiplication are deﬁned just as in R3, with the third
component of each vector dropped off. All the properties (i) to (vi) still hold.

<<<PAGE 31>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 4
4 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 3 Interpret the chemical equation 2NH 2+H2=2NH 3as a relation in the algebra of
ordered pairs.
solution We think of the molecule N xHy(xatoms of nitrogen, yatoms of hydrogen) as represented
by the ordered pair ( x,y). Then the chemical equation given is equivalent to 2(1, 2) +
(0, 2) =2(1, 3). Indeed, both sides are equal to (2, 6). ▲
Geometry of Vector Operations
Let us turn to the geometry of these operations in R2andR3. For the moment, we deﬁne
avector to be a directed line segment beginning at the origin; that is, a line segment with
speciﬁed magnitude and direction, and initial point at the origin. Figure 1.1.4 shows
several vectors, drawn as arrows beginning at the origin. In print, vectors are usuallydenoted by boldface letters such as a. By hand, we usually write them as /vectoraor simply as
a, possibly with a line or wavy line under it.
Using this deﬁnition of a vector, we associate with each vector athe point ( a
1,a2,
a3) where aterminates, and conversely, we can associate a vector awith each point
(a1,a2,a3) in space. Thus, we shall identify awith ( a1,a2,a3) and write a=(a1,a2,a3).
For this reason, the elements of R3not only are ordered triples of real numbers, but are
also regarded as vectors. The triple (0, 0, 0) is denoted 0. We call a1,a2, and a3the
components ofa, or when we think of aas a point, its coordinates.
Two vectors a=(a1,a2,a3) and b=(b1,b2,b3) are equal if and only if a1=
b1,a2=b2, and a3=b3. Geometrically this means that aandbhave the same direction
and the same length (or “magnitude”).
Geometrically, we deﬁne vector addition as follows. In the plane containing the
vectors a=(a1,a2,a3) and b=(b1,b2,b3) (see Figure 1.1.5), form the parallelogram
xyz
ﬁgure 1.1.4 Geometrically, vectors are thought
of as arrows emanating from the origin.
xyz
a
b
ba+ﬁgure 1.1.5 The geometry of vector addition.

<<<PAGE 32>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 5
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 5
z
xyv1 2+v
2vv1 2+vv1 v1v1v1 2v
2v
2v
ﬁgure 1.1.6 A physical interpretation of vector addition.
having aas one side and bas its adjacent side. The sum a+bis the directed line segment
along the diagonal of the parallelogram.
This geometric view of vector addition is useful in many physical situations, as we
shall see in the next section. For an easily visualized example, consider a bird or an
airplane ﬂying through the air with velocity v1, but in the presence of a wind with
velocity v2. The resultant velocity, v1+v2, is what one sees; see Figure 1.1.6.
To show that our geometric deﬁnition of addition is consistent with our algebraic
deﬁnition, we demonstrate that a+b=(a1+b1,a2+b2,a3+b3). We shall prove this
result in the plane and leave the proof in three-dimensional space to the reader. Thus,we wish to show that if a=(a
1,a2) and b=(b1,b2), then a+b=(a1+b1,a2+b2).
In Figure 1.1.7 let a=(a1,a2) be the vector ending at the point A, and let b=(b1,b2)
be the vector ending at point B. By deﬁnition, the vector a+bends at the vertex C of
parallelogram OBCA. To verify that a+b=(a1+b1,a2+b2), it sufﬁces to show that
the coordinates of C are ( a1+b1,a2+b2). The sides of the triangles OAD and BCG
are parallel, and the sides OA and BC have equal lengths, which we write as OA =BC.
These triangles are congruent, so BG =OD; since BGFE is a rectangle, EF =BG.
Furthermore, OD =a1and OE =b1. Hence, EF =BG=OD=a1. Since OF =EF+
OE, it follows that OF =a1+b1. This shows that the xcoordinate of a+bisa1+b1.
The proof that the ycoordinate is a2+b2is analogous. This argument assumes A and
B to be in the ﬁrst quadrant, but similar arguments hold for the other quadrants.
Figure 1.1.8(a) illustrates another way of looking at vector addition: in terms of
triangles rather than parallelograms. That is, we translate (without rotation) the directedline segment representing the vector bso that it begins at the end of the vector a. The
endpoint of the resulting directed segment is the endpoint of the vector a+b.W e
note that when aandbare collinear, the triangle collapses to a line segment, as in
Figure 1.1.8(b).
xy
OA = (a , a ) 1 2
D E FGC
a + b
ba
B = (b , b ) 12ﬁgure 1.1.7 The construction used to prove
that ( a1,a2)+(b1,b2)=(a1+b1,a2+b2).

<<<PAGE 33>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 6
6 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
ﬁgure 1.1.8 (a) Vector addition
may be visualized in terms of
triangles as wellas parallelograms. (b) Thetriangle collapses to a linesegment when aandbare
collinear.a b
ba
b
aab
xy y
x+translated 
translated+b
(a) (b)
In Figure 1.1.8 we have placed aandbhead to tail. That is, the tail of bis placed
at the head of a, and the vector a+bgoes from the tail of ato the head of b.I fw ed o
it in the other order, b+a, we get the same vector by going around the parallelogram
the other way. Consistent with this ﬁgure, it is useful to let vectors “glide” or “slide,”
keeping the same magnitude and direction. We want, in fact, to regard two vectors asthesame if they have the same magnitude and direction. When we insist on vectors
beginning at the origin, we will say that we have bound vectors. If we allow vectors to
begin at other points, we will speak of free vectors or just vectors.
vectors Vectors (also called free vectors) are directed line segments in [the plane
or] space represented by directed line segments with a beginning (tail) and an end(head). Directed line segments obtained from each other by parallel translation(but not rotation) represent the same vector.
The components ( a
1,a2,a3)o f aare the (signed) lengths of the projections
ofaalong the three coordinate axes; equivalently, they are deﬁned by placing
the tail of aat the origin and letting the head be the point ( a1,a2,a3). We write
a=(a1,a2,a3).
Two vectors are added by placing them head to tail and drawing the vectors
from the tail of the ﬁrst to the head of the second, as in Figure 1.1.8.
Scalar multiplication of vectors also has a geometric interpretation. If αis a scalar
andaa vector, we deﬁne αato be the vector that is |α|times as long as a, with the same
direction as aifα> 0, but with the opposite direction if α< 0. Figure 1.1.9 illustrates
several examples.
xy
xy
xy
xy
a1__
4a3__
2
a
a1__
4−
ﬁgure 1.1.9 Some scalar multiples of a vector a.

<<<PAGE 34>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 7
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 7
−ba
a
−baA
B
xy
bﬁgure 1.1.10 The geometry of vector subtraction.
Using an argument based on similar triangles, we ﬁnd that if a=(a1,a2,a3), and α
is a scalar, then
αa=(αa1,αa2,αa3).
That is, the geometric deﬁnition coincides with the algebraic one.
Given two vectors aandb, how do we represent the vector b−ageometrically, that
is, what is the geometry of vector subtraction? Because a+(b−a)=b, we see that b−a
is the vector that we add to ato get b. In view of this, we may conclude that b−ais the
vector parallel to, and with the same magnitude as, the directed line segment beginning
at the endpoint of aand terminating at the endpoint of bwhen aandbbegin at the same
point (see Figure 1.1.10).
example 4 Letuandvbe the vectors shown in Figure 1.1.11. Draw the two vectors u+vand−2u.
What are their components?
vxy
u
11
22
3ﬁgure 1.1.11 Findu+vand−2u.
solution Place the tail of vat the tip of uto obtain the vector shown in Figure 1.1.12.
The vector −2u, also shown, has length twice that of uand points in the opposite
direction. From the ﬁgure, we see that the vector u+vhas components (5, 2) and −2u
has components ( −6,−4).

<<<PAGE 35>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 8
8 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
v
xy
u
1v
u2−+uv 1
1−2
26 2
−
−−3
35 4
4−
ﬁgure 1.1.12 Computing u+vand−2u. ▲
example 5 (a) Sketch −2v, where vhas components ( −1, 1, 2).
(b) If vandware any two vectors, show that v−1
3wand 3v −ware parallel.
solution (a) The vector −2v is twice as long as v, but points in the opposite direction (see
Figure 1.1.13).
xy
2−vz
()1−,1 2
2
1−1,
()2, 2−,4−v }
}}
ﬁgure 1.1.13 Multiplying (−1, 1, 2) by −2.
(b)v−1
3w=1
3(3v−w); vectors that are multiples of one another are parallel. ▲
The Standard Basis Vectors
To describe vectors in space, it is convenient to introduce three special vectors along
thex,y, and zaxes:
i: the vector with components (1, 0, 0)
j: the vector with components (0, 1, 0)
k: the vector with components (0, 0, 1).

<<<PAGE 36>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 9
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 9
ijk(0, 0, 1)
(1, 0, 0)(0, 1, 0)
xyz
ﬁgure 1.1.14 The standard basis vectors.
These standard basis vectors are illustrated in Figure 1.1.14. In the plane we have the
standard basis iandjwith components (1, 0) and (0, 1).
Letabe any vector, and let ( a1,a2,a3) be its components. Then
a=a1i+a2j+a3k,
because the right-hand side is given in components by
a1(1, 0, 0) +a2(0, 1, 0) +a3( 0 ,0 ,1 ) =(a1,0 ,0 ) +(0,a2,0 )+(0, 0, a3)
=(a1,a2,a3).
Thus, we can express every vector as a sum of scalar multiples of i,j, and k.
The Standard Basis Vectors
1. The vectors i,j, and kare unit vectors along the three coordinate axes, as
shown in Figure 1.1.14.
2. If ahas components ( a1,a2,a3), then
a=a1i+a2j+a3k.
example 6 Express the vector whose components are ( e,π,−√
3) in the standard basis.
solution Substituting a1=e,a2=π, and a3=−√
3 into a=a1i+a2j+a3kgives
v=ei+πj−√
3k. ▲
example 7 The vector (2, 3, 2) equals 2i +3j+2k, and the vector (0, −1, 4) is −j+4k. Figure 1.1.15
shows 2i +3j+2k; you draw in the vector −j+4k. ▲
Addition and scalar multiplication may be written in terms of the standard basis
vectors as follows:
(a1i+a2j+a3k)+(b1i+b2j+b3k)=(a1+b1)i+(a2+b2)j+(a3+b3)k
and
α(a1i+a2j+a3k)=(αa1)i+(αa2)j+α(a3)k.

<<<PAGE 37>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 10
10 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
xyz
i
jk
2(2, 3, 2)k
ji2
3ﬁgure 1.1.15 Representation of (2, 3, 2)
in terms of the standard basis vectors i,j,
andk.
The Vector Joining Two Points
To apply vectors to geometric problems, it is useful to assign a vector to a pair of points
in the plane or in space, as follows. Given two points P and P/prime, we can draw the vector
vwith tail P and head P/prime, as in Figure 1.1.16, where we write− →PP/primeforv.PPP'P'
ﬁgure 1.1.16 The
vector from P to
P/primeis denoted− →PP/prime.
If P=(x,y,z) and P/prime=(x/prime,y/prime,z/prime), then the vectors from the origin to P and P/prime
area=xi+yj+zkanda/prime=x/primei+y/primej+z/primek, respectively, so the vector− →PP/primeis the
difference a/prime−a=(x/prime−x)i+(y/prime−y)j+(z/prime−z)k. (See Figure 1.1.17.)
xy
OPP'
a'a
aa'−
ﬁgure 1.1.17
− →PP/prime=− − →OP/prime−− →OP.The Vector Joining Two Points If the point P has coordinates ( x,y,z) and
P/primehas coordinates ( x/prime,y/prime,z/prime), then the vector− →PP/primefrom the tip of P to the tip of P/prime
has components ( x/prime−x,y/prime−y,z/prime−z).
example 8 (a) Find the components of the vector from (3, 5) to (4, 7).
(b) Add the vector vfrom ( −1, 0) to (2, −3) and the vector wfrom (2, 0) to (1, 1).
(c) Multiply the vector vin (b) by 8. If the resulting vector is represented by the
directed line segment from (5, 6) to Q, what is Q?
solution (a) As in the preceding box, we subtract the ordered pairs: (4, 7) −(3, 5) =(1, 2).
Thus the required components are (1, 2).
(b) The vector vhas components (2, −3)−(−1, 0) =(3,−3), and whas
components (1, 1) −(2, 0) =(−1, 1). Therefore, the vector v+whas
components (3, −3)+(−1, 1) =(2,−2).
(c) The vector 8v has components 8(3, −3)=(24,−24). If this vector is represented
by the directed line segment from (5, 6) to Q, and Q has coordinates ( x,y), then
(x,y)−(5, 6) =(24,−2 4 ) ,s o( x,y)=(5, 6)+(24,−24)=(29,−18). ▲
example 9 Let P=(−2,−1), Q =(−3,−3), and R =(−1,−4) in the xyplane.
(a) Draw these vectors: vjoining P to Q; wjoining Q to R; ujoining R to P .
(b) What are the components of v,w, and u?
(c) What is v+w+u?

<<<PAGE 38>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 11
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 11
solution (a) See Figure 1.1.18.
vxy
u
11
1 −2
2 2 −−3
3 3
w
−4−32−1−
uv
wP
RQﬁgure 1.1.18 The vector vjoins P to Q; wjoins Q to
R; and ujoins R to P.
(b) Because v=− →PQ,w=− →QR, and u=− →RP, we get
v=(−3,−3)−(−2,−1)=(−1,−2),
w=(−1,−4)−(−3,−3)=(2,−1),
u=−(−1,−4)+(−2,−1)=(−1, 3) .
(c)v+w+u=(−1,−2)+(2,−1)+(−1, 3) =(0, 0).
▲
Geometry Theorems by Vector Methods
Many of the theorems of plane geometry can be proved by vector methods. Here is one
example.
example 10 Use vectors to prove that the diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.
solution Let OPRQ be the parallelogram, with two adjacent sides represented by the vectors
a=− →OP and b=− →OQ. Let M be the midpoint of the diagonal OR, and let N be the
midpoint of the other diagonal, PQ. (See Figure 1.1.19.)
OP
QRP
QR a
ba ba
MN−a b + ( ) 1 
2 1
2
b( )
O
ﬁgure 1.1.19 If the midpoints M and N coincide, then
the diagonals OR and PQ bisect each other.
Observe that− →OR=− →OP+− →OQ=a+bby the parallelogram rule for vector addition,
so− →OM=
1
2− →OR=1
2(a+b). On the other hand,
− →PQ=− →OQ−− →OP=b−a,s o− →PN=
1
2− →PQ=1
2(b−a),

<<<PAGE 39>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 12
12 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
and hence,
− →ON=− →OP+− →PN=a+
1
2(b−a)=1
2(a+b).
Because− →OM and− →ON are equal vectors, the points M and N coincide, so the diagonals
bisect each other.▲
Equations of Lines
Planes and lines are geometric objects that can be represented by equations. We shall
defer until Section 1.3 a study of equations representing planes. However, using thegeometric interpretation of vector addition and scalar multiplication, we will now ﬁndtheequation of a line l that passes through the endpoint of the vector a,with the direction
of a vector v(see Figure 1.1.20); that is, line lis parallel to the vector v.
ﬁgure 1.1.20 The line l,
parametrically given by
l(t)=a+tv, lies in the direction v
and passes through the tip of a.l
a
v
0tva+
tvtv
Astvaries through all real values, the points of the form tvare all scalar multiples
of the vector v, and therefore exhaust the points of the line passing through the origin
in the direction of v. Because every point on lis the endpoint of the diagonal of a
parallelogram with sides aandtvfor some real value of t, we see that all the points on l
are of the form a+tv. Thus, the line lmay be expressed by the equation l(t)=a+tv.
We say that lis expressed parametrically, with tthe parameter. At t=0,l(t)=a.A s
tincreases, the point l(t) moves away from ain the direction of v.A st decreases from
t=0 through negative values, l(t) moves away from ain the direction of −v.
Point-Direction Form of a Line The equation of the line lthrough the tip of
aand pointing in the direction of the vector visl(t)=a+tv, where the parameter
ttakes on all real values. In coordinate form, the equations are
x=x1+at,
y=y1+bt,
z=z1+ct,
where a=(x1,y1,z1) and v=(a,b,c). For lines in the xyplane, we simply drop
thezcomponent.
example 11 Determine the equation of the line lpassing through (1, 0, 0) in the direction j. See
Figure 1.1.21.

<<<PAGE 40>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 13
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 13
xyz
() ,1,ij
00 l(t)l
ﬁgure 1.1.21 The line lpasses through the tip of iin the direction j.
solution The desired line can be expressed parametrically as l(t)=i+tj. In terms of coordinates,
l(t)=(1, 0, 0) +t(0, 1, 0) =(1,t,0 ).▲
example 12 (a) Find the equations of the line in space through the point (3, −1, 2) in the direction
2i−3j+4k.
(b) Find the equation of the line in the plane through the point (1, −6) in the direction
of 5i−πj.
(c) In what direction does the line x=−3t+2,y=−2(t−1),z=8t+2 point?
solution (a) Here a=(3,−1, 2) =(x1,y1,z1) and v=2i−3j+4k,s o a=2,b=−3, and
c=4. From the preceding box, the equations are
x=3+2t, y=−1−3t, z=2+4t.
(b) Here a=(1,−6) and v=5i−πj, so the required line is
l(t)=(1,−6)+(5t,−πt)=(1+5t,−6−πt);
that is,
x=1+5t, y=−6−πt.
(c) Using the box, we construct the direction v=ai+bj+ckfrom the
coefﬁcients of t:a=−3,b=−2,c=8. Thus, the line points in the direction
ofv=−3i−2j+8k. ▲
example 13 Do the two lines ( x,y,z)=(t,−6t+1, 2t−8) and ( x,y,z)=(3t+1, 2t, 0) intersect?
solution If the lines intersect, there must be numbers t1andt2such that the corresponding points
are equal:
(t1,−6t 1+1, 2t 1−8)=(3t2+1, 2t 2,0 ) ;

<<<PAGE 41>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 14
14 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
that is, all three of the following equations hold:
t1=3t2+1,
−6t 1+1=2t2,
2t1−8=0.
From the third equation, t1=4. The ﬁrst equation then becomes 4 =3t2+1; that is,
t2=1. We must check whether these values satisfy the middle equation:
−6t 1+1?=2t2.
Since t1=4 and t2=1, this reads
−24+1?=2,
which is false, so the lines do not intersect. ▲
Notice that there can be many equations of the same line. Some may be obtained by
choosing, instead of a, a different point on the given line, and forming the parametric
equation of the line beginning at that point and in the direction of v. For example, the
endpoint of a+vis on the line l(t)=a+tv, and thus, l1(t)=(a+v)+tvrepresents
the same line. Still other equations may be obtained by observing that if α/negationslash=0, the
vector αvhas the same (or opposite) direction as v. Thus, l2(t)=a+tαvis another
equation of l(t)=a+tv.
For example, both l(t)=( 1 ,0 ,0 ) +(t,t, 0) and l1(s)=(0,−1, 0) +(s,s,0 )
represent the same line since both are in the direction i+jand both pass through the
point (1, 0, 0); lpasses through (1, 0, 0) at t=0 and l1passes through (1, 0, 0) at s=1.
Therefore, the equation of a line is not uniquely determined. Nevertheless, it is
customary to use the term “the equation of a line.” Keeping this in mind, let us derive
the equation of a line passing through the endpoints of two given vectors aand b.
Because the vector b−ais parallel to the directed line segment from atob,w e
calculate the parametric equation of the line passing through ain the direction of b−a
(Figure 1.1.22). Thus,
l(t)=a+t(b−a); that is, l(t)=(1−t)a+tb.
Astincreases from 0 to 1, t(b−a) starts as the zero vector and increases in length
(remaining in the direction of b−a) until at t=1 it is the vector b−a. Thus, for
l(t)=a+t(b−a), as tincreases from 0 to 1, the vector l(t) moves from the endpoint
ofato the endpoint of balong the directed line segment from atob.
t(b − a)
t(b − a)t(b − a)
b − a ab  a+
 0l
ﬁgure 1.1.22 The line l, parametrically
given by l(t)=a+t(b−a)=
(1−t)a+tb, passes through the tips
ofaandb.

<<<PAGE 42>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 15
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 15
If P=(x1,y1,z1) is the tip of aand Q =(x2,y2,z2) is the tip of b, then v=
(x2−x1)i+(y2−y1)j+(z2−z1)k, and so the equations of the line are
x=x1+(x2−x1)t,
y=y1+(y2−y1)t,
z=z1+(z2−z1)t.
By eliminating t, these can be written as
x−x1
x2−x1=y−y1
y2−y1=z−z1
z2−z1.
Parametric Equation of a Line: Point--Point Form The parametric
equations of the line lthrough the points P =(x1,y1,z1) and Q =(x2,y2,z2) are
x=x1+(x2−x1)t,
y=y1+(y2−y1)t,
z=z1+(z2−z1)t,
where ( x,y,z) is the general point of l, and the parameter ttakes on all real values.
example 14 Find the equation of the line through (2, 1, −3) and (6, −1,−5).
solution Using the preceding box, we choose ( x1,y1,z1)=(2, 1,−3) and ( x2,y2,z2)=
(6,−1,−5), so the equations are
x=2+(6−2)t=2+4t,
y=1+(−1−1)t=1−2t,
z=−3+(−5−(−3)) t=−3−2t.▲
example 15 Find the equation of the line passing through ( −1, 1, 0) and (0, 0, 1) (see Figure 1.1.23).
xyz
ab0l
( ) ,1,00
( ) 1−,1 ,
ﬁgure 1.1.23 Finding the equation of the line through two points.

<<<PAGE 43>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 16
16 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
solution Letting a=−i+jandb=krepresent the given points, we have
l(t)=(1−t)(−i+j)+tk=−(1−t)i+(1−t)j+tk.
The equation of this line may thus be written as
l(t)=(t−1)i+(1−t)j+tk,
or, equivalently, if l(t)=xi+yj+zk,
x=t−1, y=1−t, z=t.▲
The description of a line segment requires that the domain of the parameter tbe
restricted, as in the following example.
example 16 Find the equation of the line segment between (1, 1, 1) and (2, 1, 2).
solution Thelinethrough (1, 1, 1) and (2, 1, 2) is described in parametric form by ( x,y,z)=
(1+t,1 ,1+t), as ttakes on all real values. When t=0, the point ( x,y,z)i s
(1, 1, 1), and when t=1, the point ( x,y,z) is (2, 1, 2). Thus, the point ( x,y,z) lies
between (1, 1, 1) and (2, 1, 2) when 0 ≤t≤1, so the line segment is described by the
equations
x=1+t,
y=1,
z=1+t,
together with the inequalities 0 ≤t≤1. ▲
We can also give parametric descriptions of geometric objects other than lines.
example 17 Describe the points that lie within the parallelogram whose adjacent sides are the vectors
aandbbased at the origin (“within” includes points on the edges of the parallelogram).
solution Consider Figure 1.1.24. If P is any point within the given parallelogram and we constructlines l
1andl2through P parallel to the vectors aandb, respectively, we see that l1
intersects the side of the parallelogram determined by the vector bat some point tb,
where 0 ≤t≤1. Likewise, l2intersects the side determined by the vector aat some
point sa, where 0 ≤s≤1.
tbsaa
blP
12l
0ﬁgure 1.1.24 Describing points within the
parallelogram formed by vectors aandb, with
vertex 0.
Note that P is the endpoint of the diagonal of a parallelogram having adjacent sides sa
andtb; hence, if vdenotes the vector− →OP, we see that v=sa+tb. We conclude that all

<<<PAGE 44>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 17
1.1 Vectors in Two- and Three-Dimensional Space 17
the points in the given parallelogram are endpoints of vectors of the form sa+tbfor
0≤s≤1 and 0 ≤t≤1. Reversing our steps, we see that all vectors of this form end
within the parallelogram. ▲
As two different lines through the origin determine a plane through the origin, so do
two nonparallel vectors. If we apply the same reasoning as in Example 17, we see that
the entire plane formed by two nonparallel vectors vandwconsists of all points of the
form sv+tw, where sandtcan be any real numbers, as in Figure 1.1.25.
We have thus described the points in the plane by two parameters. For this reason, we
say the plane is two-dimensional . Similarly, a line is called one-dimensional whether
it lies in the plane or in space or is the real number line itself.
The plane determined by vandwis called the plane spanned by vandw. When vis
a scalar multiple of wandw/negationslash=0, then vandware parallel and the plane degenerates to
a straight line. When v=w=0(i.e., both are zero vectors), we obtain a single point.
There are three particular planes that arise naturally in a coordinate system and that
will be useful to us later. We call the plane spanned by vectors iandjthexyplane, the
plane spanned by jandktheyzplane, and the plane spanned by iandkthexzplane.
These planes are illustrated in Figure 1.1.26.
ﬁgure 1.1.25 Describing points P
in the plane formed from vectors
vandw.
yP
w
twsv
v
xz
xyz
xz planeyz plane
xy planeﬁgure 1.1.26 The three coordinate
planes.

<<<PAGE 45>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 18
18 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
exercises
(Exercises with colored numbers are solved in the Study Guide.)
Complete the computations in Exercises 1 to 4.
1.(−21, 23) −(?, 6)=(−25, ?)
2.3(133, −0.33, 0) +(−399, 0.99, 0) =( ? ,? ,? )3.(8a,−2b,1 3c)=(52, 12, 11) +1
2( ? ,? ,? )
4.( 2 ,3 ,5 ) −4i+3j=( ? ,? ,? )
In Exercises 5 to 8, sketch the given vectors vandw. On your sketch, draw in −v,v+w,andv−w.
5.v=(2, 1) and w=(1, 2)
6.v=(0, 4) and w=(2,−1)
7.v=(2, 3,−6) and w=(−1, 1, 1)
8.v=( 2 ,1 ,3 )a n d w=(−2, 0, −1)
9.Letv=2i+jandw=i+2j. Sketch
v,w,v+w,2 w, and v−win the plane.
10. Sketch (1, −2, 3) and ( −1
3,2
3,−1). Why do these
vectors point in opposite directions?11. What restrictions must be made on x,y, and zso that the
triple ( x,y,z) will represent a point on the yaxis? On
thezaxis? In the xzplane? In the yzplane?
12. (a) Generalize the geometric construction in Figure
1.1.7 to show that if v1=(x,y,z) and v2=(x/prime,y/prime,z/prime),
then v1+v2=(x+x/prime,y+y/prime,z+z/prime).
(b) Using an argument based on similar triangles, provethatαv=(αx,αy,αz) when v=(x,y,z).
In Exercises 13 to 19, use set theoretic or vector notation or both to describe the points that lie in the given conﬁgurations.
13. The plane spanned by v1=( 2 ,7 ,0 )a n d v2=( 0 ,2 ,7 )
14. The plane spanned by v1=(3,−1, 1) and v2=( 0 ,3 ,4 )
15. The line passing through ( −1,−1,−1) in the direction
ofj
16. The line passing through (0, 2, 1) in the direction of2i−k
17. The line passing through ( −1,−1,−1) and (1, −1, 2)
18. The line passing through ( −5, 0, 4) and (6, −3, 2)
19. The parallelogram whose adjacent sides are the vectorsi+3kand−2j
20. Show that l1(t)=( 1 ,2 ,3 ) +t(1, 0,−2) and
l2(t)=( 2 ,2 ,1 ) +t(−2, 0, 4) parametrize the
same line.
21. Do the points (2, 3, −4), (2, 1, −1), and (2, 7, −10) lie
on the same line?
22. Letu=(1, 2), v=(−3, 4), and w=(5, 0):(a) Draw these vectors in R2.
(b)Find scalars λ1andλ2such that w=λ1u+λ2v.
23. Suppose A,B, and Care vertices of a triangle. Find− →AB+− →BC+− →CA.
24. Find the points of intersection of the line
x=3+2t,y=7+8t,z=−2+t, that is, l(t)=
(3+2t,7+8t,−2+t), with the coordinate planes.
25. Show that there are no points ( x,y,z) satisfying
2x−3y+z−2=0 and lying on the line
v=(2,−2,−1)+t( 1 ,1 ,1 ) .
26. Show that every point on the linev=(1,−1, 2) +t(2, 3, 1) satisﬁes the equation
5x−3y−z−6=0.
27. Determine whether the lines
x=3t+2,y=t−1,z=6t+1, and
x=3s−1,y=s−2,z=sintersect.
28. Do the lines ( x,y,z)=(t+4, 4t+5,t−2) and
(x,y,z)=(2s+3,s+1, 2s−3) intersect?

<<<PAGE 46>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 19
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 19
In Exercises 29 to 31, use vector methods to describe the given conﬁgurations.
29. The parallelepiped with edges the vectors a,b, and c
emanating from the origin
30. The points within the parallelogram with one corner
at (x0,y0,z0) whose sides extending from thatcorner are equal in magnitude and direction to vectors a
andb
31. The plane determined by the three points(x
0,y0,z0), (x1,y1,z1), and ( x2,y2,z2)
Prove the statements in Exercises 32 to 34.
32. The line segment joining the midpoints of two sides of atriangle is parallel to and has half the length of the thirdside.
33. If PQR is a triangle in space and b>0 is a number, thenthere is a triangle with sides parallel to those of PQR andside lengths btimes those of PQR.
34. The medians of a triangle intersect at a point, and thispoint divides each median in a ratio of 2 : 1.
Problems 35 and 36 require some knowledge of chemical notation.
35. Write the chemical equation CO +H2O=H2+CO2as
an equation in ordered triples ( x1,x2,x3), where
x1,x2,x3are the number of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen atoms, respectively, in each molecule.
36. (a)Write the chemical equation pC3H4O3+qO2=
rCO2+sH2O as an equation in ordered triples with
unknown coefﬁcients p,q,r, and s.(b)Find the smallest positive integer solution for
p,q,r, and s.
(c)Illustrate the solution by a vector diagram in space.
37. Find a line that lies entirely in the set deﬁned by theequation x
2+y2−z2=1.
1.2The Inner Product, Length, and Distance
In this section and the next we shall discuss two products of vectors: the inner product
and the cross product. These are very useful in physical applications and have interestinggeometric interpretations. The ﬁrst product we shall consider is called the inner product.
The name dot product is often used instead.
The Inner Product
Suppose we have two vectors aandbinR3(Figure 1.2.1) and we wish to determine
the angle between them, that is, the smaller angle subtended by aandbin the plane
that they span. The inner product enables us to do this. Let us ﬁrst develop the concept
q
xyz
abﬁgure 1.2.1 θis the angle between the vectors
aandb.

<<<PAGE 47>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 20
20 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
formally and then prove that this product does what we claim. Let a=a1i+a2j+a3k
andb=b1i+b2j+b3k. We deﬁne the inner product ofaandb, written a·b,t ob e
the real number
a·b=a1b1+a2b2+a3b3.
Note that the inner product of two vectors is a scalar quantity. Sometimes the inner
product is denoted /angbracketlefta,b/angbracketright;thus,/angbracketlefta,b/angbracketrightanda·bmean exactly the same thing.
example 1 (a) If a=3i+j−2kandb=i−j+k, calculate a·b.
(b) Calculate (2i +j−k)·(3k−2j).
solution (a)a·b=3·1+1·(−1)+(−2)·1=3−1−2=0.
(b) (2i +j−k)·(3k−2j)=(2i+j−k)·(0i−2j+3k)
=2·0−1·2−1·3=−5. ▲
Certain properties of the inner product follow from the deﬁnition. If a,b, and care
vectors in R3andαandβare real numbers, then
(i)a·a≥0;
a·a=0 if and only if a=0.
(ii)αa·b=α(a·b) and a·βb=β(a·b).
(iii) a·(b+c)=a·b+a·c and ( a+b)·c=a·c+b·c.
(iv) a·b=b·a.
To prove the ﬁrst of these properties, observe that if a=a1i+a2j+a3k, then a·a=
a2
1+a2
2+a2
3. Because a1,a2, and a3are real numbers, we know a2
1≥0,a2
2≥0,a2
3≥0.
Thus, a·a≥0. Moreover, if a2
1+a2
2+a2
3=0, then a1=a2=a3=0; therefore,
a=0(zero vector). The proofs of the other properties of the inner product are also
easily obtained.
It follows from the Pythagorean theorem that the length of the vector a=a1i+a2j+
a3kis/radicalbig
a2
1+a2
2+a2
3(see Figure 1.2.2). The length of the vector ais denoted by /bardbla/bardbl.
This quantity is often called the norm ofa. Because a·a=a2
1+a2
2+a2
3, it follows that
/bardbla/bardbl=( a·a)1/2.
a12
xyz
a22a32+ +
a12a22+a1a2a3aﬁgure 1.2.2 The length of the vector
a=(a1,a2,a3)is given by the Pythagorean
formula:/radicalBig
a2
1+a2
2+a2
3.

<<<PAGE 48>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 21
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 21
Unit Vectors
Vectors with norm 1 are called unit vectors. For example, the vectors i,j,kare unit
vectors. Observe that for any nonzero vector a,a//bardbla/bardbl is a unit vector; when we divide
aby/bardbla/bardbl, we say that we have normalized a.
example 2 (a) Normalize v=2i+3j−1
2k.
(b) Find unit vectors a,b, and cin the plane such that b+c=a.
solution (a) We have /bardblv/bardbl=/radicalbig
22+32+(1/2)2=(1/2)√
53, so the normalization of vis
u=1
/bardblv/bardblv=4√
53i+6√
53j−1√
53k.
(b) Because all three vectors are to have length 1, a triangle with sides a,b, and c
must be equilateral, as in Figure 1.2.3. If we orient the triangle as in the ﬁgure and
we take a=i, then necessarily
b=1
2i+√
3
2j, and c=1
2i−√
3
2j.
Note that indeed /bardbla/bardbl=/bardbl b/bardbl=/bardbl c/bardbl=1 and that b+c=a.▲1
23
2
abc
xy
,
ﬁgure 1.2.3 The vectors a,b,
andcare represented by the
sides of an equilateral triangle.
In the plane, deﬁne the vector iθ=(cosθ)i+(sinθ)j, which is the unit vector making
an angle θwith the xaxis (see Figure 1.2.4).
xy
i
sin qq
q
cos q
ﬁgure 1.2.4 The coordinates of
iθare cos θand sin θ; it is a unit
vector because
cos2θ+sin2θ=1.
xyz
Q
Pb
a ||b −  a || 
ﬁgure 1.2.5 The distance
between the tips of aandbis
/bardblb−a/bardbl.Distance
Ifaandbare vectors, we have seen that the vector b−ais parallel to and has the same
magnitude as the directed line segment from the endpoint of ato the endpoint of b.
It follows that the distance from the endpoint of ato the endpoint of bis/bardblb−a/bardbl(see
Figure 1.2.5).
Inner Product, Length, and Distance Letting a=a1i+a2j+a3kand
b=b1i+b2j+b3k, their inner product is
a·b=a1b1+a2b2+a3b3,
while the length ofais
/bardbla/bardbl=√a·a=/radicalBig
a2
1+a2
2+a2
3.
Tonormalize a vector a, form the vector
a
/bardbla/bardbl.
Thedistance between the endpoints of aandbis/bardbla−b/bardbl, and the distance between
Pa n dQi s/bardbl− →PQ/bardbl.

<<<PAGE 49>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 22
22 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 3 Find the distance from the endpoint of the vector i, that is, the point (1, 0, 0), to the
endpoint of the vector j, that is, the point (0, 1, 0) .
solution /bardblj−i/bardbl=√(0−1)2+(1−0)2+(0−0)2=√
2. ▲
The Angle Between Two Vectors
Let us now show that the inner product does indeed measure the angle between two
vectors.
Theorem 1Letaandbbe two vectors in R3and let θ, where 0 ≤θ≤π,b e
the angle between them (Figure 1.2.6). Then
a·b=/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθ.
It follows from the equation a·b=/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθthat if aandbare nonzero, we
may express the angle between them as
θ=cos−1/parenleftbigga·b
/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl/parenrightbigg
.
proof If we apply the law of cosines from trigonometry to the triangle with one
vertex at the origin and adjacent sides determined by the vectors aandb(as in the
ﬁgure), it follows that
/bardblb−a/bardbl2=/bardbla/bardbl2+/bardblb/bardbl2−2/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθ.
Because /bardblb−a/bardbl2=(b−a)·(b−a),/bardbla/bardbl2=a·a, and /bardblb/bardbl2=b·b, we can rewrite
the preceding equation as
(b−a)·(b−a)=a·a+b·b−2/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθ.
xyz
b − a || ||
qb
aﬁgure 1.2.6 The vectors a,b, and the angle θ
between them; the geometry for Theorem 1 and its
proof.

<<<PAGE 50>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 23
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 23
We can also expand ( b−a)·(b−a) as follows:
(b−a)·(b−a)=b·(b−a)−a·(b−a)
=b·b−b·a−a·b+a·a
=a·a+b·b−2a·b.
Thus,
a·a+b·b−2a·b=a·a+b·b−2/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθ.
That is,
a·b=/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl cosθ. ■
example 4 Find the angle between the vectors i+j+kandi+j−k(see Figure 1.2.7).
xyz
i + j − ki + j + k
qﬁgure 1.2.7 Finding the angle between
a=i+j+kand b=i+j−k.
solution Using Theorem 1, we have
(i+j+k)·(i+j−k)=/bardbli+j+k/bardbl/bardbli+j−k/bardblcosθ,
and so
1+1−1=(√
3)(√
3) cos θ.
Hence,
cosθ=1
3.
That is,
θ=cos−1(1
3)≈1.23 radians (71◦).▲
The Cauchy–Schwarz Inequality
Theorem 1 shows that the inner product of two vectors is the product of their lengths times
the cosine of the angle between them. This relationship is often of value in problems ofa geometric nature. An important consequence of Theorem 1 is:

<<<PAGE 51>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 24
24 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
Corollary Cauchy–Schwarz Inequality For any two vectors aandb,w e
have
|a·b|≤/bardbl a/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl
with equality if and only if ais a scalar multiple of b, or one of them is 0.
proof Ifais not a scalar multiple of b, then θ, the angle between them, is not zero or
π, and so |cosθ|<1, and thus the inequality holds; in fact, if aandbare both nonzero,
strict inequality holds in this case. When ais a scalar multiple of b, then θ=0o rπ
and|cosθ|=1, so equality holds in this case. ■
example 5 Verify the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality for a=−i+j+kandb=3i+k.
solution The dot product is a·b=−3+0+1=−2, so|a·b|=2. Also, /bardbla/bardbl=√1+1+1=√
3 and/bardblb/bardbl=√9+1=√
10, and it is true that 2 ≤√
3·√
10 because√
3·√
10>√
3·√
3=3≥2. ▲
Ifaandbare nonzero vectors in R3andθis the angle between them, we see that
a·b=0 if and only if cos θ=0. Thus, the inner product of two nonzero vectors is zero
if and only if the vectors are perpendicular. Hence, the inner product provides us with
a convenient method for determining whether two vectors are perpendicular. Often wesay that perpendicular vectors are orthogonal. The standard basis vectors i,j, and kare
mutually orthogonal and of length 1; any such system is called orthonormal. We shall
adopt the convention that the zero vector is orthogonal to all vectors.
example
6 The vectors iθ=(cosθ)i+(sinθ)jandjθ=− (sinθ)i+(cosθ)jare orthogonal,
because
iθ·jθ=− cosθsinθ+sinθcosθ=0.
Here, iθis the rotation of i,θ◦counterclockwise. Also, jθis the rotation of j,θ◦
counterclockwise (see Figure 1.2.8).
q
qq
j i
xy
qﬁgure 1.2.8 The vectors iθandjθare orthogonal and of
unit length, that is, they are orthonormal.
▲
example 7 Letaandbbe two nonzero orthogonal vectors. If cis a vector in the plane spanned by
aandb, then there are scalars αandβsuch that c=αa+βb. Use the inner product
to determine αandβ(see Figure 1.2.9).

<<<PAGE 52>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 25
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 25
aabb
cb
aq
||c||cos q = ac.___
||a||
xyz
ﬁgure 1.2.9 The geometry for ﬁnding αandβ, where
c=αa+βb.
solution Taking the inner product of aandc,w eh a v e
a·c=a·(αa+βb)=αa·a+βa·b.
Because aandbare orthogonal, a·b=0, and so
α=a·c
a·a=a·c
/bardbla/bardbl2.
Similarly,
β=b·c
b·b=b·c
/bardblb/bardbl2. ▲
Orthogonal Projection
In the preceding example, the vector αais called the projection of calong a, and βbis
itsprojection along b. Let us formulate this idea more generally. If vis a vector, and lis
the line through the origin in the direction of a vector a, then the orthogonal projection
ofvonais the vector pwhose tip is obtained by dropping a perpendicular line to lfrom
the tip of v, as in Figure 1.2.10.
v
palq
q
ﬁgure 1.2.10 pis the orthogonal
projection of vona.Referring to the ﬁgure, we see that pis a multiple of aand that vis the sum of pand
a vector qperpendicular to a. Thus,
v=ca+q,
where p=caanda·q=0. Taking the dot product of awith both sides of v=ca+q,
we ﬁnd a·v=ca·a,s oc =(a·v)/(a·a), and hence
p=a·v
/bardbla/bardbl2a.

<<<PAGE 53>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 26
26 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
The length of pis
/bardblp/bardbl=|a·v|
/bardbla/bardbl2/bardbla/bardbl=|a·v|
/bardbla/bardbl=/bardblv/bardblcosθ.
Orthogonal Projection Theorthogonal projection ofvonais the vector
p=a·v
/bardbla/bardbl2a.
example 8 Find the orthogonal projection of i+joni−2j.
solution With a=i−2jandv=i+j, the orthogonal projection of vonais
a·v
a·aa=1−2
1+4(i−2j)=−1
5(i−2j)
(see Figure 1.2.11). ▲
Orthogonal
vonaprojection
ofv
a
ﬁgure 1.2.11 The
orthogonal projection of v
onaequals −1
5a.The Triangle Inequality
A useful consequence of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, which is called the triangle
inequality, relates the lengths of vectors aandband of their sum a+b. Geometrically,
the triangle inequality says that the length of any side of a triangle is no greater than the
sum of the lengths of the other two sides (see Figure 1.2.12).
Theorem 2 Triangle Inequality For vectors aandbin space,
/bardbla+b/bardbl≤/bardbl a/bardbl+/bardbl b/bardbl.
proof While this result may be clear geometrically, it is useful to give a proof using the
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, as it will generalize to n-dimensional vectors. We consider
the square of the left-hand side:
/bardbla+b/bardbl2=(a+b)·(a+b)=/bardbla/bardbl2+2a·b+/bardblb/bardbl2.
P Q
ORaaab
b+ﬁgure 1.2.12 This geometry shows that
/bardblOQ/bardbl≤/bardbl OR/bardbl+/bardbl RQ/bardbl or, in vector notation,
that/bardbla+b/bardbl≤/bardbl a/bardbl+/bardbl b/bardbl, which is the
triangle inequality.

<<<PAGE 54>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 27
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 27
By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we have
/bardbla/bardbl2+2a·b+/bardblb/bardbl2≤/bardbla/bardbl2+2/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl+/bardbl b/bardbl2=(/bardbla/bardbl+/bardbl b/bardbl)2.
Thus,
/bardbla+b/bardbl2≤(/bardbla/bardbl+/bardbl b/bardbl)2;
taking square roots proves the result. ■
example 9 (a) Verify the triangle inequality for a=i+jandb=2i+j+k.
(b) Prove that /bardblu−v/bardbl≤/bardbl u−w/bardbl+/bardbl w−v/bardblfor any vectors u,v, and w. Illustrate
with a ﬁgure in which u,v, and whave the same base point.
solution (a) We have a+b=3i+2j+k,s o/bardbla +b/bardbl=√9+4+1=√
14. On the other
hand,/bardbla/bardbl=√
2 and/bardblb/bardbl=√
6, so the triangle inequality asserts that√
14≤√
2+√
6. The numbers bear this out:√
14≈3.74, while√
2+√
6≈1.41+2.45=3.86.
(b) We ﬁnd that u−v=(u−w)+(w−v), so the result follows from the triangle
inequality with areplaced by u−wandbreplaced by w−v. Geometrically, we
are considering the shaded triangle in Figure 1.2.13. ▲uu
uvvv
ww
w−
−
−
ﬁgure 1.2.13 Illustrating
the inequality /bardblu−v/bardbl≤
/bardblu−w/bardbl+/bardbl w−v/bardbl. Physical Applications of Vectors
A simple example of a physical quantity represented by a vector is a displacement.
Suppose that, on a part of the earth’ s surface small enough to be considered ﬂat, weintroduce coordinates so that the xaxis points east, the yaxis points north, and the
unit of length is the kilometer. If we are at a point P and wish to get to a point Q, thedisplacement vector d=− →PQ joining P to Q tells us the direction and distance we have
to travel. If xandyare the components of this vector, the displacement of P to Q is “ x
kilometers east, ykilometers north.”
example
10 Suppose that two navigators who cannot see one another but can communicate by radio
wish to determine the relative position of their ships. Explain how they can do this ifthey can each determine their displacement vector to the same lighthouse.
solution Let P
1and P 2be the positions of the ships, and let Q be the position of the lighthouse.
The displacement of the lighthouse from the ith ship is the vector dijoining P ito Q.
The displacement of the second ship from the ﬁrst is the vector djoining P 1to P 2.W e
have d+d2=d1(Figure 1.2.14), and so d=d1−d2. That is, the displacement from
one ship to the other is the difference between the displacements from the ships to thelighthouse.
Fogdd
dd dPQ
P1
2
211 2−=ﬁgure 1.2.14 Vector methods can be used
to locate objects. ▲

<<<PAGE 55>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 28
28 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
We can also represent the velocity of a moving object as a vector. For the moment,
we will consider only objects moving at uniform speed along straight lines. Suppose,
for example, that a boat is steaming across a lake at 10 kilometers per hour (km/h) inthe northeast direction. After 1 hour of travel, the displacement is (10/√
2, 10/√
2)≈
(7.07, 7.07); see Figure 1.2.15. 45
Initial positionPosition after 1 h
10
10
2__10
2__
ﬁgure 1.2.15 If an
object moves northeast
at 10 km/h, its velocityvector has components(10/
/radicalbig
2,10//radicalbig
2)=
10(1//radicalbig
2,1//radicalbig
2), where
(1//radicalbig
2,1//radicalbig
2) is the unit
vector of the northeastdirection.The vector whose components are (10/√
2, 10/√
2) is called the velocity vector of
the boat. In general, if an object is moving uniformly along a straight line, itsvelocity
vector is the displacement vector from the position at any moment to the position 1unit
of time later. If a current appears on the lake, moving due eastward at 2 km/h, and the
boat continues to point in the same direction with its engine running at the same rate,its displacement after 1 hour will have components given by (10/√
2+2, 10/√
2); see
Figure 1.2.16. The new velocity vector, therefore, has components (10/√
2+2, 10/√
2).
We note that this is the sum of the original velocity vector (10/√
2, 10/√
2) of the boat
and the velocity vector (2, 0) of the current.
Displacement and Velocity If an object has a (constant) velocity vector
v, then in tunits of time the resulting displacement vector of the object is d=tv;
thus, after time t=1, the displacement vector equals the velocity vector. See
Figure 1.2.17.
Displacementdue toengineDisplacement due      to current
Total displacement
ﬁgure 1.2.16 The total displacement
is the sum of the displacements due
to the engine and the current.vd = t v
Displacement in time t
ﬁgure 1.2.17 Displacement =
time×velocity.
example 11 A bird is ﬂying in a straight line with velocity vector 10i +6j+k(in kilometers per
hour). Suppose that ( x,y) are its coordinates on the ground and zis its height above the
ground.
(a) If the bird is at position (1, 2, 3) at a certain moment, what is its location 1 hour
later? 1 minute later?
(b) How many seconds does it take the bird to climb 10 meters?
solution (a) The displacement vector from (1, 2, 3) after 1 hour is given by 10i +6j+k,s o
the new position is (1, 2, 3) +(10, 6, 1) =(11, 8, 4). After 1 minute, the displacement
vector from (1, 2, 3) is1
60(10i+6j+k)=1
6i+1
10j+1
60k, and so the new position is
(1, 2, 3) +(1
6,1
10,1
60)=(7
6,21
10,181
60).
(b) After tseconds ( =t/3600 hours), the displacement vector from (1, 2, 3) is ( t/3600)
(10i+6j+k)=(t/360) i+(t/600) j+(t/3600) k. The increase in altitude is the z
component, namely, t/3600. This will equal 10 m ( =1
100km) when t/3600 =1
100, that
is, when t=36 s. ▲

<<<PAGE 56>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 29
1.2 The Inner Product, Length, and Distance 29
example 12 Physical forces have magnitude and direction and may thus be represented by vectors.
If several forces act at once on an object, the resultant force is represented by the sumof the individual force vectors. Suppose that forces i+kandj+kare acting on a body.
What third force Fmust we impose to counteract the two—that is, to make the total
force equal to zero?
solution The force Fshould be chosen so that ( i+k)+(j+k)+F=0; that is, F=−(i+k)−
(j+k)=−i−j−2k. (Recall that 0is the zero vector, the vector whose components
are all zero.)
▲
exercises
1.Calculate (3i +2j+k)·(i+2j−k).
2.Calculate a·b, where a=2i+10j−12kand
b=−3i+4k.
3.Find the angle between 7j +19kand−2i−j(to the
nearest degree).4.Compute u·v, where u=√
3i−315j+22kand
v=u//bardblu/bardbl.
5.Is/bardbl8i−12k/bardbl·/bardbl6j+k/bardbl−| (8i−12k)·(6j+k)|equal
to zero? Explain.
In Exercises 6 to 11, compute /bardblu/bardbl,/bardblv/bardbl, andu·vfor the given vectors in R3.
6.u=15i−2j+4k,v=πi+3j−k
7.u=2j−i,v=−j+i
8.u=5i−j+2k,v=i+j−k
9.u=−i+3j+k,v=−2i−3j−7k
10. u=−i+3k,v=4j
11. u=−i+2j−3k,v=−i−3j+4k
12. Letv=(2, 3). Suppose w∈R2is perpendicular to v,
and that /bardblw/bardbl=5. This determines wup to sign. Find
one such w.
13. Find bandcso that (5, b,c) is orthogonal to both (1, 2,
3) and (1, −2, 1).
14. Letv1=( 0 ,3 ,0 ) ,v 2=( 2 ,2 ,0 ) ,v 3=(1, 1, 3). These
three vectors with their tails at the origin determine a
parallelepiped P.
(a) Draw P.
(b) Determine the length of the main diagonal (from theorigin to its opposite vertex).
15. What is the geometric relation between the vectors vand
wifv·w=− /bardbl v/bardbl/bardblw/bardbl?16. Normalize the vectors in Exercises 6 to 8. (Only thesolution corresponding to Exercise 7 is in the StudentGuide.)
17. Find the angle between the vectors in Exercises 9 to 11.If necessary, express your answer in terms of cos
−1.
18. Find all values of xsuch that ( x,1 ,x) and ( x,−6, 1) are
orthogonal.
19. Find all values of xsuch that (7, x,−10) and (3, x,x)
are orthogonal.
20. Find the projection of u=−i+j+konto
v=2i+j−3k.
21. Find the projection of v=2i+j−3konto
u=−i+j+k.
22. What restrictions must be made on the scalar bso that
the vector 2i +bjis orthogonal to (a)−3i+2j+kand
(b)k?
23. Vectors vandware sides of an equilateral triangle
whose sides have length 1. Compute v·w.
24. Letb=( 3 ,1 ,1 )a n d Pbe the plane through the origin
given by x+y+2z=0.
(a) Find an orthogonal basis for P. That is, ﬁnd two
nonzero orthogonal vectors v1,v2∈P.

<<<PAGE 57>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 30
30 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
(b) Find the orthogonal projection of bonto P. That is,
ﬁnd Proj v1b+Projv2b.
25. Find two nonparallel vectors both orthogonal to (1, 1, 1).
26. Find the line through (3, 1, −2) that intersects and is
perpendicular to the line
x=−1+t,y=−2+t,z=−1+t.[HINT:I f
(x0,y0,z0) is the point of intersection, ﬁnd its
coordinates.]
27. Using the dot product, prove the converse of the
Pythagorean theorem. That is, show that if the lengths ofthe sides of a triangle satisfy a
2+b2=c2, then the
triangle is a right triangle.
28. Forv=(v1,v2,v3) letα,β,γdenote the angles
between vand the x,y, and zaxes, respectively. Show
that cos2α+cos2β+cos2γ=1.
29. A ship at position (1, 0) on a nautical chart (with northin the positive ydirection) sights a rock at position (2,
4). What is the vector joining the ship to the rock? Whatangleθdoes this vector make with due north? (This is
called the bearing of the rock from the ship.)
30. Suppose that the ship in Exercise 29 is pointing duenorth and traveling at a speed of 4 knots relative to thewater. There is a current ﬂowing due east at 1 knot. Theunits on the chart are nautical miles; 1 knot =1 nautical
mile per hour.
(a) If there were no current, what vector uwould
represent the velocity of the ship relative to the sea
bottom?
(b) If the ship were just drifting with the current, what
vector vwould represent its velocity relative to the sea
bottom?
(c) What vector wrepresents the total velocity of the
ship?(d) Where would the ship be after 1 hour?(e) Should the captain change course?(f) What if the rock were an iceberg?
31. An airplane is located at position (3, 4, 5) at noon and
traveling with velocity 400i +500j−kkilometers per
hour. The pilot spots an airport at position (23, 29, 0).
(a)At what time will the plane pass directly over the
airport? (Assume that the plane is ﬂying over ﬂat ground
and that the vector kpoints straight up.)(b)How high above the airport will the plane be when it
passes?
32. The wind velocity v1is 40 miles per hour (mi/h) from
east to west while an airplane travels with air speed v2of
100 mi/h due north. The speed of the airplane relative tothe ground is the vector sum v
1+v2.
(a) Find v1+v2.
(b) Draw a ﬁgure to scale.
33. A force of 50 lb is directed 50◦above horizontal,
pointing to the right. Determine its horizontal andvertical components. Display all results in a ﬁgure.
34. Two persons pull horizontally on ropes attached to apost, the angle between the ropes being 60
◦. Person A
pulls with a force of 150 lb, while person B pulls with aforce of 110 lb.
(a)The resultant force is the vector sum of the two
forces. Draw a ﬁgure to scale that graphically represents
the three forces.
(b)Using trigonometry, determine formulas for the
vector components of the two forces in a conveniently
chosen coordinate system. Perform the algebraicaddition, and ﬁnd the angle the resultant force makeswith A.
35. A 1-kilogram (1-kg) mass located at the origin issuspended by ropes attached to the two points (1, 1, 1)and (−1,−1, 1). If the force of gravity is pointing in the
direction of the vector −k, what is the vector describing
the force along each rope? [H
INT: Use the symmetry of
the problem. A 1-kg mass weighs 9.8 newtons (N).]
36. Suppose that an object moving in direction i+jis acted
on by a force given by the vector 2i +j. Express this
force as the sum of a force in the direction of motion anda force perpendicular to the direction of motion.
37. A force of 6 N makes an angle of π/4 radian with the y
axis, pointing to the right. The force acts against themovement of an object along the straight line connecting(1, 2) to (5, 4).
(a)Find a formula for the force vector F.
(b)Find the angle θbetween the displacement direction
D=(5−1)i+(4−2)jand the force direction F.
(c)Thework done isF·D, or, equivalently,
/bardblF/bardbl/bardblD/bardbl cosθ. Compute the work from both formulas
and compare.

<<<PAGE 58>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 31
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 31
38. Show that in any parallelogram the sum of the squares of
the lengths of the four sides equals the sum of thesquares of the lengths of the two diagonals.39. Using vectors, show that the diagonals of a rectangle areperpendicular if and only if the rectangle is a square.
1.3Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product
In Section 1.2 we deﬁned a product of vectors that was a scalar. In this section we shall
deﬁne a product of vectors that is a vector; that is, we shall show how, given two vectorsaandb, we can produce a third vector a×b, called the cross product ofaandb. This
new vector will have the pleasing geometric property that it is perpendicular to the planespanned (determined) by aandb. The deﬁnition of the cross product is based on the
notions of the matrix and the determinant, and so these are developed ﬁrst. Once thishas been accomplished, we can study the geometric implications of the mathematicalstructure we have built.
2×2 Matrices
We deﬁne a 2 ×2matrix to be an array
/bracketleftbigga11a12
a21a22/bracketrightbigg
,
where a11,a12,a21, and a22are four scalars. For example,
/bracketleftbigg21
04/bracketrightbigg
,/bracketleftbigg−10
11/bracketrightbigg
, and/bracketleftbigg13 7
61 1/bracketrightbigg
are 2×2 matrices. The determinant
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
of such a matrix is the real number deﬁned by the equation
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=a
11a22−a12a21. (1)
example 1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle11
11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1−1=0;/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle12
34/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=4−6=−2;/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle56
78/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=40−42=−2
▲
3×3 Matrices
A3×3matrix is an array
⎡
⎣a11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33⎤⎦,

<<<PAGE 59>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 32
32 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
where, again, each aijis a scalar; aijdenotes the entry in the array that is in the ith row
and the jth column. We deﬁne the determinant o fa3 ×3 matrix by the rule
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=a
11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
22a23
a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−a
12/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a23
a31a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+a
13/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a22
a31a32/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (2)
Without some mnemonic device, formula (2) would be difﬁcult to memorize. The rule
to learn is that you move along the ﬁrst row, multiplying a
1jby the determinant of the
2×2 matrix obtained by canceling out the ﬁrst row and the jth column, and then you
add these up, remembering to put a minus in front of the a12term. For example, the
determinant multiplied by the middle term of formula (2), namely,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a23
a31a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
is obtained by crossing out the ﬁrst row and the second column of the given 3 ×3 matrix:
⎡
⎣a11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33⎤⎦.
example
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle100
010001/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10
01/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle00
01/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle01
00/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1.
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle123
456789/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle56
89/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle46
79/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle45
78/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−3+12−9=0
▲
Properties of Determinants
An important property of determinants is that interchanging two rows or two columns
results in a change of sign. For 2 ×2 determinants, this is a consequence of the deﬁnition
as follows: For rows, we have
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=a
11a22−a21a12=−(a21a12−a11a22)=−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a22
a11a12/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
and for columns,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−(a
12a21−a11a22)=−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
12a11
a22a21/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
We leave it to you to verify this property for the 3 ×3 case.
A second fundamental property of determinants is that we can factor scalars out of
any row or column. For 2 ×2 determinants, this means
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαa
11a12
αa21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11αa12
a21αa22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=α/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a21a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαa
11αa12
a21 a22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11 a12
αa21αa22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.

<<<PAGE 60>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 33
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 33
Similarly, for 3 ×3 determinants we have
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαa
11αa12αa13
a21 a22 a23
a31 a32 a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=α/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11αa12a13
a21αa22a23
a31αa32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
and so on. These results follow from the deﬁnitions. In particular, if any row or column
consists of zeros, then the value of the determinant is zero.
A third fundamental fact about determinants is the following: If we change a row
(or column) by adding another row (or, respectively, column) to it, the value of the
determinant remains the same. For the 2 ×2 case, this means that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1+b1a2+b2
b1 b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1 a2
b1+a1b2+a2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1+a2a2
b1+b2b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a1+a2
b1b1+b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
For the 3 ×3 case, this means
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2a3
b1b2b3
c1c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1+b1a2+b2a3+b3
b1 b2 b3
c1 c2 c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1+a2a2a3
b1+b2b2b3
c1+c2c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
and so on. Again, this property can be proved using the deﬁnition of the determinant.
example
3 Suppose
a=αb+βc; that is, a=(a1,a2,a3)=α(b1,b2,b3)+β(c1,c2,c3).
Show that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2a3
b1b2b3
c1c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=0.
solution We shall prove the case α/negationslash=0,β/negationslash=0. The case α=0=βis trivial, and the case
where exactly one of α,βis zero is a simple modiﬁcation of the case we prove. Using
the fundamental properties of determinants, the determinant in question is
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαb
1+βc1αb2+βc2αb3+βc3
b1 b2 b3
c1 c2 c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=−1
α/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαb
1+βc1αb2+βc2αb3+βc3
−αb1 −αb2 −αb3
c1 c2 c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(factoring −1/α out of the second row)
=/parenleftbigg
−1
α/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
−1
β/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleαb
1+βc1αb2+βc2αb3+βc3
−αb1 −αb2 −αb3
−βc1 −βc2 −βc3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(factoring −1/β out of the third row)

<<<PAGE 61>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 34
34 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
=1
αβ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleβc
1βc2βc3
−αb1−αb2−αb3
−βc1−βc2−βc3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(adding the second row to the ﬁrst row)
=1
αβ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle000
−αb
1−αb2−αb3
−βc1−βc2−βc3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(adding the third row to the ﬁrst row)
=0.
▲
Closely related to these properties is the fact that we can expand a 3×3determinant
along any row or column using the signs in the following checkerboard pattern:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+−+
−+−+−+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
For instance, you can check that we can expand “by minors” along the middle row:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−a
21/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
12a13
a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+a
22/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a13
a31a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−a
23/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12
a31a32/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Let us redo the second determinant in Example 2 using this formula:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle123
456789/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−4/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle23
89/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+5/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle13
79/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−6/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle12
78/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=(−4)(−6)+(5)(12) +(−6)(6) =0.
Historical NoteDeterminants appear to have been invented and first used by Leibniz in 1693, in
connection with solutions of linear equations. Maclaurin and Cramer developedtheir properties between 1729 and 1750; in particular, they showed that thesolution of the system of equations
a
11x1+a12x2+a13x3=b1
a21x1+a22x2+a23x3=b2
a31x1+a32x2+a33x3=b3
is
x1=1
/Delta1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleb1a12a13
b2a22a23
b3a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
, x2=1
/Delta1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea11b1a13
a21b2a23
a31b3a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
, x3=1
/Delta1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea11a12b1
a21a22b2
a31a32b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
,
where
/Delta1=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea11a12a13
a21a22a23
a31a32a33/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
,

<<<PAGE 62>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 35
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 35
a fact now known as Cramer's rule. While this method is rather inefficient from a
numerical point of view, it is of theoretical importance in matrix theory. Later,
Vandermonde (1772) and Cauchy (1812), treating determinants as a separatetopic worthy of special attention, developed the field more systematically, withcontributions by Laplace, Jacobi, and others. Formulas for volumes ofparallelepipeds in terms of determinants are due to Lagrange (1775). We shallstudy these later in this section. Although during the nineteenth centurymathematicians studied matrices and determinants, the subjects wereconsidered to be distinct disciplines. For the full history up to 1900, see T. Muir, The
Theory of Determinants in the Historical Order of Development (reprinted by
Dover, New York, 1960).
Cross Products
Now that we have established the necessary properties of determinants and discussed
their history, we are ready to proceed with the cross product of vectors.
Deﬁnition The Cross Product Suppose that a=a1i+a2j+a3kandb=
b1i+b2j+b3kare vectors in R3. The cross product orvector product ofaand
b, denoted a×b, is deﬁned to be the vector
a×b=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
2a3
b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglei−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a3
b1b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglej+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglek,
or, symbolically,
a×b=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
a
1a2a3
b1b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Even though we only deﬁned determinants for arrays of real numbers, this formal
expression involving vectors is a useful memory aid for the cross product.
example 4 Find (3i −j+k)×(i+2j−k).
solution
(3i−j+k)×(i+2j−k)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
3−11
12 −1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−i+4j+7k.
▲
Certain algebraic properties of the cross product follow from the deﬁnition. If a,b,
andcare vectors and α,β, andγare scalars, then
(i)a×b=−(b×a)
(ii)a×(βb+γc)=β(a×b)+γ(a×c) and ( αa+βb)×c=α(a×c)+β(b×c).
Note that a×a=−(a×a), by property (i). Thus, a×a=0. In particular,
i×i=0, j×j=0, k×k=0.

<<<PAGE 63>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 36
36 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
Also,
i×j=k, j×k=i, k×i=j,
which can be remembered by cyclicly permuting i,j,klike this:
i
j k
To give a geometric interpretation of the cross product, we ﬁrst introduce the triple
product. Given three vectors a,b, and c, the real number
(a×b)·c
is called the triple product ofa,b, and c(in that order). To obtain a formula for it, let
a=a1i+a2j+a3k,b=b1i+b2j+b3k, and c=c1i+c2j+c3k. Then
(a×b)·c=/parenleftbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
2a3
b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglei−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a3
b1b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglej+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglek/parenrightbigg
·(c
1i+c2j+c3k)
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
2a3
b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglec
1−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a3
b1b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglec
2+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglec
3.
This is the expansion by minors of the third row of the determinant, so
(a×b)·c=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2a3
b1b2b3
c1c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Ifcis a vector in the plane spanned by the vectors aandb, then the third row in the
determinant expression for ( a×b)·cis a linear combination of the ﬁrst and second
rows, and therefore ( a×b)·c=0. In other words, the vector a×bis orthogonal to
any vector in the plane spanned by aandb, in particular to both aandb.
Next, we calculate the length of a×b. Note that
/bardbla×b/bardbl
2=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
2a3
b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a3
b1b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=(a2b3−a3b2)2+(a1b3−b1a3)2+(a1b2−b1a2)2.
If we expand the terms in the last expression, we can recollect them to give
(a2
1+a2
2+a2
3)(b2
1+b2
2+b2
3)−(a1b1+a2b2+a3b3)2,
which equals
/bardbla/bardbl2/bardblb/bardbl2−(a·b)2=/bardbla/bardbl2/bardblb/bardbl2−/bardbla/bardbl2/bardblb/bardbl2cos2θ=/bardbla/bardbl2/bardblb/bardbl2sin2θ,
where θis the angle between aandb,0≤θ≤π. Taking square roots and using√
k2=|k|, we ﬁnd that /bardbla×b/bardbl=/bardbl a/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl|sin θ|.
Combining our results, we conclude that a×bis avector perpendicular to the plane
Pspanned by aandbwith length /bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl|sin θ|. We see from Figure 1.3.1 that this
length is also the area of the parallelogram (with base /bardbla/bardbland height /bardblbsinθ/bardbl) spanned
byaandb. There are still two possible vectors that satisfy these conditions because
there are two choices of direction that are perpendicular (or normal) to P. This is clear

<<<PAGE 64>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 37
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 37
ab
0||b|| sin u un1
−n1 = n2P
ﬁgure 1.3.1 n1andn2are the two possible vectors
orthogonal to both aandb, and with norm
/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl|sinθ|.
from Figure 1.3.1, which shows the two choices n1and−n1perpendicular to P, with
/bardbln1/bardbl=/bardbl − n1/bardbl=/bardbl a/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl|sinθ|.
Which vector represents a×b,n1or−n1? The answer is n1. Try a few cases such
ask=i×jto verify this. The following “right-hand rule” determines the direction of
a×bin general. Take your right hand and place it so your ﬁngers curl from atoward b
through the acute angleθ, as in Figure 1.3.2. Then your thumb points in the direction
ofa×b.a × b
b
aq
ﬁgure 1.3.2 The
right-hand rule for
determining in which of
the two possible
directions a×bpoints.The Cross Product Geometric deﬁnition: a×bis the vector such that:
(1)/bardbla×b/bardbl=/bardbl a/bardbl/bardblb/bardblsinθ, the area of the parallelogram spanned by aandb
(θis the angle between aandb;0≤θ≤π); see Figure 1.3.3.
(2)a×bis perpendicular to aandb, and the triple ( a,b,a×b) obeys the
right-hand rule.
Component formula:
(a1i+a2j+a3k)×(b1i+b2j+b3k)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
a1a2a3
b1b2b3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=(a2b3−a3b2)i−(a1b3−a3b1)j+(a1b2−a2b1)k.
Algebraic rules:
1.a×b=0if and only if aandbare parallel or aorbis zero.
2.a×b=−b×a.
3.a×(b+c)=a×b+a×c.
4. (a+b)×c=a×c+b×c.
5. (αa)×b=α(a×b).
Multiplication table:
Second factor
× ij k
i 0k −j
First j−k0 i
factor k j −i0

<<<PAGE 65>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 38
38 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
aa /H11003 b
yxLength = ||b|| |sin u|
b
u
z
ﬁgure 1.3.3 The length of a×bis the
area of the parallelogram formed by
aandb.
example 5 Find the area of the parallelogram spanned by the two vectors a=i+2j+3kand
b=−i−k.
solution We calculate the cross product of aandbby applying the component or determinant
formula, with a1=1,a2=2,a3=3,b1=−1,b2=0,b3=−1:
a×b=[(2)(−1)−(3)(0)] i+[(3)(−1)−(1)(−1)]j+[(1)(0) −(2)(−1)]k
=−2i−2j+2k.
Thus, the area is
/bardbla×b/bardbl=/radicalbig
(−2)2+(−2)2+(2)2=2√
3.▲
example 6 Find a unit vector orthogonal to the vectors i+jandj+k.
solution A vector perpendicular to both i+jandj+kis their cross product, namely, the vector
(i+j)×(j+k)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleijk
110
011/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=i−j+k.
Because /bardbli−j+k/bardbl=√
3, the vector
1√
3(i−j+k)
is a unit vector perpendicular to i+jandj+k.▲
example 7 Derive an identity relating the dot and cross products from the formulas
/bardblu×v/bardbl=/bardbl u/bardbl/bardblv/bardblsinθ and u·v=/bardblu/bardbl/bardblv/bardblcosθ
by eliminating θ.
solution Seeing sin θand cos θmultiplied by the same expression suggests squaring the two
formulas and adding the results. We get
/bardblu×v/bardbl2+(u·v)2=/bardblu/bardbl2/bardblv/bardbl2(sin2θ+cos2θ)=/bardblu/bardbl2/bardblv/bardbl2,

<<<PAGE 66>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 39
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 39
so
/bardblu×v/bardbl2=/bardblu/bardbl2/bardblv/bardbl2−(u·v)2.
This identity is interesting because it establishes a link between the dot and cross
products. ▲
Geometry of Determinants
Using the cross product, we may obtain a basic geometric interpretation of 2 ×2 and
3×3 determinants. Let a=a1i+a2jandb=b1i+b2jbe two vectors in the plane. If
θis the angle between aandb, we have seen that /bardbla×b/bardbl=/bardbl a/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl|sin θ|is the area
of the parallelogram with adjacent sides aandb. The cross product as a determinant is
a×b=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
a
1a20
b1b20/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglek.
Thus, the area /bardbla×b/bardblis the absolute value of the determinant
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=a
1b2−a2b1.
Geometry of 2×2 Determinants The absolute value of the determinant /vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleis the area of the parallelogram whose adjacent sides are the vectors a=
a
1i+a2jandb=b1i+b2j. The sign of the determinant is +when, rotating in
the counterclockwise direction, the angle from atobis less than π.
example 8 Find the area of the triangle with vertices at the points (1, 1), (0, 2), and (3, 2) (see
Figure 1.3.4).
2
1
3
(a) (b)2 11
1 0 0 −1 22
c − a b − ab
ac
xy
xy
ﬁgure 1.3.4 (a) Find the area Aof the shaded triangle by expressing the sides as
vector differences (b) to get A=/bardbl(b−a)×(c−a)/bardbl/2.

<<<PAGE 67>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 40
40 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
solution Leta=i+j,b=2j, and c=3i+2j. It is clear that the triangle whose vertices
are the endpoints of the vectors a,b, and chas the same area as the triangle with
vertices at 0,b−a, and c−a(Figure 1.3.4). Indeed, the latter is merely a translation
of the former triangle. Because the area of this translated triangle is one-half the area
of the parallelogram with adjacent sides b−a=− i+j, and c−a=2i+j,w e
ﬁnd that the area of the triangle with vertices (1, 1), (0, 2), and (3, 2) is the absolutevalue of
1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−11
21/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−3
2,
that is, 3/2. ▲
There is an interpretation of determinants of 3 ×3 matrices as volumes that is
analogous to the interpretation of determinants of 2 ×2 matrices as areas.
Geometry of 3 ×3 Determinants The absolute value of the determinant
D=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
1a2a3
b1b2b3
c1c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
is the volume of the parallelepiped whose adjacent sides are the vectors
a=a
1i+a2j+a3k, b=b1i+b2j+b3k, and c=c1i+c2j+c3k.
To prove the statement in the preceding box, we refer to Figure 1.3.5 and note that
the length of the cross product, namely, /bardbla×b/bardbl, is the area of the parallelogram with
adjacent sides aandb. Moreover, ( a×b)·c=/bardbla×b/bardbl/bardblc/bardbl cosψ, where ψis the angle
thatcmakes with the normal to the plane spanned by aandb. Because the volume of
the parallelepiped with adjacent sides a,b, and cis the product of the area of the base
/bardbla×b/bardbland the altitude /bardblc/bardbl| cosψ|, it follows that the volume is |(a×b)·c)|.W es a w
earlier that ( a×b)·c=D, so the volume equals the absolute value of D.
xyz
abca  b
hyﬁgure 1.3.5 The volume of the
parallelepiped spanned by a,b,cis
the absolute value of the
determinant of the 3 ×3 matrix
having a,b,cas its rows.

<<<PAGE 68>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 41
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 41
example 9 Find the volume of the parallelepiped spanned by the three vectors i+3k,2i+j−2k,
and 5 i+4k.
solution The volume is the absolute value of
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10 3
21 −2
50 4/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
If we expand this determinant by minors by going down the second column, the only
nonzero term is
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle13
54/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(1)=−11,
so the volume equals 11. ▲
Equations of Planes
LetPbe a plane in space, P 0=(x0,y0,z0) a point on that plane, and suppose that
n=Ai+Bj+Ckis a vector normal to that plane (see Figure 1.3.6). Let P =(x,y,z)
be a point in R3. Then P lies on the plane Pif and only if the vector− →P0P=(x−x0)i+
(y−y0)j+(z−z0)kis perpendicular to n, that is,− →P0P·n=0, or, equivalently,
(Ai+Bj+Ck)·[(x−x0)i+(y−y0)j+(z−z0)k]=0.
Thus,
A(x−x0)+B(y−y0)+C(z−z0)=0.
Equation of a Plane in Space The equation of the plane Pthrough
(x0,y0,z0) that has a normal vector n=Ai+Bj+Ckis
A(x−x0)+B(y−y0)+C(z−z0)=0;
that is, ( x,y,z)∈Pif and only if
Ax+By+Cz+D=0,
where D=− Ax0−By0−Cz0.
P
xyP0P
z
n
ﬁgure 1.3.6 The points P of the plane through P 0and
perpendicular to nsatisfy the equation−→P0P·n=0.

<<<PAGE 69>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 42
42 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
The four numbers A,B,C, and Dare not determined uniquely by the plane P.T os e e
this, note that ( x,y,z) satisﬁes the equation Ax+By+Cz+D=0 if and only if it
also satisﬁes the relation
(λA)x+(λB)y+(λC)z+(λD)=0
for any constant λ/negationslash=0. Furthermore, if A,B,C,DandA/prime,B/prime,C/prime,D/primedetermine the
same plane P, then A=λA/prime,B=λB/prime,C=λC/prime,D=λD/primefor a scalar λ. Conse-
quently, A,B,C,Daredetermined by Pup to a scalar multiple.
example 10 Determine an equation for the plane that is perpendicular to the vector i+j+kand
contains the point (1, 0, 0).
solution Using the general form A(x−x0)+B(y−y0)+C(z−z0)=0, the plane is
1(x−1)+1(y−0)+1(z−0)=0; that is, x+y+z=1. ▲
example 11 Find an equation for the plane containing the three points (1, 1, 1), (2, 0, 0), and
(1, 1, 0).
solution Method 1. This is a “brute force” method that you can use if you have forgotten thevector methods. The equation for any plane is of the form Ax+By+Cz+D=0.
Because the points (1, 1, 1), (2, 0, 0), and (1, 1, 0) lie in the plane, we have
A+B+C+D=0,
2A +D=0,
A+B +D=0.
Proceeding by elimination, we reduce this system of equations to the form
2A+D=0 (second equation)
2B+D=0( 2 ×third−second),
C=0 (ﬁrst −third).
Because the numbers A,B,C, and Dare determined only up to a scalar multiple, we
can ﬁx the value of one of them, say A=1, and then the others will be determined
uniquely. We get A=1,D=−2,B=1,C=0. Thus, an equation of the plane that
contains the given points is x+y−2=0.
Method 2. Let P =(1, 1, 1), Q =(2, 0, 0), R =(1, 1, 0). Any vector normal to the
plane must be orthogonal to the vectors− →QP and− →RP, which are parallel to the plane,
because their endpoints lie on the plane. Thus, n=− →QP×− →RP is normal to the plane.
Computing the cross product, we have
n=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleijk
−111
001/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=i+j.
Because the point (2, 0, 0) lies on the plane, we conclude that the equation is given by
(x−2)+(y−0)+0·(z−0)=0; that is, x+y−2=0.
▲
Two planes are called parallel when their normal vectors are parallel. Thus, the
planes A1x+B1y+C1z+D1=0 and A2x+B2y+C2z+D2=0 are parallel

<<<PAGE 70>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 43
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 43
when n1=A1i+B1j+C1kand n2=A2i+B2j+C2kare parallel; that is,
n1=σn2for a constant σ. For example, the planes
x−2y+z=0 and −2x+4y−2z=10
are parallel, but the planes
x−2y+z=0 and 2 x−2y+z=10
are not parallel.
Distance: Point to Plane
Let us now determine the distance from a point E =(x1,y1,z1) to the plane Pdescribed
by the equation A(x−x0)+B(y−y0)+C(z−z0)=Ax+By+Cz+D=0. To
do so, consider the unit normal vector
n=Ai+Bj+Ck√
A2+B2+C2,
which is a unit vector normal to the plane. Drop a perpendicular from E to the plane
and construct the triangle REQ shown in Figure 1.3.7. The distance d=/bardbl− →EQ/bardblis the
length of the projection of v=− →RE (the vector from R to E) onto n; thus,
Distance =|v·n|=| [(x1−x0)i+(y1−y0)j+(z1−z0)k]·n|
=|A(x1−x0)+B(y1−y0)+C(z1−z0)|√
A2+B2+C2.
If the plane is given in the form Ax+By+Cz+D=0, then for any point ( x0,y0,z0)
on it, D=− (Ax0+By0+Cz0). Substitution into the previous formula gives the
following:
Distance from a Point to a Plane The distance from ( x1,y1,z1) to the
plane Ax+By+Cz+D=0i s
Distance =|Ax1+By1+Cz1+D|√
A2+B2+C2.
R = (x0, y0, z0)E = (x1, y1, z1)
vn
Q
x
y
z
Pﬁgure 1.3.7 The geometry for determining the
distance from the point E to plane P.

<<<PAGE 71>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 44
44 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 12 Find the distance from Q =(2, 0,−1) to the plane 3 x−2y+8z+1=0.
solution We substitute into the formula in the preceding box the values x1=2y1=0,z1=−1
(the point) and A=3,B=−2,C=8,D=1 (the plane) to give
Distance =|3·2+(−2)·0+8(−1)+1|√32+(−2)2+82=|−1|√
77=1√
77.
▲
Historical NoteThe Origins of the Vector, Scalar, Dot, and Cross Products
QUADRATIC EQUATIONS, CUBIC EQUATIONS, AND IMAGINARY NUMBERS. We
know from Babylonian clay tablets that this great civilization possessed the
quadratic formula, enabling them (in verbal form) to solve quadratic equations.Because the concept of negative numbers had to wait until the sixteenth centuryto see the light of day, the Babylonians did not consider either negative(or imaginary) solutions.
With the Renaissance and the rediscovery of ancient learning, Italian
mathematicians began to wonder about the solutions of cubic equations,
x
3+ax2+bx+c=0, where a,b, and care positive numbers.
Around 1500, Scipione del Ferro, a professor in Bologna (the oldest European
university), was able to solve cubics of the form x3+bx=c, but kept his discovery
secret. Before his death, he passed his formula to his successor, Antonio Fior, whofor a while also kept the formula to himself. It remained a secret until a brilliant,self-taught mathematician named Nicolo Fontana, also known as Tartaglia (thestammerer), appeared on the scene. Tartaglia claimed he could solve the cubic,and Fior felt he needed to protect the priority of del Ferro, and so in responsechallenged Tartaglia to a public competition.
We are told that Tartaglia was able to solve all of the thirty cubic equations
posed by Fior. Amazingly, some scholars believe that Tartaglia discovered theformula for solutions to x
3+cx=donly days before the contest was to take
place.
The greatest mathematician of the sixteenth century, Gerolamo
Cardano (1501--1576)---a Renaissance scholar, mathematician,physician, and fortuneteller---gave the first published solution of the generalcubic. Although born of modest means, he (like Tartaglia) rose, througheffort and natural brilliance, to great fame. Cardano is the author ofthe first book on games of chance (marking the beginning of modernprobability theory) and also of Ars Magna (the Great Art), which marks
the beginning of modern algebra. It was in this book that Cardanopublished the solution to the general cubic x
3+ax2+bx+c=0.
How did he get it?
While working on his algebra book, and aware that Tartaglia was able to
solve forms of cubic, Cardano, in 1539, wrote to Tartaglia asking for a meeting.After some cajoling, Tartaglia agreed. It was at this meeting that, in exchange fora pledge of secrecy (and we know how these generally go), Tartaglia revealedhis solution, from which Cardano was able to derive a solution to the generalequation, which then appeared in Ars Magna . Feeling betrayed, Tartaglia led a
scathing attack on Cardano, leading to a small soap opera.
What is important for us, at the moment, is that as a consequence of the
method of solution, something very strange occurred. Consider the cubic
x
3−15x=4. Its only positive root is 4. However, the Tartaglia--Cardano solution

<<<PAGE 72>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 45
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 45
formula yields
x=3/radicalBig
2+/radicalbig
−121 +3/radicalBig
2−/radicalbig
−121 (3)
as the positive root. Thus, this number must be equal to 4. Yet this must be
nonsense , because inside the cube root we are taking the square root of a
negative number---at the time, an absolute impossibility. This was a real shock.Over 100 years later, in 1702, when Leibniz, codiscoverer of calculus, showed thegreat Dutch scientist Christian Huygens the formula
/radicalbig
6=/radicalBig
1+/radicalbig
−3+/radicalBig
1−/radicalbig
−3 (4)
Huygens was completely flabbergasted, and remarked that this equality “defiesall human understanding.” [Try, informally, to verify both formulas (1) and (2) foryourself.]
Whether nonsense or not, Tartaglia and Cardano's formula forced
mathematicians to confront square roots of negative numbers (or imaginary
numbers, as they are called today).
THE MATURING OF COMPLEX NUMBERS. For well over two centuries, numbers
likei=/radicalbig
−1 were looked at with great suspicion. The square root of any negative
number can be written in terms of i; for example,√−a=/radicalbig
(a)(−1)=√a/radicalbig
−1.
In the middle of the eighteenth century, the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Eulerconnected the universal cosmic numbers eandπwith the imaginary number i.
Whatever iwas or meant, it necessarily follows that
e
πi=−1,
that is, e“raised to the power πiequals −1.” Thus, these cosmic numbers,
reflecting perhaps some deeper mystery, are in fact connected to each other by
a very simple formula.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the German mathematician Karl
Friedrich Gauss was able to prove the fundamental theorem of algebra , which
says that any nth-degree polynomial has nroots (some or all of which may be
imaginary; that is, the roots have the form a+bi, where, as earlier, i=/radicalbig
−1 and
where aand bare real numbers).
By the middle of the nineteenth century, the French mathematician
Augustin-Louis Cauchy and the German mathematician Bernhard Riemann had
developed the differential calculus for functions of one complex variable. Anexample of such a function is F(z)=z
n, where z=a+bi. In this case, the usual
formula for the derivative, F/prime(z)=nzn−1, still holds. However, by introducing
imaginary numbers, Cauchy was able to evaluate “real integrals” thatheretofore could not be evaluated. For example, it is possible to show that
/integraldisplay∞
0sinx
xdx=π
2
and that
/integraldisplayπ
0log sin xd x=−πlog 2.
These were stunning results.

<<<PAGE 73>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 46
46 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
In summary, the solution of the cubic equation, the fundamental theorem of
algebra, and the evaluation of real integrals proved how valuable it was to
consider imaginary numbers a+bi, even though they were not (at least not yet)
onterra firma. Did they really exist or were they simply phantoms of our
imagination , and thus truly imaginary?
HAMILTON'S DEFINITION OF COMPLEX NUMBERS. Many mathematicians after
Cardano made important contributions to imaginary (or complex) numbers,
including Argand, Wessel, and Gauss---all of whom represented themgeometrically. However, the modern, intellectually rigorous definition of acomplex number is due to the great Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton(see Figure 1.3.8). After Newton, who created the vector concept through hisinvention of the notion of force, Hamilton was, beyond any doubt, the mostimportant and singular figure in the development of vector calculus. It wasHamilton who gave us the terms vector and scalar quantity .
ﬁgure 1.3.8 Sir William Rowan
Hamilton (1805--1865). William Rowan Hamilton was born in Dublin, Ireland, at midnight on August 3,
1805. In 1823, he entered Trinity College, Dublin. His university career, by any
standard, was phenomenal. By his third year, Trinity offered him a professorship,the Andrew's Chair of Astronomy, and the State named him Royal Astronomer ofIreland. These honors were based on his theoretical prediction (in 1824) of twoentirely new and unexpected optical phenomena, namely, internal and externalconical refraction.
By 1827 he had become interested in imaginary numbers. He wrote that “the
symbol
/radicalbig
−1 is absurd, and denotes an impossible extraction ...” He set out to
put the idea of a complex number on a firm logical foundation. His solution was
to define a complex number a+bias a point ( a,b) in the plane R2, much as we
do today. Thus, the imaginary number bifor Hamilton was simply the point (0, b)
on the yaxis. The difference between complex numbers and the Cartesian plane
was that Hamilton followed the proforma multiplication of complex numbers:
(a+bi)(c+di)=(ac−bd)+(ad+bc)i,
and defined a new multiplication on the complex plane:
(a,b)·(c,d)=(ac−bd,ad+bc).
Thus, i=/radicalbig
−1 just disappears into the point (0, 1), and the mystery and
confusion over complex numbers disappears along with it.
FROM COMPLEX NUMBERS TO QUATERNIONS. From Hamilton's interpretation,
complex numbers are nothing more than the extension of real numbers into a
new dimension, two dimensions . Hamilton, however, also did fundamental work
in mechanics, and he knew well that two dimensions were too limiting for thespace analysis necessary for understanding the physics of the three-dimensionalworld. Therefore, Hamilton set out to find a triplet system; that is, an acceptable
1
multiplication scheme on points ( a,b,c)i nR3, or, as it were, on vectors
ai+bj+ck.
1For him, “acceptable” meant that the associative law of multiplication would hold.

<<<PAGE 74>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 47
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 47
By 1843, Hamilton realized that his quest was hopeless. But then, on October
16, 1843, Hamilton discovered that what he could not achieve for R3he could
achieve for R4; he discovered quaternions, an entirely new number system.
Hamilton2had realized that the multiplication he had been searching for
could be introduced on 4-tuples ( a,b,c,d), which he had denoted by
a+bi+cj+dk.
Theawas called the scalar part and bi+cj+dkwas called the vector part,
which in reality, as with complex numbers, meant the point (a, b, c, d )i nR4. The
multiplication table he introduced was
ij=k=−ji
ki=j=−ik
jk=i=−kj
i2=j2=k2=ijk=−1.
Hamilton continued to passionately believe in his quaternions until the end of
his life. Unfortunately, historical development went in another direction.
The first step away from the quaternions was in fact taken by a
firm believer in the importance of quaternions, namely, Peter Guthrie Tait, who
was born in 1831 near Edinburgh, Scotland. In 1860, Tait was appointed to theChair of Natural Philosophy at Edinburgh University, where he remained until hisdeath in 1901. In 1867, he wrote his Elementary Treatises on Quaternions , a text
stressing physical applications. His third chapter was most significant. It was herethat Tait looked at the quaternionic product of two vectors:
v=ai+bj+ck and w=a
/primei+b/primej+c/primek.
Then the product vw, as defined by Hamilton, yields:
(ai+bj+ck)(a/primei+b/primej+c/primek)
=−(aa/prime+bb/prime+cc/prime)+(bc/prime−cb/prime)i+(ac/prime−ca/prime)j+(ab/prime−ba/prime)k
or, in modern form:
vw=−(v·w)+v×w,
where ·is the modern dot or inner product of vectors and ×is the cross product.
Tait discovered the formulas
v·w=/bardblv/bardbl/bardblw/bardbl cosθ and /bardblv×w/bardbl=/bardbl v/bardbl/bardblw/bardbl sinθ,
where θis the angle formed by vandw. Moreover, he showed that v×wwas
orthogonal to vandw, therefore giving a geometric interpretation of the
quaternionic product of two vectors.
2North British Review, 14(1858), p. 57.

<<<PAGE 75>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 48
48 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
This began the move away from the study of quaternions and back to
Newton's vectors, with the quaternionic product eventually being replaced by
two separate products, the inner product and the cross product.
By the way, you might wonder why Hamilton did not at first discover the cross
product, since it is a product on R3. The reason is that it did not have a
fundamental property that he required---namely, it was not associative:3
0=(i×i)×k/negationslash=i×(i×k)=−k.
Remarkably, Euler discovered the cross product in component form in 1750,
and three years before Hamilton, Olinde Rodrigues also discovered a form ofquartenionic multiplication.
THE MOVE AWAY FROM QUATERNIONS. The scientists ultimately
responsible for the demise of quaternions were James Clerk Maxwell
(see Figure 1.3.9), Oliver Heaviside, and Josiah Willard Gibbs, a founder ofstatistical mechanics. In the 1860s, Maxwell wrote down his monumentalequations of electricity and magnetism. No vector notation was used (it did notexist). Instead, Maxwell wrote out his equations in what we would now call“component form.” Around 1870, Tait began to correspond with Maxwell,piquing his interest in quaternions.
In 1873, Maxwell published his epic work, Treatise on Electricity and
Magnetism . Here (as we shall do in Chapter 8), Maxwell wrote down the
equations of the electromagnetic field using quaternions, thus motivating
physicists and mathematicians alike to take a closer look at them. From thismanuscript many have concluded that Maxwell was a supporter of the“quaternionic approach” to physics. The truth, however, is that Maxwell wasreluctant to use quaternions. It was Maxwell, in fact, who began the process ofseparating the vector part of a product of two quaternions (the cross product)
from its scalar part (the dot product).
It is known that Maxwell was troubled by the fact that the scalar part of the
“square” of a vector (vv ) was always negative ( −v·v), which in the case of a
velocity vector could be interpreted as negative kinetic energy---anunacceptable idea!
It was Heaviside and Gibbs who made the final push away from quaternions.
Heaviside, an independent researcher interested in electricity and magnetism,and Gibbs, a professor of mathematical physics at Yale, almost simultaneously---and independently---created our modern system of vector analysis, which wehave just started to study.
3Interestingly, if one is willing to continue to live with nonassociativity, there is also a vector product
with most of the properties of the cross product in R7; this involves yet another number system called the
octonians, which exists in R8. The nonexistence of a cross product in other dimensions is a result that
goes beyond the scope of this text. For further information, see the American Mathematical Monthly, 74
(1967), pp. 188–194, and 90(1983), p. 697, as well as J. Baez, “The Octonians,” Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 39(2002), pp. 145–206. One can show that systems like the quaternions and
octonians occur only in dimension 1 (the reals R), dimension 2 (the complex numbers), dimension 4
(the quaternions), and dimension 8 (the octonians). On the other hand, the “right” way to extend the
cross product is to introduce the notion of differential forms, which exists in anydimension. We discuss
their construction in Section 8.5.

<<<PAGE 76>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 49
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 49
In 1879, Gibbs taught a course at Yale in vector analysis with applications to
electricity and magnetism. This treatise was clearly motivated by the advent of
Maxwell's equations, which we will be studying in Chapter 8. In 1884, hepublished his Elements of Vector Analysis , a book in which all the properties of
the dot and cross products are fully developed. Knowing that much of whatGibbs wrote was in fact due to Tait, Gibbs's contemporaries did not view his bookas highly original. However, it is one of the sources from which modern vectoranalysis has come into existence.
ﬁgure 1.3.9 James Clerk
Maxwell (1831--1879).Heaviside was also largely motivated by Maxwell's brilliant work. His great
Electromagnetic Theory was published in three volumes. Volume I (1893)
contained the first extensive treatment of modern vector analysis.
We all owe a great debt to E. B. Wilson's 1901 book Vector Analysis: A Textbook
for the Use of Students of Mathematics and Physics Founded upon the Lectures ofJ. Willard Gibbs . Wilson was reluctant to take Gibbs's course, because he had just
completed a full-year course in quaternions at Harvard under J. M. Pierce, achampion of quaternionic methods; but he was forced by a dean to add thecourse to his program, and he did so in 1899. Wilson was later asked by the editorof the Yale Bicentennial Series to write a book based on Gibbs's lectures. For apicture of Gibbs and for additional historical comments on divergence and curl,see the Historical Note in Section 4.4.
exercises
1.Verify that interchanging the ﬁrst two rows of the 3 ×3
determinant/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle121
301202/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
changes the sign of the determinant.
2.Evaluate the determinants
(a) 2−10
43 2
30 1(b) 36 18 17
45 24 20
35 −2
(c) 149
49 1 6
91 62 5(d) 235
71 11 3
17 19 233.Compute a×b, where a=i−2j+k,b=2i+j+k.
4.Compute a·(b×c), where aandbare as in Exercise 3
andc=3i−j+2k.
5.Find the area of the parallelogram with sides aandb
given in Exercise 3.
6.A triangle has vertices (0, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1), and (0, −2, 3).
Find its area.
7.What is the volume of the parallelepiped with sides
2i+j−k,5i−3k, and i−2j+k?
8.What is the volume of the parallelepiped with sidesi,3j−k, and 4i +2j−k?
In Exercises 9 to 12, describe all unit vectors orthogonal to both of the given vectors.
9.i,j
10.−5i+9j−4k,7 i+8j+9k
11.−5i+9j−4k,7 i+8j+9k
12. 2i−4j+3k,−4i+8j−6k13. Compute u+v,u·v,/bardblu/bardbl,/bardblv/bardbl, and u×v, where
u=i−2j+k,v=2i−j+2k.
14. Repeat Exercise 13 foru=3i+j−k,v=−6i−2j−2k.

<<<PAGE 77>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 50
50 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
15. Find an equation for the plane that
(a)is perpendicular to v=(1, 1, 1) and passes through
( 1 ,0 ,0 ) .
(b) is perpendicular to v=(1, 2, 3) and passes through
( 1 ,1 ,1 ) .
(c) is perpendicular to the line
l(t)=( 5 ,0 ,2 ) t+(3,−1, 1) and passes through
(5,−1, 0) .
(d)is perpendicular to the line
l(t)=(−1,−2, 3) t+(0, 7, 1) and passes through
(2, 4,−1).
16. Find an equation for the plane that passes through
(a) (0, 0, 0), (2, 0, −1), and (0, 4, −3).
(b)(1, 2, 0), (0, 1, −2), and (4, 0, 1).
(c) (2, −1, 3), (0, 0, 5), and (5, 7, −1).
17. Show that the points (0, −2,−1), (1, 4, 0), (2, 10, 1) do
not determine a unique plane.
18. Let Pbe the plane deﬁned by the equation
x+y+z=1. Which of the following points are
contained in P?
(a)(0, 0, 0)
(b)(1, 1,−1)
(c) (−3, 8, −4)
(d) (1, 2, −3)
19. (a) Show that two parallel planes are either identical or
they never intersect.
(b) How do two nonparallel planes intersect?
20. Find the intersection of the planes x+2y+z=0 and
x−3y−z=0.
21. Find the intersection of the planes x+(y−1)+z=0
and−x+(y+1)−z=0.
22. Find the intersection of the two planes with equations3(x−1)+2y+(z+1)=0 and
(x−1)+4y−(z+1)=0.
23. (a) Prove the two triple-vector-product identities
(a×b)×c=(a·c)b−(b·c)a
and
a×(b×c)=(a·c)b−(a·b)c.(b) Prove ( u×v)×w=u×(v×w) if and only if
(u×w)×v=0.
(c) Also prove that
(u×v)×w+(v×w)×u+(w×u)×v=0
(called the Jacobi identity).
24. (a)Prove, without recourse to geometry, that
u·(v×w)=v·(w×u)=w·(u×v)=−u·(w×v)
=− w·(v×u)=−v·(u×w).
(b) Use part (a) and Exercise 23(a) to prove that
(u×v)·(u/prime×v/prime)=(u·u/prime)(v·v/prime)−(u·v/prime)(u/prime·v)
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleu·u/primeu·v/prime
u/prime·vv·v/prime/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
25. Verify Cramer’ s rule.
26. What is the geometric relation between the vectors vand
wif/bardblv×w/bardbl=1
2/bardblv/bardbl/bardbl w/bardbl?
27. Letv=( 1 ,1 ,0 )a n d w=(0, 2,−1). Use the algebraic
rules and multiplication table on page 37 to compute
v×wwithout using determinants.
28. Find an equation for the plane that passes through thepoint (2, −1, 3) and is perpendicular to the line
v=(1,−2, 2) +t(3,−2, 4).
29. Find an equation for the plane that passes through thepoint (1, 2, −3) and is perpendicular to the line
v=(0,−2, 1) +t(1,−2, 3).
30. Find the equation of the line that passes through thepoint (1, −2,−3) and is perpendicular to the plane
3x−y−2z+4=0.
31. Find an equation for the plane containing the two(parallel) lines
v
1=(0, 1,−2)+t(2, 3,−1)
and
v2=(2,−1, 0) +t(2, 3,−1).
32. Find a parametrization for the line perpendicular to(2,−1, 1), parallel to the plane 2 x+y−4z=1, and
passing through the point (1, 0, −3)
33. Find an equation for the plane containing the point(1, 0, 1) and the line l(t)=(1, 2,−1)+t( 1 ,0 ,5 ) .

<<<PAGE 78>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 51
1.3 Matrices, Determinants, and the Cross Product 51
34. Find the distance from the point (2, 1, −1) to the plane
x−2y+2z+5=0.
35. Find an equation for the plane that contains the line
v=(−1, 1, 2) +t(3, 2, 4) and is perpendicular to the
plane 2 x+y−3z+4=0.
36. Find an equation for the plane that passes through
(3, 2,−1) and (1, −1, 2) and that is parallel to the line
v=(1,−1, 0)+t(3, 2,−2).
37. Redo Exercises 25 and 26 of Section 1.1 using the dot
product and what you know about normals to planes.
38. Given vectors aandb, do the equations x×a=band
x·a=/bardbla/bardbldetermine a unique vector x? Argue both
geometrically and analytically.
39. Determine the distance from the plane
12x+13y+5z+2=0 to the point (1, 1, −5).
40. Find the distance to the point (6, 1, 0) from the plane
through the origin that is perpendicular to i−2j+k.
41. (a) In mechanics, the moment M of a force Fabout a
point O is deﬁned to be the magnitude of Ftimes
the perpendicular distance dfrom O to the line of
action of F. The vector moment Mis the vector of
magnitude Mwhose direction is perpendicular to the
plane of O and F, determined by the right-hand rule.
Show that M=R×F, where Ris any vector from
O to the line of action of F. (See Figure 1.3.10.)
Line of actiondO
R
F
ﬁgure 1.3.10 Moment of a
force.
(b) Find the moment of the force vector
F=i−j+2knewtons about the origin if the line
of action is x=1+t,y=1−t,z=2t.
42. Show that the plane that passes through the three points
A=(a1,a2,a3),B=(b1,b2,b3), and C=(c1,c2,c3)consists of the points P =(x,y,z) given by
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1−xa 2−ya 3−z
b1−xb 2−yb 3−z
c1−xc 2−yc 3−z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=0.
(HINT: Write the determinant as a triple product.)
43. Two media with indices of refraction n1andn2are
separated by a plane surface perpendicular to the unit
vector N. Let aandbbe unit vectors along the incident
and refracted rays, respectively, their directions being
those of the light rays. Show that n1(N×a)=n2(N×b)
by using Snell’ s law , sinθ1/sinθ2=n2/n1, where θ1
andθ2are the angles of incidence and refraction,
respectively. (See Figure 1.3.11.)
u2Light ray
N
u1
ﬁgure 1.3.11 Snell's law.
44. Justify the steps in the following computation:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle12 3
45 6
781 0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle123
0−3−6
78 1 0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle12 3
0−3−6
0−6−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−3−6
−6−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=33−36=−3.
45. Show that adding a multiple of the ﬁrst row of a matrix
to the second row leaves the determinant unchanged;
that is,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1 b1 c1
a2+λa1b2+λb1c2+λc1
a3 b3 c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1b1c1
a2b2c2
a3b3c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
[In fact, adding a multiple of any row (column) of a
matrix to another row (column) leaves the determinant
unchanged.]
46. Suppose v,w∈R3are orthogonal unit vectors. Let
u=v×w. Show that w=u×vandv=w×u.

<<<PAGE 79>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 52
52 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
1.4Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates
A standard way to represent a point in the plane R2is by means of rectangular coordinates
(x,y). However, as you have probably learned in elementary calculus, polar coordinates
in the plane can be extremely useful. As portrayed in Figure 1.4.1, the coordinates ( r,θ)
are related to ( x,y) by the formulas
x=rcosθ and y=rsinθ,
where we usually take r≥0 and 0 ≤θ< 2π.
xy
r()
q,xy
ﬁgure 1.4.1 The polar coordinates of ( x,y)are ( r,θ).
If you are not familiar with ploar coordinates, we advise you to study the relevant
section of their calculus texts. We now set forth two ways of representing points in
space other than by using rectangular Cartesian coordinates ( x,y,z). These alternative
coordinate systems are particularly well suited for certain types of problems, such asthe evaluation of integrals using a change of variables.
In 1671, Isaac Newton wrote a manuscript entitled The Method of Fuxions and
Infinite Series , which contains many uses of coordinate geometry to sketch the
solutions of equations. In particular, he introduces the polar coordinate system,
among various other coordinate systems.
In 1691, Jacob Bernoulli published a paper also containing polar coordinates.
Because Newton's manuscript was not published until after his death in 1727,credit for the discovery of polar coordinates is usually attributed to Bernoulli.
Historical Note
Cylindrical Coordinates
Deﬁnition Thecylindrical coordinates (r,θ,z) of a point ( x,y,z) are deﬁned
by (see Figure 1.4.2)
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ, z=z. (1)

<<<PAGE 80>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 53
1.4 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 53
xz
r()
q,xy,
yz
zﬁgure 1.4.2 Representing a point ( x,y,z) in terms
of its cylindrical coordinates r,θ, and z.
r = a
a
y
xz
ﬁgure 1.4.3 The graph of the points whose cylindrical
coordinates satisfy r=ais a cylinder.
To express r,θ, and zin terms of x,y, and z, and to ensure that θlies between 0 and
2π, we can write
r=/radicalbig
x2+y2,θ=⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩tan−1(y/x)i f x>0 and y≥0
π+tan−1(y/x)i f x<0
2π+tan−1(y/x)i f x>0 and y<0,z=z,
where tan−1(y/x) is taken to lie between −π/2 andπ/2. The requirement that 0 ≤θ<
2πuniquely determines θandr≥0 for a given xandy.I fx=0, then θ=π/2 for
y>0 and 3 π/2 for y<0. If x=y=0,θis undeﬁned.
In other words, for any point ( x,y,z), we represent the ﬁrst and second coordinates
in terms of polar coordinates and leave the third coordinate unchanged. Formula (1)
shows that, given ( r,θ,z), the triple ( x,y,z) is completely determined, and vice versa,
if we restrict θto the interval [0, 2 π) (sometimes the range ( −π,π] is convenient) and
require that r>0.
To see why we use the term cylindrical coordinates , note that if the conditions
0≤θ<2π,−∞<z<∞hold and if r=ais some positive constant, then the
locus of these points is a cylinder of radius a(see Figure 1.4.3).
example 1 (a) Find and plot the cylindrical coordinates of (6, 6, 8). (b) If a point has cylindrical
coordinates (8, 2 π/3,−3), what are its Cartesian coordinates? Plot.
solution For part (a), we have r=√
62+62=6√
2 and θ=tan−1(6/6)=tan−1(1)=π/4.
Thus, the cylindrical coordinates are (6√
2,π/4, 8). This is point P in Figure 1.4.4.

<<<PAGE 81>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 54
54 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
p/6
p/4
xyP(6, 6, 8)
z
28
6
4
2
642−2−4
−34
6
3, −3) Q(−4, 42−6
ﬁgure 1.4.4 Some examples of the conversion between
Cartesian and cylindrical coordinates.
For part (b), note that 2 π/3=π/2+π/6 and compute
x=rcosθ=8 cos2π
3=−8
2=−4
and
y=rsinθ=8 sin2π
3=8√
3
2=4√
3.
Thus, the Cartesian coordinates are ( −4, 4√
3,−3). This is point Q in the ﬁgure. ▲
Spherical Coordinates
Cylindrical coordinates are not the only possible generalization of polar coordinates to
three dimensions. Recall that in two dimensions the magnitude of the vector xi+yj/parenleftbig
that is,/radicalbig
x2+y2/parenrightbig
is the rin the polar coordinate system. For cylindrical coordinates,
the length of the vector xi+yj+zk, namely,
ρ=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,
is not one of the coordinates of that system—instead, we used the magnitude r=/radicalbig
x2+y2, the angle θ, and the “height” z.
We now modify this by introducing the spherical coordinate system, which does
useρas a coordinate. Spherical coordinates are often useful for problems that possess
spherical symmetry (symmetry about a point), whereas cylindrical coordinates can be
applied when cylindrical symmetry (symmetry about a line) is involved.

<<<PAGE 82>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 55
1.4 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 55
xz
r()
q,xy,
yz
r
zf ﬁgure 1.4.5 Spherical coordinates (ρ ,θ,φ);
the graph of points satisfying ρ=ais a
sphere.
Given a point ( x,y,z)∈R3, let
ρ=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2
and represent xandyby polar coordinates in the xyplane:
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ, (2)
where r=/radicalbig
x2+y2andθis determined by formula (1) [see the expression for θ
following formula (1)]. The coordinate zis given by
z=ρcosφ,
where φis the angle (chosen to lie between 0 and π, inclusive) that the radius vector
v=xi+yj+zkmakes with the positive zaxis, in the plane containing the vec-
torvand the zaxis (see Figure 1.4.5). Using the dot product, we can express φas
follows:
cosφ=v·k
/bardblv/bardbl, that is, φ=cos−1/parenleftbiggv·k
/bardblv/bardbl/parenrightbigg
.
We take as our coordinates the quantities ρ,θ,φ. Because
r=ρsinφ,
we can use formula (2) to ﬁnd x,y,zin terms of the spherical coordinates ρ,θ,φ.
Deﬁnition Thespherical coordinates of points ( x,y,z) in space are the triples
(ρ,θ,φ), deﬁned as follows:
x=ρsinφcosθ, y=ρsinφsinθ, z=ρcosφ, (3)
where
ρ≥0, 0 ≤θ< 2π,0 ≤φ≤π.

<<<PAGE 83>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 56
56 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
Historical NoteIn 1773, Joseph Louis Lagrange was working on Newton's gravitational theory as
it applied to ellipsoids of revolution. In attempting to calculate the totalgravitational attraction of such an ellipsoid, he encountered an integral that wasdifficult to evaluate. Motivated by this application, he introduced sphericalcoordinates, which allowed him to calculate the integral. We will be discussingthe method of changing coordinates as it applies to multiple integrals in Section6.2, and applications to gravitation in Section 6.3, where we show how the inversesquare law of gravity allowed Newton to consider spherical masses as pointmasses.
Spherical coordinates are also closely connected to navigation by latitude
and longitude. To see the connection, first note that the sphere of radius a
centered at the origin is described by a very simple equation in spherical
coordinates, namely, ρ=a. Fixing the radius a, the spherical coordinates θandφ
are similar to the geographic coordinates of longitude and latitude if we take theearth's axis to be the zaxis. There are differences, though: The geographical
longitude is |θ|and is called east or west longitude, according to whether θis a
positive or negative measure from the Greenwich meridian; the geographical
latitude is |π/2−φ|and is called north or south latitude, according to whether
π/2−φis positive or negative.
example 2 (a) Find the spherical coordinates of the Cartesian point (1, −1, 1) and plot.
(b) Find the Cartesian coordinates of the spherical coordinate point (3, π/6,π/4) and
plot.
(c) Let a point have Cartesian coordinates (2, −3, 6). Find its spherical coordinates
and plot.
(d) Let a point have spherical coordinates (1, −π/ 2,π/4). Find its Cartesian
coordinates and plot.
solution (a)ρ=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2=√12+(−1)2+12=√
3,
θ=2π+tan−1/parenleftBigy
x/parenrightBig
=2π+tan−1/parenleftbigg−1
1/parenrightbigg
=2π−π
4=7π
4
φ=cos−1/parenleftbiggz
ρ/parenrightbigg
=cos−1/parenleftbigg1√
3/parenrightbigg
≈0.955 ≈54.74◦.
See Figure 1.4.6(a) and the formula for θfollowing formula (1).
(b)x=ρsinφcosθ=3 sin/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
cos/parenleftBigπ
6/parenrightBig
=3/parenleftbigg1√
2/parenrightbigg√
3
2=3√
3
2√
2,
y=ρsinφsinθ=3 sin/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
sin/parenleftBigπ
6/parenrightBig
=3/parenleftbigg1√
2/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg1
2/parenrightbigg
=3
2√
2,
z=ρcosφ=3 cos/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
=3√
2=3√
2
2.
See Figure 1.4.6(b).

<<<PAGE 84>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 57
1.4 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 57
q
xy
−3
_
4p(1, −1, 1) =r 3
=f=_
4p(a) (b) z z
xyf55=
q=_6r7p /4
ﬁgure 1.4.6 Finding (a) the spherical coordinates of the point (1, –1, 1),
and (b) the Cartesian coordinates of (3, π/6,π/4).
(c)ρ=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2=√22+(−3)2+62=√
49=7,
θ=2π+tan−1/parenleftBigy
x/parenrightBig
=2π+tan−1/parenleftbigg−3
2/parenrightbigg
≈5.3004 radians ≈303.69◦,
φ=cos−1/parenleftbiggz
ρ/parenrightbigg
=cos−1/parenleftbigg6
7/parenrightbigg
≈0.541 ≈31.0◦.
See Figure 1.4.7(a).
(d)x=ρsinφcosθ=1 sin/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
cos/parenleftBig
−π
2/parenrightBig
=/parenleftbigg√
2
2/parenrightbigg
·0=0,
y=ρsinφsinθ=1 sin/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
sin/parenleftBig
−π
2/parenrightBig
=/parenleftbigg√
2
2/parenrightbigg
(−1)=−√
2
2,
z=ρcosφ=1 cos/parenleftBigπ
4/parenrightBig
=√
2
2.
See Figure 1.4.7(b).
y y
x xz z(a) (b)
317
1p
4
p
2
−56−
ﬁgure 1.4.7 Finding (a) the spherical coordinates of the
point (2, −3, 6), and (b) the Cartesian coordinates of
(1,−π/2,π/4). ▲

<<<PAGE 85>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 58
58 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
ﬁgure 1.4.8 (a) Orthonormal
vectors er,eθ, and ezassociated
with cylindrical coordinates. The
vector eris parallel to the line
labeled r. (b) Orthonormal
vectors eρ,eθ, and eφassociated
with spherical coordinates.q
xyz
r ze
ee
rqz
qffqr
r
yz
xre
e
e(a) (b)
example 3 Express (a) the surface xz=1 and (b) the surface x2+y2−z2=1 in spherical
coordinates.
solution From formula (3), x=ρsinφcosθ, and z=ρcosφ, and so the surface xz=1i n
(a) consists of all ( ρ,θ,φ) such that
ρ2sinφcosθcosφ=1, that is, ρ2sin 2φ cosθ=2.
For part (b), we can write
x2+y2−z2=x2+y2+z2−2z2=ρ2−2ρ2cos2φ,
so that the surface is ρ2(1−2 cos2φ)=1; that is, −ρ2cos (2φ )=1. ▲
Associated with cylindrical and spherical coordinates are unit vectors that are the
counterparts of i,j, and kfor rectangular coordinates. They are shown in Figure 1.4.8.
For example, eris the unit vector parallel to the xyplane and in the radial direction, so
thater=(cosθ)i+(sinθ)j. Similarly, in spherical coordinates, eφis the unit vector
tangent to the curve parametrized by the variable φwith the variables ρandθheld ﬁxed.
We shall use these unit vectors later when we use cylindrical and spherical coordinates
in vector calculations.
exercises
1.Find the spherical coordinates of the Cartesian point
(√
2,−√
6,−2√
2).
2.Find the spherical coordinates of the Cartesian point(√
6,−√
2,−2√
2).
3.(a)The following points are given in cylindrical
coordinates; express each in rectangular coordinates andspherical coordinates: (1, 45
◦, 1), (2, π/2,−4),
(0, 45◦, 10), (3, π/6, 4), (1, π/6, 0), and (2, 3π/ 4,−2).
(Only the ﬁrst point is solved in the Study Guide.)
(b)Change each of the following points from
rectangular coordinates to spherical coordinates and to
cylindrical coordinates: (2, 1, −2), (0, 3, 4), (√
2, 1, 1),(−2√
3,−2, 3). (Only the ﬁrst point is solved in the
Study Guide.)
4.Describe the geometric meaning of the followingmappings in cylindrical coordinates:
(a) ( r,θ,z)/mapsto→(r,θ,−z)
(b)(r,θ,z)/mapsto→(r,θ+π,−z)
(c) ( r,θ,z)/mapsto→(−r,θ−π/4,z)
5.Describe the geometric meaning of the followingmappings in spherical coordinates:
(a) (ρ,θ,φ)/mapsto→(ρ,θ+π,φ)
(b)(ρ,θ,φ)/mapsto→(ρ,θ,π−φ)
(c) (ρ,θ,φ)/mapsto→(2ρ,θ+π/2,φ)

<<<PAGE 86>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 59
1.4 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 59
6.Sketch the following solids:
(a)r∈[0, 1], θ∈[0,π],z∈[−1, 1]
(b)r∈[0, 2], θ∈[0,π/2],z∈[0, 4]
(c)ρ∈[0, 1], θ∈[0, 2π ],φ∈[0,π/4]
(d)ρ∈[1, 2], θ∈[0, 2π ],φ∈[0,π/2]
7.Sketch the following surfaces:
(a)z=r2
(b)ρ=4 cscφsecθ
(c)r=4 sinθ
(d)ρsinφ=2
8.(a) Describe the surfaces r=constant, θ=constant,
andz=constant in the cylindrical coordinate system.
(b) Describe the surfaces ρ=constant, θ=constant,
andφ=constant in the spherical coordinate system.
9.Show that to represent each point in R3by spherical
coordinates, it is necessary to take only values of θ
between 0 and 2π , values of φbetween 0 and π, and
values of ρ≥0. Are coordinates unique if we allow
ρ≤0?
10. Describe the following solids using inequalities. State
the coordinate system used.
(a)A cylindrical shell 8 units long, with insidediameter 2 units and outside diameter 3 units
(b)A spherical shell with inside radius 4 units andoutside radius 6 units
(c) A hemisphere of diameter 5 units
(d) A cube of side length 2
11. LetSbe the sphere of radius Rcentered at the origin.
Find the equation for Sin cylindrical coordinates.
12. Using cylindrical coordinates and the orthonormal(orthogonal normalized) vectors e
r,eθ, and ez(see
Figure 1.4.8),
(a) express each of er,eθ, and ezin terms of i,j,kand
(x,y,z); and
(b) calculate eθ×jboth analytically, using part (a), and
geometrically.
13. Using spherical coordinates and the orthonormal(orthogonal normalized) vectors e
ρ,eθ, and eφ[see
Figure 1.4.8(b)],
(a)express each of eρ,eθ, and eφin terms of i,j,kand
(x,y,z); and(b) calculate eθ×jandeφ×jboth analytically and
geometrically.
14. Express the plane z=xin (a) cylindrical, and (b)
spherical coordinates.
15. Show that in spherical coordinates:
(a)ρis the length of xi+yj+zk.
(b)φ=cos−1(v·k//bardblv/bardbl), where v=xi+yj+zk.
(c)θ=cos−1(u·i//bardblu/bardbl), where u=xi+yj.
16. Two surfaces are described in spherical coordinates bythe two equations ρ=f(θ,φ) and
ρ=−2f(θ,φ), where f(θ,φ) is a function of two
variables. How is the second surface obtainedgeometrically from the ﬁrst?
17. A circular membrane in space lies over the region
x2+y2≤a2. The maximum zcomponent of points in
the membrane is b. Assume that ( x,y,z) is a point on
the membrane. Show that the corresponding point(r,θ,z) in cylindrical coordinates satisﬁes the
conditions 0 ≤r≤a,0≤θ≤2π,|z|≤b .
18. A tank in the shape of a right-circular cylinder of radius10 ft and height 16 ft is half ﬁlled and lying on its side.Describe the air space inside the tank by suitably chosencylindrical coordinates.
19. A vibrometer is to be designed that withstands theheating effects of its spherical enclosure of diameter d,
which is buried to a depth d/3 in the earth, the upper
portion being heated by the sun (assume the surface isﬂat). Heat conduction analysis requires a description ofthe buried portion of the enclosure in sphericalcoordinates. Find it.
20. An oil ﬁlter cartridge is a porous right-circular cylinderinside which oil diffuses from the axis to the outercurved surface. Describe the cartridge in cylindricalcoordinates, if the diameter of the ﬁlter is 4.5 inches, theheight is 5.6 inches, and the center of the cartridge isdrilled (all the way through) from the top to admit a
5
8-inch-diameter bolt.
21. Describe the surface given in spherical coordinates byρ=cos 2θ .
22. (a) Find all points p∈R3that have the same
representation in both Cartesian and sphericalcoordinates.
(b) Find all points p∈R
3that have the same
representation in both Cartesian and cylindrical
coordinates.

<<<PAGE 87>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 60
60 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
1.5n-Dimensional Euclidean Space
Vectors in n-space
In Sections 1.1 and 1.2 we studied the spaces R=R1,R2, andR3and gave geometric
interpretations to them. For example, a point ( x,y,z)i nR3can be thought of as a
geometric object, namely, the directed line segment or vector emanating from the origin
and ending at the point ( x,y,z). We can therefore think of R3in either of two ways:
(i) Algebraically, as a set of triples ( x,y,z), where x,y, and zare real numbers
(ii) Geometrically, as a set of directed line segments
These two ways of looking at R3are equivalent. For generalization it is easier to
use deﬁnition (i). Speciﬁcally, we can deﬁne Rn, where nis a positive integer (possibly
greater than 3), to be the set of all ordered n-tuples ( x1,x2,...,xn), where the xiare
real numbers. For instance, (1,√
5, 2,√
3)∈R4.
The set Rnso deﬁned is known as euclidean n-space, and its elements, which we
write as x=(x1,x2,..., xn), are known as vectors orn-vectors. By setting n=1, 2,
or 3, we recover the line, the plane, and three-dimensional space, respectively.
We launch our study of euclidean n-space by introducing several algebraic operations.
These are analogous to those introduced in Section 1.1 for R2andR3. The ﬁrst two,
addition and scalar multiplication, are deﬁned as follows:
(i) ( x1,x2,...,xn)+(y1,y2,..., yn)=(x1+y1,x2+y2,...,xn+yn);
and
(ii) for any real number α,
α(x1,x2,...,xn)=(αx1,αx2,...,αxn).
The geometric signiﬁcance of these operations for R2andR3was discussed in
Section 1.1.
Thenvectors
e1=(1, 0, 0, ...,0 ) ,e 2=( 0 ,1 ,0 ,...,0 ) ,..., en=(0, 0,...,0 ,1 )
are called the standard basis vectors ofRn, and they generalize the three mutually
orthogonal unit vectors i,j,kofR3. The vector x=(x1,x2,...,xn) can then be written
asx=x1e1+x2e2+···+ xnen.
For two vectors x=(x1,x2,x3) and y=(y1,y2,y3)i nR3, we deﬁned the dotor
inner product x·yto be the real number x·y=x1y1+x2y2+x3y3. This deﬁnition
easily extends to Rn; speciﬁcally, for x=(x1,x2,...,xn),y=(y1,y2,..., yn), we
deﬁne the inner product ofxandyto be x·y=x1y1+x2y2+···+ xnyn.I nRn, the
notation /angbracketleftx,y/angbracketrightis often used in place of x·yfor the inner product.
Continuing the analogy with R3, we are led to deﬁne the notion of the length ornorm
of a vector xby the formula
Length of x=/bardblx/bardbl=√x·x=/radicalbig
x2
1+x2
2+···+ x2
n.
Ifxandyare two vectors in the plane ( R2) or in space ( R3), then we know that the
angleθbetween them is given by the formula
cosθ=x·y
/bardblx/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl.

<<<PAGE 88>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 61
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 61
The right side of this equation can be deﬁned in Rnas well as in R2orR3. It still
represents the cosine of the angle between xandy; this angle is geometrically well
deﬁned, because xandylie in a two-dimensional subspace of Rn(the plane determined
byxandy) and our usual geometry ideas apply to such planes.
It will be useful to have available some algebraic properties of the inner product.
These are summarized in the next theorem [compare with properties (i), (ii), (iii), and
(iv) of Section 1.2].
Theorem 3Forx,y,z∈Rnandα,β, real numbers, we have
(i) (αx+βy)·z=α(x·z)+β(y·z).
(ii)x·y=y·x.
(iii) x·x≥0.
(iv) x·x=0 if and only if x=0.
proof Each of the four assertions can be proved by a simple computation. For ex-
ample, to prove property (i) we write
(αx+βy)·z=(αx1+βy1,αx2+βy2,...,αxn+βyn)·(z1,z2,...,zn)
=(αx1+βy1)z1+(αx2+βy2)z2+···+ (αxn+βyn)zn
=ax1z1+βy1z1+αx2z2+βy2z2+···+ αxnzn+βynzn
=α(x·z)+β(y·z).
The other proofs are similar. ■
In Section 1.2, we proved an interesting property of dot products, called the Cauchy–
Schwarz inequality.4ForR2our proof required the use of the law of cosines. For Rnwe
could also use this method, by conﬁning our attention to a plane in Rn. However, we
can also give a direct, completely algebraic proof.
Theorem 4 Cauchy--Schwarz Inequality in RnLetx,ybe vectors in Rn.
Then
|x·y|≤/bardbl x/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl.
proof Leta=y·yandb=− x·y.Ifa=0, the theorem is clearly valid, because
then y=0and both sides of the inequality reduce to 0. Thus, we may suppose a/negationslash=0.
4Sometimes called the Cauchy–Bunyakovskii–Schwarz inequality, or simply the CBS inequality, be-
cause it was independently discovered in special cases by the French mathematician Cauchy, the Russian
mathematician Bunyakovskii, and the German mathematician Schwarz.

<<<PAGE 89>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 62
62 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
By Theorem 3 we have
0≤(ax+by)·(ax+by)=a2x·x+2abx·y+b2y·y
=(y·y)2x·x−(y·y)(x·y)2.
Dividing by y·ygives 0 ≤(y·y)(x·x)−(x·y)2, that is, ( x·y)2≤(x·x)(y·y)=
/bardblx/bardbl2/bardbly/bardbl2. Taking square roots on both sides of this inequality yields the desired
result. ■
There is a useful consequence of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality in terms of lengths.
The triangle inequality is geometrically clear in R3and was discussed in Section 1.2.
Theanalytic proof of the triangle inequality that we gave in Section 1.2 works exactly
the same in Rnand proves the following:
Corollary Triangle Inequality in RnLetx,ybe vectors in Rn. Then
/bardblx+y/bardbl≤/bardbl x/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl.
If Theorem 4 and its corollary are written out algebraically, they become the following
useful inequalities:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglen/summationdisplay
i=1xiyi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle≤/parenleftBigg
n/summationdisplay
i=1x2
i/parenrightBigg1/2/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1y2
i/parenrightBigg1/2
;
/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1(xi+yi)2/parenrightBigg1/2
≤/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1x2
i/parenrightBigg1/2
+/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1y2
i/parenrightBigg1/2
.
example 1 Letx=(1, 2, 0, −1) and y=(−1, 1, 1, 0). Verify Theorem 4 and its corollary in this
case.
solution/bardblx/bardbl=/radicalbig
12+22+02+(−1)2=√
6
/bardbly/bardbl=/radicalbig
(−1)2+12+12+02=√
3
x·y=1(−1)+2·1+0·1+(−1)0=1
x+y=(0, 3, 1, −1)
/bardblx+y/bardbl=/radicalbig
02+32+12+(−1)2=√
11.
We compute x·y=1≤4.24≈√
6√
3=/bardblx/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl, which veriﬁes Theorem 4. Similarly,
we can check its corollary:
/bardblx+y/bardbl=√
11≈3.32
≤4.18=2.45+1.73≈√
6+√
3=/bardblx/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl. ▲
By analogy with R3, we can deﬁne the notion of distance in Rn; namely, if xandy
are points in Rn, the distance between xandyis deﬁned to be /bardblx−y/bardbl, or the length of
the vector x−y. We do not attempt to deﬁne the cross product on Rnexcept for n=3.

<<<PAGE 90>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 63
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 63
General Matrices
Generalizing 2 ×2 and 3 ×3 matrices (see Section 1.3), we can consider m×nmatrices,
which are arrays of mnnumbers:
A=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣a
11a12··· a1n
a21a22··· a2n
.........
a
m1am2··· amn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦.
We shall also write Aas [a
ij]. We deﬁne addition and multiplication by a scalar
componentwise, just as we did for vectors. Given two m×nmatrices AandB,w ec a n
add them to obtain a new m×nmatrix C=A+B, whose ijth entry cijis the sum of
aijandbij. It is clear that A+B=B+A.
example 2
(a)/bracketleftbigg210
341/bracketrightbigg
+/bracketleftbigg−113
007/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg123348/bracketrightbigg
.
(b) [1 2] +[0−1]=[1 1].
(c)/bracketleftbigg2112/bracketrightbigg
−/bracketleftbigg1001/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg1111/bracketrightbigg
.
▲
Given a scalar λand an m×nmatrix A, we can multiply Abyλto obtain a new
m×nmatrix λA=C, whose ijth entry cijis the product λaij.
example 3
3⎡
⎣1−12
01 5
10 3⎤
⎦=⎡⎣3−36
03 1 5
30 9⎤
⎦.
▲
Next we turn to matrix multiplication. If A=[aij],B=[bij] are n×nmatrices,
then the product AB=Chas entries given by
cij=n/summationdisplay
k=1aikbkj,
which is the dot product of the ith row of Aand the jth column of B:
=
anncij ith rowjth column
a11 ...
... n1a1na b11
bn1...
...b1n
bnni1a ainb1j
bnj... ...
...
...
...
.........
.......

<<<PAGE 91>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 64
64 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 4 Let
A=⎡
⎣103
210100⎤
⎦ and B=⎡⎣010
100011⎤
⎦.
Then
AB=⎡⎣043
120010⎤
⎦ and BA=⎡⎣210
103310⎤
⎦.
Observe that AB/negationslash=BA.
▲
Similarly, we can multiply an m×nmatrix (m rows, ncolumns) by an n×pmatrix
(nrows, pcolumns) to obtain an m×pmatrix (m rows, pcolumns) by the same rule.
Note that for ABto be deﬁned, the number of columns ofAmust equal the number of
rows ofB.
example 5 Let
A=/bracketleftbigg201
112/bracketrightbigg
and B=⎡
⎣102
021111⎤
⎦.
Then
AB=/bracketleftbigg315
345/bracketrightbigg
,
andBAis not deﬁned.
▲
example 6 Let
A=⎡
⎢⎢⎣1
213⎤
⎥⎥⎦and B=[ 2212 ] .
Then
AB=⎡
⎢⎢⎣2212
442422126636⎤
⎥⎥⎦and BA=[13].
▲
Any m×nmatrix Adetermines a mapping of RntoRmdeﬁned as follows: Let
x=(x1,..., xn)∈Rn; consider the n×1 column matrix associated with x, which we
shall temporarily denote xT
xT=⎡
⎢⎣x1
...
xn⎤
⎥⎦,

<<<PAGE 92>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 65
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 65
and multiply AbyxT(considered to be an n×1 matrix) to get a new m×1 matrix:
AxT=⎡
⎢⎣a11··· a1n
......
a
m1··· amn⎤
⎥⎦⎡
⎢⎣x1
...
xn⎤
⎥⎦=⎡
⎢⎣y1
...
ym⎤
⎥⎦=yT,
corresponding to the vector y=(y1,..., ym).5Thus, although it may cause some
confusion, we will write x=(x1,...,xn) and y=(y1,..., ym) as column matrices
x=⎡
⎢⎣x1
...
xn⎤
⎥⎦, y=⎡
⎢⎣y1
...
ym⎤
⎥⎦
when dealing with matrix multiplication; that is, we will identify these two forms of
writing vectors. Thus, we will delete the TonxTand view xTandxas the same.
Thus, Ax=ywill “really” mean the following: Write xas a column matrix, multiply
it by A, and let ybe the vector whose components are those of the resulting column
matrix. The rule x/mapsto→Axtherefore deﬁnes a mapping of RntoRm. This mapping is
linear; that is, it satisﬁes
A(x+y)=Ax+Ay
A(αx)=α(Ax), αa scalar,
as may be easily veriﬁed. One learns in a linear algebra course that, conversely, any
linear transformation of RntoRmis representable in this way by an m×nmatrix.
IfA=[aij]i sa nm ×nmatrix and ejis the jth standard basis vector of Rn, then
Aejis a vector in Rmwith components the same as the jth column of A. That is, the
ith component of Aejisaij. In symbols, ( Aej)i=aij.
example 7 If
A=⎡
⎢⎢⎣103
−101
212
−121⎤
⎥⎥⎦,
then x/mapsto→AxofR3toR4is the mapping deﬁned by
⎡
⎣x1
x2
x3⎤⎦/mapsto→⎡
⎢⎢⎣x
1+3x3
−x1+x3
2x1+x2+2x3
−x1+2x2+x3⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
▲
5To use a matrix Ato get a mapping from vectors x=(x1,...,xn) to vectors y=(y1,..., yn)
according to the equation AxT=yT, we write the vectors in the column form xTinstead of the row
form ( x1,...,xn). This sudden switch from writing xas a row to writing xas a column is necessitated
by standard conventions on matrix multiplication.

<<<PAGE 93>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 66
66 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 8 The following illustrates what happens to a speciﬁc point when mapped by a 4 ×3
matrix:
Ae2=⎡
⎢⎢⎣429
354123012⎤
⎥⎥⎦⎡
⎣0
10⎤
⎦=⎡
⎢⎢⎣2
521⎤
⎥⎥⎦=2nd column of A.
▲
Properties of Matrices
Matrix multiplication is not, in general, commutative:I f AandBaren×nmatrices,
then generally
AB/negationslash=BA,
as Examples 4, 5, and 6 show.
Ann×nmatrix is said to be invertible if there is an n×nmatrix Bsuch that
AB=BA=In,
where
In=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣100··· 0
010··· 0
001··· 0
............
000··· 1⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
is the n×nidentity matrix: I
nhas the property that InC=CIn=Cfor any n×n
matrix C. We denote BbyA−1and call A−1theinverse ofA. The inverse, when it
exists, is unique.
example 9 If
A=⎡
⎣240
021302⎤
⎦, then A
−1=1
20⎡⎣4−84
34 −2
−61 2 4⎤⎦,
because AA
−1=I3=A−1A, as may be checked by matrix multiplication. ▲
Methods of computing inverses are learned in linear algebra; we won’t require these
methods in this book. If Ais invertible, the equation Ax=ycan be solved for the vector
xby multiplying both sides by A−1to obtain6x=A−1y.
In Section 1.3 we deﬁned the determinant of a 3 ×3 matrix. This can be generalized
by induction to n×ndeterminants. We illustrate here how to write the determinant of
6In fact, Cramer’ s rule from Section 1.3 provides one way to invert matrices. Numerically more efﬁcient
methods based on elimination methods are learned in linear algebra or computer science.

<<<PAGE 94>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 67
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 67
a4×4 matrix in terms of the determinants of 3 ×3 matrices:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
11a12a13a14
a21a22a23a24
a31a32a33a34
a41a42a43a44/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=a
11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
22a23a24
a32a33a34
a42a43a44/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−a
12/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a23a24
a31a33a34
a41a43a44/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
+a
13/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a22a24
a31a32a34
a41a42a44/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−a
14/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
21a22a23
a31a32a33
a41a42a43/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
[see formula (2) of Section 1.3; the signs alternate +,−,+,−].
The basic properties of 3 ×3 determinants reviewed in Section 1.3 remain valid for
n×ndeterminants. In particular, we note the fact that if Ais an n×nmatrix and Bis the
matrix formed by adding a scalar multiple of one row (or column) of Ato another row
(or, respectively, column) of A, then the determinant of Ais equal to the determinant of
B(see Example 10).
A basic theorem of linear algebra states that an n×nmatrix Ais invertible if and
only if the determinant of Ais not zero. Another basic property is that the determinant is
multiplicative: det ( AB)=(det A)(det B). In this text, we shall not make use of many
details of linear algebra, and so we shall leave these assertions unproved.
example
10 Let
A=⎡
⎢⎢⎣1010
111121011102⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
Find det A. Does A have an inverse?
solution Adding ( −1)×ﬁrst column to the third column, we get
detA=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10 00
11 0121−2111−12/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10 1
1−21
1−12/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Adding ( −1)×ﬁrst column to the third column of this 3 ×3 determinant gives
detA=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10 0
1−20
1−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−20
−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−2.
Thus, det A=−2/negationslash=0, and so Ahas an inverse.
▲
If we have three matrices A,B, and Csuch that the products ABand BCare
deﬁned, then the products ( AB)CandA(BC) are deﬁned and are in fact equal (i.e.,
matrix multiplication is associative). We call this the triple product of matrices and
denote it by ABC .

<<<PAGE 95>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 68
68 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
example 11 Let
A=/bracketleftbigg
3
5/bracketrightbigg
, B=[1 1], and C=/bracketleftbigg
12/bracketrightbigg
.
Then
ABC=A(BC)=/bracketleftbigg
35/bracketrightbigg
[3]=/bracketleftbigg
9
15/bracketrightbigg
.
▲
example 12/bracketleftbigg
2001/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg
1111/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg
0−1
11/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg
2001/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg
1010/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg
2010/bracketrightbigg
▲
Historical Note
ﬁgure 1.5.1 René Descartes
(1596–1650).The founder of modern (coordinate) geometry was René Descartes (see
Figure 1.5.1), a great physicist, philosopher, and mathematician, as well as afounder of modern biology.
Born in Touraine, France, in 1596, Descartes had a fascinating life. After
studying law, he settled in Paris, where he developed an interest in mathematics.In 1628, he moved to Holland, where he wrote his only mathematical work, La
Geometrie, one of the origins of modern coordinate geometry.
Descartes had been highly critical of the geometry of the ancient Greeks, with
all their undefined terms and with their proofs requiring ever newer and moreingenious approaches. For Descartes, this geometry was so tied to geometricfigures “that it can exercise the understanding only on condition of greatlyfatiguing the imagination.” He undertook to exploit, in geometry, the use ofalgebra, which had recently been developed. The result was La Geometrie,
which made possible analytic or computational methods in geometry.
Remember that the Greeks were, like Descartes, philosophers as well as
mathematicians and physicists. Their answer to the question of the meaning ofspace was “Euclidean geometry.” Descartes had therefore succeeded in“algebrizing” the Greek model of space.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, cofounder (with Isaac Newton) of calculus, was also
interested in “space analysis,” but he did not think that Descartes’s algebra wentfar enough. Leibniz called for a direct method of space analysis (analysis situs )
that could be interpreted as a call for the development of vector analysis.
On September 8, 1679, Leibniz outlined his ideas in a letter to Christian
Huygens:
I am still not satisfied with algebra, because it does not give the shortest
methods or the most beautiful constructions in geometry. This is why Ibelieve that, so far as geometry is concerned, we need still anotheranalysis which is distinctly geometrical or linear and which will expresssituation (situs) directly as algebra expresses magnitude directly. And Ibelieve that I have found the way and that we can represent figuresand even machines and movements by characters, as algebrarepresents numbers or magnitudes. I am sending you an essay whichseems to me to be important.
In the essay, Leibniz described his ideas in greater detail.

<<<PAGE 96>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 69
1.5 n-Dimensional Euclidean Space 69
exercises
1.Calculate the dot product of x=(1,−1, 0, 2) ∈R4and
y=( 1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ) ∈R4.
2.InRnshow that
(a)2/bardblx/bardbl2+2/bardbly/bardbl2=/bardblx+y/bardbl2+/bardblx−y/bardbl2(This is
known as the parallelogram law.)(b)/bardblx−y/bardbl/bardblx+y/bardbl≤/bardbl x/bardbl2+/bardbly/bardbl2
(c) 4/angbracketleftx, y/angbracketright=/bardbl x+y/bardbl2−/bardblx−y/bardbl2(This is called the
polarization identity.)
Interpret these results geometrically in terms of the parallelogram formed by xandy.
V erify the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and the triangle inequality for the vectors in Exercises 3 to 6.
3.x=(2, 0,−1), y=(4, 0,−2)
4.x=( 1 ,0 ,2 ,6 ) ,y =( 3 ,8 ,4 ,1 )
5.x=(1,−1, 1, −1, 1), y=( 3 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,2 )
6.x=( 1 ,0 ,0 ,1 ) ,y =(−1, 0, 0, 1)
7.Letv,w∈Rn.I f/bardblv/bardbl=/bardbl w/bardbl, show that v+wand
v−ware orthogonal.
8.Suppose Tis a triangle formed by placing three points
on a circle, two of which lie on the circle’ s diameter. Use
the previous problem to show Tis a right triangle.
9.Compute AB, det A, det B, det ( AB), and det ( A+B)
for
A=/bracketleftBigg1−10
03 231 1/bracketrightBigg
and B=/bracketleftBigg−20 2−11−1
14 3/bracketrightBigg
.
10. Compute AB, det A, det B, det ( AB), and det ( A+B)
for
A=/bracketleftBigg30 112−110 1/bracketrightBigg
and B=/bracketleftBigg10−120 101 0/bracketrightBigg
.11. Determine which of the following matrices areinvertible:
A=/bracketleftBigg123011033/bracketrightBigg
B=/bracketleftBigg00 3
−111 9
23π/bracketrightBigg
C=/bracketleftbigg
1111/bracketrightbigg
12. For matrix Ain the previous problem, ﬁnd a nonzero
x∈R3such that Ax=0.
13. Use induction on kto prove that if x1,...,xk∈Rn, then
/bardblx1+···+ xk/bardbl≤/bardbl x1/bardbl+···+/bardbl xk/bardbl.
14. Using algebra, prove the identity of Lagrange: For real
numbers x1,...,xnandy1,..., yn.
/parenleftbigg n/summationdisplay
i=1xiyi/parenrightbigg2
=/parenleftbigg n/summationdisplay
i=1x2
i/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg n/summationdisplay
i=1y2
i/parenrightbigg
−/summationdisplay
i<j(xiyj−xjyi)2.
Use this to give another proof of the Cauchy–Schwarzinequality in R
n,
15. Prove that if Ais an n×nmatrix, then
(a)det (λA)=λndetA; and
(b) if Bis a matrix obtained from Aby multiplying any
row or column by a scalar λ, then det B=λdetA.
In Exercises 16 to 18, A,B,and C denote n ×n matrices.
16. Is det ( A+B)=detA+detB? Give a proof or
counterexample.
17. Does ( A+B)(A−B)=A2−B2?
18. Assuming the law det ( AB)=(det A)(det B), prove
that det ( ABC )=(det A)(det B)(det C).
19. (This exercise assumes a knowledge of integration ofcontinuous functions of one variable.) Note that theproof of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality (Theorem 4)depends only on the properties of the inner productlisted in Theorem 1. Use this observation to establish thefollowing inequality for continuous functions
f,g: [0, 1] →R:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay
1
0f(x)g(x)dx/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
≤/radicalBigg/integraldisplay1
0[f(x)]2dx/radicalBigg/integraldisplay1
0[g(x)]2dx.
Do this by
(a) verifying that the space of continuous functions from
[0, 1] to Rforms a vector space; that is, we may think of

<<<PAGE 97>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 70
70 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
functions f,gabstractly as “vectors” that can be added
to each other and multiplied by scalars.
(b) introducing the inner product of functions
f·g=/integraldisplay1
0f(x)g(x)dx
and verifying that it satisﬁes conditions (i) to (iv) of
Theorem 3.
20. Deﬁne the transpose ATof an n×nmatrix Aas
follows: the ijth element of ATisajiwhere aijis the
ijth entry of A. Show that ATis characterized by the
following property: For all x,yinRn,
(ATx)·y=x·(Ay).21. Verify that the inverse of
/bracketleftBigab
cd/bracketrightBig
is1
ad−bc/bracketleftBigd−b
−ca/bracketrightBig
.
22. Use your answer in Exercise 21 to show that the solutionof the system
ax+by=e
cx+dy=f
is
/bracketleftBigx
y/bracketrightBig
=1
ad−bc/bracketleftBigd−b
−ca/bracketrightBig/bracketleftBige
f/bracketrightBig
.
23. Assuming the law det ( AB)=(det A)(det B), verify
that (det A)(det A−1)=1 and conclude that if Ahas an
inverse, then det A/negationslash=0.
24. Find two 2 ×2 matrices AandBsuch that AB=0b u t
BA/negationslash=0.
review exercises for chapter 1
1.Letv=3i+4j+5kandw=i−j+k. Compute
v+w,3v,6v+8w,−2v, v·w,v×w. Interpret
each operation geometrically by graphing thevectors.
2.Repeat Exercise 1 with v=2j+kandw=−i−k.
3.(a) Find the equation of the line through ( −1, 2, −1) in
the direction of j.
(b) Find the equation of the line passing through(0, 2,−1) and ( −3, 1, 0).
(c) Find the equation for the plane perpendicular to thevector ( −2, 1, 2) and passing through the point
(−1, 1, 3).
4.(a)Find the equation of the line through (0, 1, 0) in the
direction of 3i +k.
(b)Find the equation of the line passing through
( 0 ,1 ,1 )a n d( 0 ,1 ,0 ) .
(c)Find an equation for the plane perpendicular to the
vector ( −1, 1, −1) and passing through the point
( 1 ,1 ,1 ) .
5.Find an equation for the plane containing the points
(2, 1,−1), (3, 0, 2), and (4, −3, 1).6.Find an equation for a line that is parallel to the plane2x−3y+5z−10=0 and passes through the point
(−1, 7, 4). (There are lots of them.)
7.Compute v·wfor the following sets of vectors:
(a)v=−i+j;w=k
(b)v=i+2j−k;w=3i+j
(c)v=−2i−j+k;w=3i+2j−2k
8.Compute v×wfor the vectors in Exercise 7. [Only
part (b) is solved in the Study Guide.]
9.Find the cosine of the angle between the vectors inExercise 7. [Only part (b) is solved in the Study Guide.]
10. Find the area of the parallelogram spanned by the vectorsin Exercise 7. [Only part (b) is solved in the StudyGuide.]
11. Use vector notation to describe the triangle in spacewhose vertices are the origin and the endpoints ofvectors aandb.
12. Show that three vectors a, b, c lie in the same plane
through the origin if and only if there are three scalarsα,β,γ, not all zero, such that αa+βb+γc=0.

<<<PAGE 98>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 71
Review Exercises for Chapter 1 71
13. For real numbers a1,a2,a3,b1,b2,b3, show that
(a1b1+a2b2+a3b3)2≤(a2
1+a2
2+a2
3)(b2
1+b2
2+b2
3).
14. Letu,v,wbe unit vectors that are orthogonal to each
other. If a=αu+βv+γw, show that
α=a·u, β=a·v, γ=a·w.
Interpret the results geometrically.
15. Find the products ABandBAwhere
A=/bracketleftBigg152
023102/bracketrightBigg
B=/bracketleftBigg201130241/bracketrightBigg
.
16. Find the products ABandBAwhere
A=/bracketleftBigg212401130/bracketrightBigg
B=/bracketleftBigg305121031/bracketrightBigg
.
17. Leta,bbe two vectors in the plane,
a=(a1,a2),b=(b1,b2), and let λbe a real number.
Show that the area of the parallelogram determined by a
andb+λais the same as that determined by aandb.
Sketch. Relate this result to a known property ofdeterminants.
18. Find the volume of the parallelepiped determined by thevertices (0, 1, 0), (1, 1, 1), (0, 2, 0), (3, 1, 2).
19. Given nonzero vectors aandbinR3, show that the
vector v=/bardbla/bardblb+/bardblb/bardblabisects the angle between a
andb.
20. Show that the vectors /bardblb/bardbla+/bardbla/bardblband/bardblb/bardbla−/bardbla/bardblbare
orthogonal.
21. Use the triangle inequality to show that
/bardblv−w/bardbl≥/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/bardblv/bardbl−/bardbl w/bardbl/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
22. Use vector methods to prove that the distance from the
point ( x1,y1) to the line ax+by=cis
|ax1+by1−c|√
a2+b2.
23. Verify that the direction of b×cis given by the
right-hand rule, by choosing b,cto be two of the vectors
i,j, and k.
24. (a)Suppose a·b=a/prime·bfor all b. Show that a=a/prime.
(b)Suppose a×b=a/prime×bfor all b. Is it true that
a=a/prime?25. (a) Using vector methods, show that the distancebetween two nonparallel lines l
1andl2is given by
d=|(v2−v1)·(a1×a2)|
/bardbla1×a2/bardbl,
where v1,v2are any two points on l1andl2, respectively,
anda1anda2are the directions of l1andl2.[HINT:
Consider the plane through l2that is parallel to l1. Show
that the vector ( a1×a2)//bardbla 1×a2/bardblis a unit normal for
this plane; now project v2−v1onto this normal
direction.]
(b) Find the distance between the line l1determined by
the points ( −1,−1, 1) and (0, 0, 0) and the line l2
determined by the points (0, −2, 0) and (2, 0, 5).
26. Show that two planes given by the equations
Ax+By+Cz+D1=0 and Ax+By+Cz+D2=0
are parallel, and that the distance between them is
|D1−D2|√
A2+B2+C2.
27. (a) Prove that the area of the triangle in the plane with
vertices ( x1,y1), (x2,y2), (x3,y3) is the absolute
value of
1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle111
x1x2x3
y1y2y3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
(b) Find the area of the triangle with vertices
(1, 2), (0, 1), (−1, 1).
28. Convert the following points from Cartesian to
cylindrical and spherical coordinates and plot:
( a ) ( 0 ,3 ,4 )
(b) (−√
2, 1, 0)
( c ) ( 0 ,0 ,0 )(d) (−1, 0, 1)
(e)(−2√
3,−2, 3)
29. Convert the following points from cylindrical toCartesian and spherical coordinates and plot:
(a) (1, π/4, 1)
(b)(3,π/6,−4)
(c) (0, π/4, 1)(d) (2, −π/ 2, 1)
(e) (−2,−π/ 2, 1)
30. Convert the following points from spherical to Cartesianand cylindrical coordinates and plot:
(a) (1, π/2,π)
(b)(2,−π/ 2,π/6)
(c) (0, π/8,π/35)(d) (2, −π/ 2,−π)
(e) (−1,π,π/6)

<<<PAGE 99>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 72
72 The Geometry of Euclidean Space
31. Rewrite the equation z=x2−y2using cylindrical and
spherical coordinates.
32. Using spherical coordinates, show that
φ=cos−1/parenleftBigu·k
/bardblu/bardbl/parenrightBig
,
where u=xi+yj+zk. Interpret geometrically.
33. Verify the Cauchy–Schwarz and triangle inequalities for
x=( 3 ,2 ,1 ,0 ) a n d y=( 1 ,1 ,1 ,2 ) .
34. Multiply the matrices
A=/bracketleftBigg301
201101/bracketrightBigg
and B=/bracketleftBigg101111001/bracketrightBigg
.
Does AB=BA?
35. (a) Show that for two n×nmatrices AandB, and
x∈Rn,
(AB)x=A(Bx).
(b) What does the equality in part (a) imply about the
relationship between the composition of themappings x/mapsto→Bx,y/mapsto→Ay, and matrix
multiplication?
36. Find the volume of the parallelepiped spanned by thevectors
( 1 ,0 ,1 ) , ( 1 ,1 ,1 ) , a n d ( −3, 2, 0) .
37. (For students with some knowledge of linear algebra.)Verify that a linear mapping TofR
ntoRnis determined
by an n×nmatrix.
38. Find an equation for the plane that contains (3, −1, 2)
and the line with equation v=(2,−1, 0) +t( 2 ,3 ,0 ) .
39. The work Wdone in moving an object from (0, 0) to (7,
2) subject to a constant force FisW=F·r, where ris
the vector with its head at (7, 2) and tail at (0, 0). Theunits are feet and pounds.
(a)Suppose the force F=10 cos θi+10 sin θj. Find
Win terms of θ.
(b)Suppose the force Fhas magnitude of 6 lb and
makes an angle of π/6 rad with the horizontal,
pointing right. Find Win foot-pounds.40. If a particle with mass mmoves with velocity v, its
momentum isp=mv. In a game of marbles, a marble
with mass 2 grams (g) is shot with velocity 2 meters persecond (m/s), hits two marbles with mass 1 g each, andcomes to a dead halt. One of the marbles ﬂies off with avelocity of 3 m/s at an angle of 45
◦to the incident
direction of the larger marble, as in Figure 1.R.1.Assuming that the total momentum before and after thecollision is the same (according to the law ofconservation of momentum), at what angle and speeddoes the second marble move?
1g /m2s p/4
1gg2/m3s
ﬁgure 1.R.1 Momentum and marbles.
41. Show that for all x,y,z,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex+2 yz
zy +11 0
55 2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleyx +2 z
1z−x−21 0 −z
55 2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
42. Show that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1xx2
1yy2
1zz2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
/negationslash=0
ifx,y, and zare all different.
43. Show that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle66 628 246
88 435 24
2−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle68 627 247
86 436 23
2−11/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
44. Show that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglenn +1 n+2
n+3 n+4 n+5
n+6 n+7 n+8/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
has the same value no matter what nis. What is this
value?
45. Are the following quantities vectors or scalars?
(a) The current population of Santa Cruz, California
(b) The torque a cyclist exerts on her bicycle
(c) The velocity of wind blowing through a weather
vane
(d) The temperature of a pizza in an oven

<<<PAGE 100>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:19 73
Review Exercises for Chapter 1 73
46. F i n da4 ×4 matrix Csuch that for every 4 ×4 matrix A
we have CA=3A.
47. Let
A=/bracketleftbigg
11
01/bracketrightbigg
B=/bracketleftbigg
1021/bracketrightbigg
(a) Find A−1,B−1, and ( AB)−1.
(b) Show that ( AB)−1/negationslash=A−1B−1but
(AB)−1=B−1A−148. Suppose/bracketleftbigg
ab
cd/bracketrightbigg
is invertible and has integer entries.
What conditions must be satisﬁed for A=/bracketleftbigg
ab
cd/bracketrightbigg−1
to have integer entries?
49. The volume of a tetrahedron with concurrent edges a,b,
cis given by V=1
6a·(b×c).
(a)Express the volume as a determinant.
(b)Evaluate Vwhen
a=i+j+k,b=i−j+k,c=i+j.
Use the following deﬁnition for Exercises 50 and 51: Letr1,...,rnbe vectors in R3from 0to the masses m 1,...,mn. The
center of mass is the vector
c=/summationtextn
i=1miri/summationtextn
i=1mi.
50. A tetrahedron sits in xyzcoordinates with one vertex at
(0, 0, 0), and the three edges concurrent at (0, 0, 0) arecoincident with the vectors a, b, c.
(a) Draw a ﬁgure and label the heads of the vectors
a,b,c.
(b) Find the center of mass of each of the four triangular
faces of the tetrahedron if a unit mass is placed ateach vertex.51. Show that for any vector r, the center of mass of a
system satisﬁes
n/summationdisplay
i=1mi/bardblr−ri/bardbl2=n/summationdisplay
i=1mi/bardblri−c/bardbl2+m/bardblr−c/bardbl2,
where m=/summationtextn
i=1miis the total mass of the system.
In Exercises 52 to 57, ﬁnd a unit vector that has the given property.
52. Parallel to the line x=3t+1,y=16t−2,
z=−(t+2)
53. Orthogonal to the plane x−6y+z=12
54. Parallel to both the planes 8 x+y+z=1 and
x−y−z=055. Orthogonal to i+2j−kand to k
56. Orthogonal to the line
x=2t−1,y=−t−1,z=t+2, and the vector i−j
57. At an angle of 30◦toiand making equal angles with j
andk

<<<PAGE 101>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 102>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 75
2
Differentiation
I turn away with fright and horror from the lamentable evil of functions which do not have
derivatives. ---Charles Hermite,
in a letter to Thomas Jan Stieltjes
This chapter extends the principles of differential calculus for functions
of one variable to functions of several variables. We begin in Section 2.1
with the geometry of real-valued functions and study the graphs of thesefunctions as an aid in visualizing them. Section 2.2 gives some basic def-initions relating to limits and continuity. This subject is treated brieﬂy, be-cause it requires time and mathematical maturity to develop fully and istherefore best left to a more advanced course. Fortunately, a completeunderstanding of all the subtleties of the limit concept is not necessary forour purposes; the student who has difﬁculty with this section should bearthis in mind. However, we hasten to add that the notion of a limit is cen-tral to the deﬁnition of the derivative, but not to the computation of mostderivatives in speciﬁc problems, as we already know from one-variablecalculus. Sections 2.3 and 2.5 deal with the deﬁnition of the derivative,and establish some basic rules of calculus: namely, how to differentiatea sum, product, quotient, or composition. In Section 2.6, we study direc-tional derivatives and tangent planes, relating these ideas to those inSection 2.1. Finally, the Internet supplement gives some of the technicalproofs.
In generalizing calculus from one dimension to several, it is often con-
venient to use the language of matrix algebra. What we shall need hasbeen summarized in Section 1.5.
75

<<<PAGE 103>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 76
76 Differentiation
2.1The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions
We launch our investigation of real-valued functions by developing methods for visual-
izing them. In particular, we introduce the notions of a graph, a level curve, and a level
surface of such functions.
Functions and Mappings
Let fbe a function whose domain is a subset AofRnand with a range contained
inRm. By this we mean that to each x=(x1,...,xn)∈A,fassigns a value f(x),
anm-tuple in Rm. Such functions fare called vector-valued functions1ifm>1, and
scalar-valued functions ifm=1. For example, the scalar-valued function f(x,y,z)=
(x2+y2+z2)−3/2maps the set Aof (x,y,z)/negationslash=( 0 ,0 ,0 )i n R3(n=3, in this case) to
R(m=1). To denote fwe sometimes write
f:(x,y,z)/mapsto→(x2+y2+z2)−3/2.
Note that in R3we often use the notation ( x,y,z) instead of ( x1,x2,x3). In general, the
notation x/mapsto→f(x) is useful for indicating the value to which a point x∈Rnis sent.
We write f:A⊂Rn→Rmto signify that Ais the domain of f(a subset of Rn) and the
range is contained in Rm. We also use the expression fmaps A into Rm. Such functions
fare called functions of several variables ifA⊂Rn,n>1.
As another example we can take the vector-valued function g:R6→R2deﬁned by
the rule
g(x)=g(x1,x2,x3,x4,x5,x6)=/parenleftBig
x1x2x3x4x5x6,/radicalbig
x2
1+x2
6/parenrightBig
.
The ﬁrst coordinate of the value of gatxis the product of the coordinates of x.
Functions from RntoRmare not just mathematical abstractions, they arise natu-
rally in problems studied in all the sciences. For example, to specify the temperature
Tin a region Aof space requires a function T:A⊂R3→R(n=3,m=1);
thus, T(x,y,z) is the temperature at the point ( x,y,z). To specify the velocity of
a ﬂuid moving in space requires a map V:R4→R3, where V(x,y,z,t) is the ve-
locity vector of the ﬂuid at the point ( x,y,z) in space at time t(see Figure 2.1.1).
To specify the reaction rate of a solution consisting of six reacting chemicals A,B,
C,D,E,Fin proportions x,y,z,w,u,vrequires a map σ:U⊂R6→R, where
σ(x,y,z,w,u,v) gives the rate when the chemicals are in the indicated proportions.
(x, y, z)
V
(
x
(
(
, 
y
,
z
,
t
)
=
Fluid velocity
 V
V
V
ﬁgure 2.1.1 A ﬂuid in motion deﬁnes
a vector ﬁeld Vby specifying the
velocity of the ﬂuid particles at each
point in space and time.
1Some mathematicians would write such an fin boldface, using the notation f(x), because the function
is vector-valued. We did not do so, as a matter of personal taste. We use boldface primarily for mappings
that are vector ﬁelds, introduced later. The notion of function was developed over many centuries, with
the deﬁnition extended to cover more cases as they arose. For example, in 1667 James Gregory deﬁned
a function as “a quantity obtained from other quantities by a succession of algebraic operations or
by any other operation imaginable.” In 1755 Euler gave the following deﬁnition: “If some quantities
depend on others in such a way as to undergo variation when the latter are varied then the former are
called functions of the latter.”

<<<PAGE 104>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 77
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 77
To specify the cardiac vector (the vector giving the magnitude and direction of electric
current ﬂow in the heart) at time trequires a map c:R→R3,t/mapsto→c(t).
When f:U⊂Rn→R, we say that fis areal-valued function of n variables with
domain U. The reason we say “n variables” is simply that we regard the coordinates
of a point x=(x1,...,xn)∈Uasnvariables, and f(x)=f(x1,...,xn) depends on
these variables. We say “real-valued” because f(x1,...,xn) is a real number. A good
deal of our work will be with real-valued functions, so we give them special attention.
Graphs of Functions
Forf:U⊂R→R(n=1), the graph offis the subset of R2consisting of all points
(x,f(x)) in the plane, for xinU. This subset can be thought of as a curve in R2.I n
symbols, we write this as
graph f={(x,f(x))∈R2|x∈U},
where the curly braces mean “the set of all” and the vertical bar is read “such that.”Drawing the graph of a function of one variable is a useful device to help visualize howthe function actually behaves (see Figure 2.1.2). It will be helpful to generalize the ideaof a graph to functions of several variables. This leads to the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition Graph of a Function Letf:U⊂Rn→R. Deﬁne the graph
offto be the subset of Rn+1consisting of all the points
(x1,...,xn,f(x1,...,xn))
inRn+1for (x1,...,xn)i nU. In symbols,
graph f={(x1,...,xn,f(x1,...,xn))∈Rn+1|(x1,...,xn)∈U}.
For the case n=1, the graph is a curve in R2, while for n=2, it is a surface in R3
(see Figure 2.1.2). For n=3, it is difﬁcult to visualize the graph, because, since we are
humans living in a three-dimensional world, it is hard for us to envisage sets in R4.T o
help overcome this handicap, we introduce the idea of a level set.
Graph of f
x
Uy
Graph of f
U
x
(b) (a)yz
ﬁgure 2.1.2 The graphs of (a) a function of one variable, and (b) a function of two variables.

<<<PAGE 105>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 78
78 Differentiation
ﬁgure 2.1.3 Level contours of a
function are deﬁned in the same
manner as contour lines for a
topographical map.
(a)h=50
h=100
h=150
h=200
(b)h
Level Sets, Curves, and Surfaces
Suppose f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2.Alevel set is a subset of R3on which fis
constant; for instance, the set where x2+y2+z2=1 is a level set for f. This we
can visualize: It is just a sphere of radius 1 in R3. Formally, a level set is the set of
(x,y,z) such that f(x,y,z)=c, where cis a constant. The behavior or structure of a
function is determined in part by the shape of its level sets; consequently, understanding
these sets aids us in understanding the function in question. Level sets are also useful
for understanding functions of two variables f(x,y), in which case we speak of level
curves orlevel contours .
The idea is similar to that used to prepare contour maps, where one draws lines to
represent constant altitudes; walking along such a line would mean walking on a level
path. In the case of a hill rising from the xyplane, a graph of all the level curves gives
us a good idea of the function h(x,y), which represents the height of the hill at point
(x,y) (see Figure 2.1.3).
example 1 The constant function f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→2—that is, the function f(x,y)=2—has
as its graph the horizontal plane z=2i nR3. The level curve of value cis empty if
c/negationslash=2, and is the whole xyplane if c=2. ▲
example 2 The function f:R2→R, deﬁned by f(x,y)=x+y+2, has as its graph the inclined
plane z=x+y+2. This plane intersects the xyplane ( z=0) in the line y=−x−2
and the zaxis at the point (0, 0, 2). For any value c∈R, the level curve of value cis
the straight line y=−x+(c−2); or in symbols, the set
Lc={(x,y)|y=−x+(c−2)}⊂R2.
We indicate a few of the level curves of the function in Figure 2.1.4. This is a contour
map of the function f.
f(x, y) = x + y + 2 = 4
Line of
intersection of 
plane z = x + y + 2
and the xy planey
xf(x, y) = x + y + 2 = 2f(x, y) = x + y + 2 = 0ﬁgure 2.1.4 The level curves of f(x,y)=x+y+2
show the sets on which ftakes a given value.

<<<PAGE 106>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 79
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 79
y
xz
x+ y +2 =4Level curves lifted
to surface
x+y+2=2
Level curve x+y+2=0
x+y +2=2i nxyplane
x+y+2=4i nxy plane
2
2−2
2−2
ﬁgure 2.1.5 The relationship of level curves of Figure 2.1.4 to the graph of
the function f(x,y)=x+y+2, which is the plane z=x+y+2.
From level curves labeled with the value or “height” of the function, the shape of the
graph may be inferred by mentally elevating each level curve to the appropriate height,
without stretching, tilting, or sliding it. If this procedure is visualized for all level curves,
Lc—that is, for all values c∈R, they will assemble to give the entire graph of f,a s
indicated by the shaded plane in Figure 2.1.5. If the graph is visualized using a ﬁnite
number of level curves, a contour model is produced. If fis a smooth function, its graph
will be a smooth surface, and so the contour model, mentally smoothed over, gives a
good impression of the graph. ▲
Deﬁnition Level Curves and Surfaces Letf:U⊂Rn→Rand let c∈
R. Then the level set of value cis deﬁned to be the set of those points x∈
Uat which f(x)=c.I fn=2, we speak of a level curve (of value c);
and if n=3, we speak of a level surface . In symbols, the level set of value
cis written
{x∈U|f(x)=c}⊂Rn.
Note that the level set is always in the domain space.
example 3 Describe the graph of the quadratic function
f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2.
solution The graph is the paraboloid of revolution z=x2+y2, oriented upward from the origin,
around the zaxis. The level curve of value cis empty for c<0; for c>0 the level
curve of value cis the set {(x,y)|x2+y2=c}, a circle of radius√ccentered at the
origin. Thus, raised to height cabove the xyplane, the level set is a circle of radius√c,
indicating a parabolic shape (see Figures 2.1.6 and 2.1.7).

<<<PAGE 107>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 80
80 Differentiation
1 43 2
x2 + y2 = 12 
x2 + y2 = 22 
x2 + y2 = 32 
x2 + y2 = 42 y
xﬁgure 2.1.6 Some level curves for the function
f(x,y)=x2+y2.
14916 x2 + y2 = 42
yz
xx2 + y2 = 32
x2 + y2 = 22
x2 + y2 = 12ﬁgure 2.1.7 Level curves in Figure 2.1.6 raised to
the graph.
▲
The Method of Sections
By a section of the graph of fwe mean the intersection of the graph and a (vertical)
plane. For example, if P1is the xzplane in R3, deﬁned by y=0, then the section of f
in Example 3 is the set
P1∩graph f={(x,y,z)|y=0,z=x2},
which is a parabola in the xzplane. Similarly, if P2denotes the yzplane, deﬁned by
x=0, then the section
P2∩graph f={(x,y,z)|x=0,z=y2}
is a parabola in the yzplane (see Figure 2.1.8). It is usually helpful to compute at least
one section to complement the information given by the level sets.
example 4 The graph of the quadratic function
f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2−y2
is called a hyperbolic paraboloid,o rsaddle, centered at the origin. Sketch the graph.

<<<PAGE 108>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 81
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 81
S1:z = x2,y =0z
S2:z=y2,x =0
xyﬁgure 2.1.8 Two sections of the graph
off(x,y)=x2+y2.
solution To visualize this surface, we ﬁrst draw the level curves. To determine the level curves, we
solve the equation x2−y2=c. Consider the values c=0,±1,±4. For c=0, we have
y2=x2,o ry=±x, so that this level set consists of two straight lines through the origin.
Forc=1, the level curve is x2−y2=1, or y=±√
x2−1, which is a hyperbola that
passes vertically through the xaxis at the points ( ±1, 0) (see Figure 2.1.9). Similarly,
forc=4, the level curve is deﬁned by y=±√
x2−4, the hyperbola passing vertically
through the xaxis at ( ±2, 0). For c=−1, we obtain the curve x2−y2=−1—that is,
x=±/radicalbig
y2−1—the hyperbola passing horizontally through the yaxis at (0, ±1). And
forc=− 4, the hyperbola through (0, ±2) is obtained. These level curves are shown
in Figure 2.1.9. Because it is not easy to visualize the graph of ffrom these data alone,
we shall compute two sections, as in the previous example. For the section in the xz
plane, we have
P1∩graph of f={(x,y,z)|y=0,z=x2},
which is a parabola opening upward; and for the yzplane,
P2∩graph f={(x,y,z)|x=0,z=− y2},
−2
−11 2 −1
−212
x2 − y2 = 22
xy
x2 − y2 = 12
x2 − y2 = 0x2 − y2 = −12
x2 − y2 = 22x2 − y2 = 12x2 − y2 = 0
ﬁgure 2.1.9 Level curves for the function f(x,y)=x2−y2.

<<<PAGE 109>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 82
82 Differentiation
x
yz
z 
=
x
2
,
y
= 
0
x
2− 
−y2=12; z = 1
x2−y2=−(12); z = −1
z
=
−
y
2
,
x 
=
0
ﬁgure 2.1.10 Some level curves on the graph of
f(x,y)=x2−y2.
x
yz
−10
−2
0
x axisy axis
12 −2 −112
ﬁgure 2.1.11 The graph of z=x2−y2and its level curves.
which is a parabola opening downward. The graph may now be visualized by lifting the
level curves to the appropriate heights and smoothing out the resulting surface. Their
placement is aided by computing the parabolic sections. This procedure generates the
hyperbolic saddle indicated in Figure 2.1.10. Compare this with the computer-generated
graphs in Figure 2.1.11 (note that the orientation of the axes has been changed). ▲
example 5 Describe the level sets of the function
f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→x2+y2+z2.
solution This is the three-dimensional analogue of Example 3. In this context, level sets are
surfaces in the three-dimensional domain R3. The graph, in R4, cannot be visualized
directly, but sections can nevertheless be computed.
The level set with value cis the set
Lc={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2=c},
which is the sphere centered at the origin with radius√cforc>0, is a single point at
the origin for c=0, and is empty for c<0. The level sets for c=0, 1, 4, and 9 are
indicated in Figure 2.1.12.

<<<PAGE 110>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 83
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 83
x2+ y2+z2=12
x2+y2+z2=22x2+y2+z2
x2+y2+z2 =32
y
xz
ﬁgure 2.1.12 Some level surfaces for
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2.▲
example 6 Describe the graph of the function f:R3→Rdeﬁned by f(x,y,z)=x2+y2−z2,
which is the three-dimensional analogue of Example 4, and is also called a saddle .
solution Formally, the graph of fis a subset of four-dimensional space. If we denote points in
this space by ( x,y,z,t), then the graph is given by
{(x,y,z,t)|t=x2+y2−z2}.
The level surfaces of fare deﬁned by
Lc={(x,y,z)|x2+y2−z2=c}.
Forc=0, this is the cone z=±/radicalbig
x2+y2centered on the zaxis. For cnegative,
say,c=− a2, we obtain z=±/radicalbig
x2+y2+a2, which is a hyperboloid of two sheets
around the zaxis, passing through the zaxis at the points (0, 0, ±a). For cpositive, say,
c=b2, the level surface is the single-sheeted hyperboloid of revolution around the
zaxis deﬁned by z=±/radicalbig
x2+y2−b2, which intersects the xyplane in the circle of
radius |b|. These level surfaces are sketched in Figure 2.1.13.
x2+y2−z2 = 22x2+y2−z2=12x2+y2−z2 = 02x2+y2−z2=−12x2+y2−z2 = −22
x
12
2
z
1
y
ﬁgure 2.1.13 Some level surfaces of the function f(x,y,z)=x2+y2−z2.

<<<PAGE 111>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 84
84 Differentiation
x
2−
−y2= −1
x
2
−y2=1
t 
=
−
z
2
,
x 
=
0zxt
ﬁgure 2.1.14 They=0 section of the graph of f(x,y,z)=x2+y2−z2.
Another view of the graph may be obtained from a section. For example, the subspace
Sy=0={(x,y,z,t)|y=0}intersects the graph in the section
Sy=0∩graph f={(x,y,z,t)|y=0,t=x2−z2},
that is, the set of points of the form ( x,0 ,z,x2−z2), which may be considered to be a
surface in xztspace (see Figure 2.1.14). ▲
−2−1
0
1
2−2
−1
0
1
20123
0
1
20123
−2
0
1
2−2
−1
0
1
20123
−1
0
1
20123
x axisy axis y axis
(a) (b)
−2 −1012−2−1012
x axisy axis
(c)x axis
ﬁgure 2.1.15 Computer-generated graph of z=(x2+3y2) exp (1 −x2−y2) represented in three
ways: (a) by sections, (b) by level curves on a graph, and (c) by level curves in the xyplane.

<<<PAGE 112>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 85
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 85
We have seen how the methods of sections and level sets can be used to under-
stand the behavior of a function and its graph; these techniques can be quite useful to
people who desire comprehensive visualization of complicated data. There are manycomputer programs available to do this, and we show the results of one such programin Figure 2.1.15.
exercises
1.Are the following functions vector-valued or
scalar-valued?
(a)f(x,y,z)=exzxsiny
(b)g(x,y)=(x2y2,2x−1)
(c)h(t)=(cost, sint,t2,t3)2.Are the following functions vector-valued orscalar-valued?
(a)f(u,v,w)=(u
2v,weu,5v)
(b)g(x)=log√x
(c)h(x,y)=x5y−3
In the following two exercises, match the given level curves with their visual descriptions.
3.(a) f(x,y)=x2−y2=c,c=0, 1,−1 (b) f(x,y)=2x2+3y2=c,c=6, 12
(iv) (v)xy
xyxy
xy
(ii) (i) (iii)xy

<<<PAGE 113>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 86
86 Differentiation
4.(a) f(x,y)=(x−y)2=c,c=0, 1, 4 (b) f(x,y)=(x+y)2=c,c=0, 1, 4
xy
xy
(v) (iv) (vi)xyxy
xy
(ii) (iii) (i)xy
5.Draw the level curves for fof values c.
(a) f(x,y)=x3−y,c=−1, 0, 1
(b) f(x,y)=y−2l o g x,c=−3, 0, 3
(c) f(x,y)=ycscx,c=0, 1, 2
(d) f(x,y)=x/(x2+y2),c=−2, 0, 4
6.Letf(x,y)=9x2+y2. Sketch the following.
(a) The level curves for fof values c=0, 1, 9
(b) The sections of the graph of fin the planes
x=−1,x=0,x=1
(c) The sections of the graph of fin the planes
y=−1,y=0,y=1
(d) The graph of f
7.Sketch the level curves and graphs of the following
functions:
(a) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x−y+2
(b) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+4y2
(c) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→− xy
8.Sketch level sets of values c=0, 1, 4, 9 for both
f(x,y)=x2+y2andg(x,y)=/radicalbig
x2+y2. How are
the graphs of fandgdifferent? How are their sections
different?9.LetSbe the surface in R3deﬁned by the equation
x2y6−2z=3.
(a)Find a real-valued function f(x,y,z) of three
variables and a constant csuch that Sis the level set
offof value c.
(b)Find a real-valued function g(x,y) of two variables
such that Sis the graph of g.
10. Describe the behavior, as cvaries, of the level curve
f(x,y)=cfor each of these functions:
(a) f(x,y)=x2+y2+1
(b) f(x,y)=1−x2−y2
(c) f(x,y)=x3−x
11. For the functions in Examples 2, 3, and 4, compute thesection of the graph deﬁned by the plane
S
θ={(x,y,z)|y=xtanθ}
for a given constant θ. Do this by expressing zas a
function of r, where x=rcosθ,y=rsinθ.
Determine which of these functions fhave the property
that the shape of the section Sθ∩graph fis independent
ofθ. (The solution for Example 3 only is in the Study
Guide.)

<<<PAGE 114>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 87
2.1 The Geometry of Real-Valued Functions 87
In Exercises 10 to 16, draw the level curves (in the xy plane) for the given function f and speciﬁed values of c. Sketch
the graph of z =f(x,y).
12. f(x,y)=4−3x+2y,c=0, 1, 2, 3, −1,−2,−3
13. f(x,y)=(100−x2−y2)1/2,c=0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
14. f(x,y)=(x2+y2)1/2,c=0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
15. f(x,y)=x2+y2,c=0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 516. f(x,y)=3x−7y,c=0, 1, 2, 3, −1,−2,−3
17. f(x,y)=x2+xy,c=0, 1, 2, 3, −1,−2,−3
18. f(x,y)=x/y,c=0, 1, 2, 3, −1,−2,−3
In Exercises 17 to 19, sketch or describe the level surfaces and a section of the graph of each function.
19. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→− x2−y2−z2
20. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→4x2+y2+9z221. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→x2+y2
In Exercises 20 to 24, describe the graph of each function by computing some level sets and sections.
22. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→xy
23. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→xy+yz
24. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→xy+z225. f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→|y|
26. f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→max (|x|,|y|)
Sketch or describe the surfaces in R3of the equations presented in Exercises 25 to 37.
27. 4x2+y2=16
28. x+2z=4
29. z2=y2+4
30. x2+y2−2x=0
31.x
4=y2
4+z2
9
32.y2
9+z2
4=1+x2
16
33. z=x2
34. y2+z2=4
35. z=y2
4−x2
9
36. y2=x2+z237. 4x2−3y2+2z2=0
38.x2
9+y2
12+z2
9=1
39. x2+y2+z2+4x−by+9z−b=0, where bis a
constant
40. Using polar coordinates, describe the level curves of thefunction deﬁned by
f(x,y)=2xy/(x
2+y2)i f( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0) and f(0, 0) =0.
41. Letf:R2\{0}→R be given in polar coordinates by
f(r,θ)=(cos 2θ )/r2. Sketch a few level curves in the
xyplane. Here, R2\{0}={ x∈R2|x/negationslash=0}.
42. Show that in Figure 2.1.15, the level “curve” z=3
consists of two points.

<<<PAGE 115>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 88
88 Differentiation
2.2Limits and Continuity
This section develops the concepts of open sets, limits, and continuity; open sets are
needed to understand limits, and limits are in turn needed to understand continuity anddifferentiability.
As in elementary calculus, it is not necessary to completely master the limit concept
in order to work problems in differentiation. For this reason, instructors may treat thefollowing material with varying degrees of rigor. The student should consult with theinstructor about the depth of understanding required.
Open Sets
We begin formulating the concept of an open set by deﬁning an open disk. Let x0∈Rn
and let rbe a positive real number. The open disk (oropen ball ) of radius rand center
x0is deﬁned to be the set of all points xsuch that /bardblx−x0/bardbl<r. This set is denoted
Dr(x0) and is the set of points xinRnwhose distance from x0is less than r. Notice that
we include only those xfor which strict inequality holds. The disk Dr(x0) is illustrated
in Figure 2.2.1 for n=1, 2, 3. For the case n=1 and x0∈R, the open disk Dr(x0)i s
the open interval ( x0−r,x0+r), which consists of all numbers x∈Rstrictly between
x0−randx0+r. For the case n=2,x0∈R2,Dr(x0) is the “inside” of the disk of
radius rcentered at x0. For the case n=3,x0∈R3,Dr(x0) is the part strictly “inside”
of the ball of radius rcentered at x0.
Deﬁnition Open Sets LetU⊂Rn(that is, let Ube a subset of Rn). We
callUanopen set when for every point x0inUthere exists some r>0 such
that Dr(x0) is contained within U; symbolically, we write Dr(x0)⊂U(see
Figure 2.2.2).
The number r>0 can depend on the point x0, and generally rwill shrink as x0gets
closer to the “edge” of U. Intuitively speaking, a set Uis open when the “boundary”
points of Udo not lie in U. In Figure 2.2.2, the dashed line is notincluded in U.
rDr
+x
n=1xy
n=xz
y
3 2n=x0− x0 rx0()x0r
x0
x0r
(a) (b)Dr()x0
Dr()x0
(c)
ﬁgure 2.2.1 What disks Dr(x0) look like in (a) one, (b) two, and (c) three dimensions.

<<<PAGE 116>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 89
2.2 Limits and Continuity 89
xy
Drx0()x0
Uﬁgure 2.2.2 An open set Uis one that
completely encloses some disk Dr(x0) about
each of its points x0.
We establish the convention that the empty set ∅(the set consisting of no elements) is
open.
We have deﬁned an open disk and an open set. From our choice of terms it would
seem that an open disk should also be an open set. A little thought shows that this fact
requires some proof. The following theorem does this.
Theorem 1For each x0∈Rnandr>0,Dr(x0) is an open set.
proof Letx∈Dr(x0); that is, let /bardblx−x0/bardbl<r. According to the deﬁnition of an
open set, we must ﬁnd an s>0 such that Ds(x)⊂Dr(x0). Referring to Figure 2.2.3,
we see that s=r−/bardblx−x0/bardblis a reasonable choice; note that s>0, but that sbecomes
smaller if xis nearer the edge of Dr(x0).
To prove that Ds(x)⊂Dr(x0), let y∈Ds(x); that is, let /bardbly−x/bardbl<s.W ew a n t
to prove that y∈Dr(x0) as well. Proving this, in view of the deﬁnition of an r-disk,
entails showing that /bardbly−x0/bardbl<r. This is done by using the triangle inequality for
vectors in Rn:
/bardbly−x0/bardbl=/bardbl (y−x)+(x−x0)/bardbl≤/bardbl y−x/bardbl+/bardbl x−x0/bardbl<s+/bardblx−x0/bardbl=r.
Hence, /bardbly−x0/bardbl<r.■
The following example illustrates some techniques that are useful in establishing the
openness of sets.
ﬁgure 2.2.3 The geometry of the
proof that an open disk is an
open set.d
r sx0x0dr
=|| =||
−−x
|| −xxy
x0||s

<<<PAGE 117>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 90
90 Differentiation
example 1 Prove that A={(x,y)∈R2|x>0}is an open set.
solution The set is pictured in Figure 2.2.4.
y
A
xﬁgure 2.2.4 Show that Ais an open set.
Intuitively, this set is open, because no points on the “boundary,” x=0, are contained
in the set. Such an argument will often sufﬁce after one becomes accustomed to the
concept of openness. At ﬁrst, however, we should give details. To prove that Ais open,
we show that for every point ( x,y)∈Athere exists an r>0 such that Dr(x,y)⊂A.
If (x,y)∈A, then x>0. Choose r=x.I f(x1,y1)∈Dr(x,y), we have
|x1−x|=√(x1−x)2≤/radicalbig
(x1−x)2+(y1−y)2<r=x,
and so x1−x<xandx−x1<x. The latter inequality implies x1>0, that is,
(x1,y1)∈A. Hence Dr(x,y)⊂A, and therefore Ais open (see Figure 2.2.5). ▲y
AxDr(x, y)x y
xy,()x1
(x1, y1)−)2 ( (+y1−)2
−| |xx1
ﬁgure 2.2.5 The construction of a
disk about a point in Athat is
completely enclosed in A.
It is useful to have a special name for an open set containing a given point x,
because this idea arises often in the study of limits and continuity. Thus, by a neighbor-
hood ofx∈Rnwe merely mean an open set Ucontaining the point x. For example,
Dr(x0) is a neighborhood of x0for any r>0. The set Ain Example 1 is a neighborhood
of the point x0=(3,−10).
Boundary
Let us formally introduce the concept of a boundary point, which we alluded to inExample 1.
Deﬁnition Boundary Points LetA⊂Rn. A point x∈Rnis called a bound-
ary point ofAif every neighborhood of xcontains at least one point in Aand at
least one point not in A.
In this deﬁnition, xitself may or may not be in A;i fx∈A, then xis a boundary point
if every neighborhood of xcontains at least one point notinA(it already contains a point
ofA, namely, x). Similarly, if xis not in A, it is a boundary point if every neighborhood
ofxcontains at least one point of A.
We shall be particularly interested in boundary points of open sets. By the deﬁnition
of an open set, no point of an open set Acan be a boundary point of A. Thus, a point x

<<<PAGE 118>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 91
2.2 Limits and Continuity 91
is a boundary point of an open set A if and only if xis not in A and every neighborhood
ofxhas a nonempty intersection with A.
This expresses in precise terms the intuitive idea that a boundary point of Ais a
point just on the “edge” of A. In many examples it is perfectly clear what the boundary
points are.
example 2 (a) Let A=(a,b)i nR. Then the boundary points of Aconsist of the points aandb.
A consideration of Figure 2.2.6 and the deﬁnition will make this clear. [The reader will
be asked to prove this in Exercise 28(c).]
Boundary points
ax
bﬁgure 2.2.6 The boundary points of the interval
(a,b).
(b) Let A=Dr(x0,y0)b ea n r-disk about ( x0,y0) in the plane. The boundary consists
of points ( x,y) with ( x−x0)2+(y−y0)2=r2(Figure 2.2.7).
Boundary
A = Dr (x0, y0)
xy
(x0, y0) ﬁgure 2.2.7 The boundary of Aconsists of points on
the edge of A.
(c) Let A={(x,y)∈R2|x>0}. Then the boundary of Aconsists of all points on
theyaxis (draw a ﬁgure that depicts this).
(d) Let AbeDr(x0) minus the point x0(a “punctured” disk about x0). Then x0is a
boundary point of A.▲
Limits
We now turn our attention to the concept of a limit. Throughout the following discussions
the domain of deﬁnition of the function f will be an open set A. We are interested in
ﬁnding the limit of fasx∈Aapproaches either a point of Aor a boundary point of A.
Y ou should appreciate the fact that the limit concept is a basic and useful tool for the
analysis of functions; it enables us to study derivatives, and hence maxima and minima,asymptotes, improper integrals, and other important features of functions, as well asbeing useful for inﬁnite series and sequences. We will present a theory of limits forfunctions of several variables that includes the theory for functions of one variable as aspecial case.
In one-variable calculus, you have encountered the notion of limit
x→x0f(x)=lfor
a function f:A⊂R→Rfrom a subset Aof the real numbers to the real numbers.
Intuitively, this means that as xgets closer and closer to x0, the values f(x) get closer
and closer to (the limiting value) l. To put this intuitive idea on a ﬁrm, mathematical
foundation, either the “epsilon ( ε) and delta ( δ) method” or the “neighborhood method”
is usually introduced. The same is true for functions of several variables. In what followswe develop the neighborhood approach to limits. The epsilon-delta approach is left foroptional study at the end of this section.

<<<PAGE 119>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 92
92 Differentiation
UAbz
y
xx x ()f, ) (
x
x0N
ﬁgure 2.2.8 Limits in terms of neighborhoods; If x
is inU, then f(x) will be in N. (The little open circle
denotes that the point does not lie on the graph.)
In the ﬁgure, f:A={(x,y)|x2+y2<1}→R. (The
dashed line is not in the graph of f.)
Deﬁnition Limit Letf:A⊂Rn→Rm, where Ais an open set. Let x0be in
Aor be a boundary point of A, and let Nbe a neighborhood of b∈Rm.W es a y
fiseventually in Nasxapproaches x0if there exists a neighborhood Uofx0
such that x/negationslash=x0,x∈U, and x∈Aimply f(x)∈N. [The geometric meaning of
this assertion is illustrated in Figure 2.2.8; note that x0need not be in the set A,s o
that f(x0) is not necessarily deﬁned.] We say f(x)approaches basxapproaches
x0, or, in symbols,
limit
x→x 0f(x)=b or f(x)→basx→x0,
when, given anyneighborhood Nofb,fis eventually in Nasxapproaches x0
[that is, “ f(x) is close to bifxis close to x0”]. It may be that as xapproaches x0,
the values f(x) do not get close to any particular vector. In this case, we say that
limit x→x 0f(x)does not exist.
Henceforth, whenever we consider the notion limit x→x 0f(x), we shall always assume
thatx0either belongs to some open set on which fis deﬁned or is on the boundary of
such a set.
One reason we insist on x/negationslash=x0in the deﬁnition of limit will become clear if we
remember from one-variable calculus that we want to be able to deﬁne the derivative
f/prime(x0) of a function fat a point x0by
f/prime(x0)=limit
x→x0f(x)−f(x0)
x−x0,
and this expression is not deﬁned at x=x0.
example 3 (a) This example illustrates a limit that does not exist. Consider the function f:R→R
deﬁned by
f(x)=/braceleftbigg1i f x>0
−1i f x≤0.

<<<PAGE 120>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 93
2.2 Limits and Continuity 93
The limit x→0f(x) does not exist, since there are points x1arbitrarily close to 0 with
f(x1)=1 and also points x2arbitrarily close to 0 with f(x2)=−1; that is, there is no
single number that fis close to when xis close to 0 (see Figure 2.2.9). If fis restricted
to the domain (0, 1) or ( −1, 0), then the limit does exist. Can you say why?
fxy
()1
fx() 1 2==
−1
x1x2
xﬁgure 2.2.9 The limit of this function
asx→0 does not exist.
y
x(0, 1)ﬁgure 2.2.10 The limit of this function as x→0
is zero.
(b) This example illustrates a function whose limit does exist, but whose limiting value
does not equal its value at the limiting point. Deﬁne f:R→Rby
f(x)=/braceleftbigg0i f x/negationslash=0
1i f x=0.
It is true that limit x→0f(x)=0, since for any neighborhood Uof 0, x∈Uand
x/negationslash=0 implies that f(x)=0. We see from the graph in Figure 2.2.10 that fapproaches
0a sx→0; we do not care that fhappens to take on some other value at 0. ▲
example 4 Use the deﬁnition to verify that the “obvious” limit x→x 0x=x0holds, where xand
x0∈Rn.
solution Letfbe the function deﬁned by f(x)=x, and let Nbe any neighborhood of x0.W e
must show that f(x) is eventually in Nasx→x0. According to the deﬁnition, we must
ﬁnd a neighborhood Uofx0with the property that if x/negationslash=x0andx∈U, then f(x)∈N.
Pick U=N.I fx∈U, then x∈N; because x=f(x), it follows that f(x)∈N. Thus,
we have shown that limit x→x 0x=x0. In a similar way, we have
limit
(x,y)→(x0,y0)x=x0, etc. ▲
In what follows, you may assume, without proof, the validity of limits from one-
variable calculus. For example, limit x→1√x=√
1=1 and limit θ→0sinθ=sin 0=0
may be used.

<<<PAGE 121>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 94
94 Differentiation
example 5 (This example demonstrates another case in which the limit cannot simply be “read off”
from the function.) Find limit x→1g(x) where
g:x/mapsto→x−1√x−1.
solution This function is graphed in Figure 2.2.11(a).
1
a11
11g:xxxx−1
−1g  :x* +
())( bxy
xy
ﬁgure 2.2.11 These graphs are the same except that in part (a), gis undeﬁned at x=1,
whereas in part (b), g∗is deﬁned for all x≥0.
We see that g(1) is not deﬁned, because division by zero is not deﬁned. However, if
we multiply the numerator and denominator of g(x)b y√x+1, we ﬁnd that for all x
in the domain of gwe have
g(x)=x−1√x−1=√x+1, x/negationslash=1.
The expression g∗(x)=√x+1 is deﬁned and takes the value 2 at x=1; from one-
variable calculus, g∗(x)→2a sx→1. But because g∗(x)=g(x) for all x≥0,x/negationslash=1,
we must have as well that g(x)→2a sx→1. ▲
We will consider other examples in two variables shortly.
Properties of Limits
To properly speak of thelimit, we should establish that fcan have at most one limit
asx→x0. This is intuitively clear and we now state it formally. (See the Internet
supplement for the proof.)
Theorem 2 Uniqueness of Limits
If limit
x→x 0f(x)=b1 and limit
x→x 0f(x)=b2, then b1=b2.
To carry out practical computations with limits, we require some rules for limits; for
example, that the limit of a sum is the sum of the limits. These rules are summarized inthe following theorem (see the Internet supplement for Chapter 2 for the proof).

<<<PAGE 122>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 95
2.2 Limits and Continuity 95
Theorem 3 Properties of Limits Letf:A⊂Rn→Rm,g:A⊂Rn→Rm,
x0be in Aor be a boundary point of A,b∈Rm, and c∈R; then
(i) If limit x→x 0f(x)=b, then limit x→x 0cf(x)=cb, where cf:A→Rmis
deﬁned by x/mapsto→c(f(x)).
(ii) If limit x→x 0f(x)=b1and limit x→x 0g(x)=b2, then limit x→x 0(f+g)(x)=
b1+b2, where ( f+g):A→Rmis deﬁned by x/mapsto→f(x)+g(x).
(iii) If m=1, limit x→x 0f(x)=b1, and limit x→x 0g(x)=b2, then
limit x→x 0(fg)(x)=b1b2, where ( fg):A→Ris deﬁned by x/mapsto→f(x)g(x).
(iv) If m=1, limit x→x 0f(x)=b/negationslash=0, and f(x)/negationslash=0 for all x∈A, then
limit x→x 01/f(x)=1/b, where 1/ f:A→Ris deﬁned by x/mapsto→1/f(x).
(v) If f(x)=(f1(x),..., fm(x)), where fi:A→R,i=1,...,m, are the
component functions of f, then limit x→x 0f(x)=b=(b1,...,bm) if and
only if limit x→x 0fi(x)=bifor each i=1,...,m.
These results ought to be intuitively clear. For instance, rule (ii) says that if
f(x) is close to b1andg(x) is close to b2when xis close to x0, then f(x)+g(x)
is close to b1+b2when xis close to x0. The following example illustrates how this
works.
example 6 Letf:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2+2. Compute the limit
limit
(x,y)→(0,1)f(x,y).
solution Here fis the sum of the three functions ( x,y)/mapsto→x2,(x,y)/mapsto→y2, and ( x,y)/mapsto→2.
The limit of a sum is the sum of the limits, and the limit of a product is the product of
the limits (Theorem 3). Hence, using the fact that limit (x,y)→(x0,y0)x=x0(Example 4),
we obtain
limit
(x,y)→(x0,y0)x2=/parenleftbigg
limit x
(x,y)→(x0,y0)/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
limit x
(x,y)→(x0,y0)/parenrightbigg
=x2
0
and, using the same reasoning, limit (x,y)→(x0,y0)y2=y2
0. Consequently,
limit
(x,y)→(0,1)f(x,y)=02+12+2=3. ▲
Continuous Functions
In single-variable calculus we learned that the idea of a continuous function is based onthe intuitive notion of a function whose graph is an unbroken curve; that is, a curve thathas no jumps, or the kind of curve that would be traced by a particle in motion or by a
moving pencil point that is not lifted from the paper.

<<<PAGE 123>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 96
96 Differentiation
(b)xyy
xg: 2 x x
(a)−11
ﬁgure 2.2.12 The function fin part (a) is not continuous, because its value jumps as xcrosses 0,
whereas the function gin part (b) is continuous.
To perform a detailed analysis of functions, we need concepts more precise than this
rather vague notion. An example may clarify these ideas. Consider the speciﬁc function
f:R→Rdeﬁned by f(x)=−1i fx≤0 and f(x)=1i fx>0. The graph of fis
shown in Figure 2.2.12(a). [The little open circle denotes the fact that the point (0, 1)
does notlie on the graph of f.] Clearly, the graph of fis broken at x=0. Consider
also the function g:x/mapsto→x2. This function is pictured in Figure 2.2.12(b). The graph
ofgis not broken at any point.
If we examine examples of functions like f, whose graphs are broken at some point
x0, and functions like g, whose graphs are not broken, we see that the principal difference
between them is that for a function like g, the values of g(x) get closer to g(x0)a sx
gets closer and closer to x0. The same idea works for functions of several variables. But
the notion of closer and closer does not sufﬁce as a mathematical deﬁnition; thus, weshall formulate these concepts precisely in terms of limits.
Because the condition limit
x→x 0f(x)=f(x0) means that f(x) is close to f(x0)
when xis close to x0, we see that this limit condition does indeed correspond to the
requirement that the graph of fbe unbroken (see Figure 2.2.13, where we illustrate the
case f:R→R). The case of several variables is easiest to visualize if we deal with
real-valued functions, say f:R2→R. In this case, we can visualize fby drawing its
graph, which consists of all points ( x,y,z)i nR3with z=f(x,y). The continuity of
fthus means that its graph has no “breaks” in it (see Figure 2.2.14).
ﬁgure 2.2.13 (a) Discontinuous
function for which limitx→x0f(x)
does not exist.
(b) Continuous function forwhich this limit exists and equals
f(x
0).ff
x xy y
x
afx
xxxf
())(
(
b())
fx) (
00
xf()0
0x

<<<PAGE 124>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 97
2.2 Limits and Continuity 97
z
y
xz
y
xBreak in the
surface z = f(x, y)
Set of discontinuities of f;i.e., the set of points where f is discontinuousf(x
0)
x0z = f(x, y)
(a) (b)
ﬁgure 2.2.14 (a) A discontinuous function of two variables. (b) A continuous function.
Deﬁnition Continuity Let f:A⊂Rn→Rmbe a given function with
domain A. Let x0∈A.W es a y fiscontinuous atx0if and only if
limit
x→x 0f(x)=f(x0).
If we just say that fiscontinuous, we shall mean that fis continuous at each
point x0ofA.I ffis not continuous at x0,w es a y fisdiscontinuous atx0.I ff
is discontinuous at some point in its domain, we say fisdiscontinuous.
example 7 Any polynomial p(x)=a0+a1x+···+ anxnis continuous from RtoR. Indeed, from
Theorem 3 and Example 4,
limit
x→x0/parenleftbig
a0+a1x+···+ anxn/parenrightbig
=limit
x→x0a0+limit
x→x0a1x+···+ limit
x→x0anxn
=a0+a1x0+···+ anxn
0,
because the limit of a product is the product of the limits, which gives
limit
x→x0xn=/parenleftBig
limit
x→x0x/parenrightBign
=xn
0.▲
example 8 Letf:R2→R,f(x,y)=xy. Then fis continuous, because, by the limit theorems
and Example 4,
limit
(x,y)→(x0,y0)xy=/parenleftbigg
limit
(x,y)→(x0,y0)x/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
limit
(x,y)→(x0,y0)y/parenrightbigg
=x0y0.▲
We can see by the same method that any polynomial p(x,y) [for example, p(x,y)=
3x2−6xy2+y3]i nxandyis continuous.

<<<PAGE 125>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 98
98 Differentiation
example 9 The function f:R2→Rdeﬁned by
f(x,y)=/braceleftbigg1i f x≤0o r y≤0
0 otherwise
is not continuous at (0, 0) or at any point on the positive xaxis or positive yaxis. Indeed,
if (x0,y0)=uis such a point (i.e., x0=0 and y0≥0, or y0=0 and x0≥0) and δ>0,
there are points ( x,y)∈Dδ(u), a neighborhood of u, with f(x,y)=1 and other points
(x,y)∈Dδ(u) with f(x,y)=0. Thus, it is nottrue that f(x,y)→f(x0,y0)=1a s
(x,y)→(x0,y0).▲
To prove that speciﬁc functions are continuous, we can avail ourselves of the limit
theorems (see Theorem 3 and Example 7). If we transcribe those results in terms of
continuity, we are led to the following:
Theorem 4 Properties of Continuous Functions Suppose that f:A⊂
Rn→Rm,g:A⊂Rn→Rm, and let cbe a real number.
(i) If fis continuous at x0,s oi s cf, where ( cf)(x)=c[f(x)].
(ii) If fandgare continuous at x0,s oi s f+g, where the sum of fandgis
deﬁned by ( f+g)(x)=f(x)+g(x).
(iii) If fandgare continuous at x0andm=1, then the product function fg
deﬁned by ( fg)(x)=f(x)g(x) is continuous at x0.
(iv) If f:A⊂Rn→Ris continuous at x0and nowhere zero on A, then the
quotient 1/ fis continuous at x0, where (1/ f)(x)=1/f(x).
(v) If f:A⊂Rn→Rmand f(x)=(f1(x),..., fm(x)), then fis continuous
atx0if and only if each of the real-valued functions f1,..., fmis continuous
atx0.
A variant of (iv) is often used: If f(x0)/negationslash=0 and fis continuous, then f(x)/negationslash=0i na
neighborhood of x0and so 1/ fis deﬁned in that neighborhood, and 1/ fis continuous
atx0.
example 10 Letf:R2→R2,(x,y)/mapsto→(x2y,(y+x3)/(1+x2)). Show that fis continuous.
solution To see this, it is sufﬁcient, by property (v) of Theorem 4, to show that each componentis continuous. As we have mentioned, any polynomial in two variables is continuous;thus, the map ( x,y)/mapsto→x
2yis continuous. Because 1 +x2is continuous and nonzero,
by property (iv), we know that 1/(1 +x2) is continuous; hence, ( y+x3)/(1+x2)i sa
product of continuous functions, and by (iii) is continuous. ▲
Similar reasoning applies to examples like the function c:R→R3given by c(t)=
(t2,1 ,t3/(1+t2)) to show they are continuous as well.

<<<PAGE 126>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 99
2.2 Limits and Continuity 99
ﬁgure 2.2.15 The composition
offong.AC
B
f ◦ gf g
Composition
Next we discuss composition, another basic operation that can be performed on func-
tions. If gmaps AtoBand fmaps BtoC, the composition of gwith f,o ro f fon
g, denoted by f◦g, maps AtoCby sending x/mapsto→f(g(x)) (see Figure 2.2.15). For
example, sin ( x2) is the composition of x/mapsto→x2with y/mapsto→siny.
Theorem 5 Continuity of Compositions Letg:A⊂Rn→Rmand let
f:B⊂Rm→Rp. Suppose g(A)⊂B, so that f◦gis deﬁned on A.I fgis
continuous at x0∈Aand fis continuous at y0=g(x0), then f◦gis continuous
atx0.
The intuition behind this is easy; the formal proof in the Internet supplement follows
a similar pattern. Intuitively, we must show that as xgets close to x0,f(g(x)) gets close
tof(g(x0)). But as xgets close to x0,g(x) gets close to g(x0) (by continuity of gatx0);
and as g(x) gets close to g(x0),f(g(x)) gets close to f(g(x0)) [by continuity of fat
g(x0)].
example 11 Letf(x,y,z)=(x2+y2+z2)30+sinz3. Show that fis continuous.
solution Here we can write fas a sum of the two functions ( x2+y2+z2)30and sin z3, so it sufﬁces
to show that each is continuous. The ﬁrst is the composite of ( x,y,z)/mapsto→(x2+y2+z2)
with u/mapsto→u30, and the second is the composite of ( x,y,z)/mapsto→z3with u/mapsto→sinu, and
so we have continuity by Theorem 5. ▲
Limits in Terms of ε’s and δ’s
We now state a theorem (proved in the Internet supplement for Chapter 2) giving
a useful formulation of the notion of limit in terms of epsilons and deltas that isoften taken as the deﬁnition of limit. This is, in fact, another way of making precise the
intuitive statement that “ f(x) is close to bwhen xis close to x
0.” To help understand this
formulation, the reader should consider it with respect to each of the examples alreadypresented.
Theorem 6Letf:A⊂Rn→Rmand let x0be in Aor be a boundary point of
A. Then limit x→x 0f(x)=bif and only if for every number ε>0 there is a δ>0
such that for any x∈Asatisfying 0 </bardblx−x0/bardbl<δ,w eh a v e/bardbl f(x)−b/bardbl<ε
(see Figure 2.2.16).

<<<PAGE 127>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 100
100 Differentiation
ﬁgure 2.2.16 The geometry of
theε-δdeﬁnition of limit.
b
bx xf
D
DA
()fA()
()00d
xD()0 δ Image of
x xyy
e
To illustrate the methodology of the epsilon-delta technique in Theorem 6, we con-
sider the following examples.
example 12 Show that limit (x,y)→(0,0) x=0 using the ε-δmethod.
solution Note that if δ>0,/bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl=/radicalbig
x2+y2<δimplies |x−0|=| x|=√
x2≤/radicalbig
x2+y2<δ. Thus, if /bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl <δ, then |x−0|is also less than δ.G i v e n
ε>0, we are required to ﬁnd a δ>0 (generally depending on ε) with the property that
0</bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl <δ implies |x−0|<ε. What are we to pick as our δ? From
the preceding calculation, we see that if we choose δ=ε, then /bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl <δ
implies |x−0|<ε. This shows that limit (x,y)→(0,0) x=0. Given ε> 0, we could have
also chosen δ=ε/2o rε/ 3, but it sufﬁces to ﬁnd just one δsatisfying the requirements
of the deﬁnition of a limit. ▲
example 13 Consider the function
f(x,y)=sin (x2+y2)
x2+y2.
Even though fis not deﬁned at (0, 0), determine whether f(x,y) approaches some
number as ( x,y) approaches (0, 0).
solution From one-variable calculus or L ’Hˆ opital’ s rule we know that
limit
α→0sinα
α=1.
Thus, it is reasonable to guess that
limit
v→(0,0)f(v)=limit
v→(0,0)sin/bardblv/bardbl2
/bardblv/bardbl2=1.
Indeed, because limit α→0(sinα)/α=1, given ε>0 we are able to ﬁnd a δ>0, with
0<δ<1, such that 0 <|α|<δ implies that |( sinα)/α−1|<ε.I f0</bardblv/bardbl<δ,
then 0 </bardblv/bardbl2<δ2<δ, and therefore
|f(v)−1|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglesin/bardblv/bardbl 2
/bardblv/bardbl2−1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle<ε .

<<<PAGE 128>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 101
2.2 Limits and Continuity 101
x
yz
ﬁgure 2.2.17 Graph of the function f(x,y)=[sin ( x2+y2)]/(x2+y2).
Thus, limit v→(0,0) f(v)=1. If we plot [sin ( x2+y2)]/(x2+y2) on a computer, we get
a graph that is indeed well behaved near (0, 0) (Figure 2.2.17). ▲
example 14 Show that
limit
(x,y)→(0,0)x2
/radicalbig
x2+y2=0.
solution We must show that x2//radicalbig
x2+y2is small when ( x,y) is close to the origin. To do this,
we use the following inequality:
0≤x2
/radicalbig
x2+y2≤x2+y2
/radicalbig
x2+y2(because y2≥0)
=/radicalbig
x2+y2.
Given ε> 0, choose δ=ε. Then /bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl=/bardbl (x,y)/bardbl=/radicalbig
x2+y2, and so
/bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl <δimplies that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex
2
/radicalbig
x2+y2−0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=x
2
/radicalbig
x2+y2≤/radicalbig
x2+y2=/bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl <δ=ε.
Thus, the conditions of Theorem 6 have been fulﬁlled and the limit is veriﬁed. ▲
example 15 (a) Does
limit
(x,y)→(0,0)x2/(x2+y2)
exist? [See Figure 2.2.18(a).]
(b) Prove that [see Figure 2.2.18(b)]
limit
(x,y)→(0,0)2x2y
x2+y2=0.

<<<PAGE 129>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 102
102 Differentiation
xz
yxz
y
(a) (b)As (x, y) approaches
(0, 0) in this valley, z      0As (x, y) approaches
(0, 0) along this ridge, z     1
ﬁgure 2.2.18 (a) The function z=x2/(x2+y2) has no limit at (0, 0). (b) The function
z=(2x2y)/(x2+y2) has limit 0 at (0, 0).
solution (a) If the limit exists, x2/(x2+y2) should approach a deﬁnite value, say a,a s( x,y)
gets near (0, 0). In particular, if ( x,y) approaches zero along any given path, then
x2/(x2+y2) should approach the limiting value a.I f(x,y) approaches (0, 0) along the
liney=0, the limiting value is clearly 1 ( just set y=0 in the preceding expression to
getx2/x2=1). If ( x,y) approaches (0, 0) along the line x=0, the limiting value is
lim
y→002
02+y2=0/negationslash=1.
Hence, limit (x,y)→(0,0) x2/(x2+y2) does not exist.
(b) Note that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2x
2y
x2+y2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle≤/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2x
2y
x2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=2|y|.
Thus, given ε> 0, choose δ=ε/2; then 0 </bardbl(x,y)−(0, 0)/bardbl=/radicalbig
x2+y2<δ
implies |y|<δ, and thus
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2x
2y
x2+y2−0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle<2δ=ε.
▲
Using the ε-δnotation, we are led to the following reformulation of the deﬁnition of
continuity.
Theorem 7Letf:A⊂Rn→Rmbe given. Then fis continuous at x0∈A
if and only if for every number ε>0 there is a number δ>0 such that
x∈A and /bardblx−x0/bardbl<δ implies /bardblf(x)−f(x0)/bardbl<ε .
The proof is almost immediate. Notice that in Theorem 6 we insisted that 0 <
/bardblx−x0/bardbl; that is, x/negationslash=x0. That is notimposed here; indeed, the conclusion of Theorem 7
is certainly valid when x=x0, and so there is no need to exclude this case. Here we do
care about the value of fatx0;w ew a n t fat nearby points to be close to thisvalue.

<<<PAGE 130>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 103
2.2 Limits and Continuity 103
exercises
In the following exercises you may assume that the exponential, sine, and cosine functions are continuous and may freely use
techniques from one-variable calculus, such as L ’Hˆ opital’ s rule.
1.Letf:R2→Rand suppose that
lim
(x,y)→(1,3)f(x,y)=5. What can you say about the
value f(1, 3)?
2.Letf:R2→Ris continuous and suppose that
lim(x,y)→(1,3) f(x,y)=5. What can you say about the
value f(1, 3)?
3.Compute the limits:
(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,1)x3y
(b) limit
x→0cosx−1
x2
(c)limit
h→0eh−1
h
4.Compute the following limits:
(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,1)exy
(b) limit
x→0sin2x
x
(c)limit
x→0sin2x
x2
5.Compute the following limits:(a) limit
x→3(x2−3x+5)
(b) limit
x→0sinx
(c) limit
h→0(x+h)2−x2
h
6.Let
f(x,y)=/braceleftbiggxy3
x2+y6if (x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
0i f ( x,y)=(0, 0).
(a)Compute the limit as ( x,y)→(0, 0) of falong the
path x=0.
(b)Compute the limit as ( x,y)→(0, 0) of falong the
path x=y3.
(c)Show that fis not continuous at (0, 0).
7.Letf(x,y,z)=ex+y
1+z2. Compute
limh→0f(1,2+h,3)−f(1,2,3)
h.8.Compute the following limits if they exist:
(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)(x+y)2−(x−y)2
xy
(b) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)sinxy
y
(c) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)x3−y3
x2+y2
9.Compute the following limits if they exist:
(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)exy−1
y
(b) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)cos ( xy)−1
x2y2
(c) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)xy
x2+y2+2
10. Compute the following limits if they exist:(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)exy
x+1
(b) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)cosx−1−(x2/2)
x4+y4
(c) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)(x−y)2
x2+y2
11. Compute the following limits if they exist:
(a) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)sinxy
xy
(b) limit
(x,y,z)→(0,0,0)sin (xyz)
xyz
(c) limit
(x,y,z)→(0,0,0)f(x,y,z), where f(x,y,z)=
(x2+3y2)/(x+1)
12. Compute the following limits if they exist:(a) limit
x→0sin 2x−2x
x3
(b) limit
(x,y)→(0,0)sin 2x−2x+y
x3+y
(c) limit
(x,y,z)→(0,0,0)2x2ycosz
x2+y2
13. Compute limit x→x 0f(x), if it exists, for the following
cases:
(a) f:R→R,x/mapsto→|x|,x0=1
(b) f:Rn→R,x/mapsto→/bardbl x/bardbl, arbitrary x0

<<<PAGE 131>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 104
104 Differentiation
(c) f:R→R2,x/mapsto→(x2,ex),x0=1
(d) f:R2\{(0, 0)}→R2,(x,y)/mapsto→(sin ( x−y),
ex(y+1)−x−1)//bardbl(x,y)/bardbl,x0=(0, 0)
14. Letf(x,y,z)=1
x2+y2+z2−1. Describe geometrically
the set in R3where ffails to be continuous.
15. Where is the function f(x,y)=1
x2+y2continuous?16. LetA=/bracketleftbigg
12
34/bracketrightbigg
.
(a)Considering A:R2→R2as a linear map, explicitly
write the component functions of A.
(b)Show that Ais continuous on all of R2.
17. Find lim
(x,y)→(0,0)(3x2+3y2)l o g ( x2+y2). (HINT: Use
polar coordinates.)
Show that the subsets of the plane in Exercises 18–21 are open:
18. A={(x,y)|−1<x<1,−1<y<1}
19. B={(x,y)|y>0}
20. C={(x,y)|2<x2+y2<4}
21. D={(x,y)|x/negationslash=0 and y/negationslash=0}
22. LetA⊂R2be the open unit disk D1(0, 0) with the
point x0=(1, 0) added, and let f:A→R,x/mapsto→f(x)
be the constant function f(x)=1. Show that
limit x→x 0f(x)=1.
23. Iff:Rn→Randg:Rn→Rare continuous, show
that the functions
f2g:Rn→R,x/mapsto→[f(x)]2g(x)
and
f2+g:Rn→R,x/mapsto→[f(x)]2+g(x)
are continuous.
24. (a)Show that f:R→R,x/mapsto→(1−x)8+cos (1 +x3)
is continuous.
(b) Show that the map
f:R→R,x/mapsto→x2ex/(2−sinx) is continuous.
25. (a)Can [sin ( x+y)]/(x+y) be made continuous by
suitably deﬁning it at (0, 0)?
(b)Can xy/(x2+y2) be made continuous by suitably
deﬁning it at (0, 0)?
(c) Prove that
f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→yex+sinx+(xy)4is
continuous.
26. Using either ε’ s and δ’ s or spherical coordinates, show
that
limit
(x,y,z)→(0,0,0)xyz
x2+y2+z2=0.27. Use the ε-δformulation of limits to prove that x2→4
asx→2. Give another proof using Theorem 3.
28. (a) Prove that for x∈Rnands<t,Ds(x)⊂Dt(x).
(b) Prove that if UandVare neighborhoods of x∈Rn,
then so are U∩VandU∪V.
(c) Prove that the boundary points of an open interval
(a,b)⊂Rare the points aandb.
29. Suppose xandyare in Rnandx/negationslash=y. Show that there
is a continuous function f:Rn→Rwith f(x)=1,
f(y)=0, and 0 ≤f(z)≤1 for every zinRn.
30. Letf:A⊂Rn→Rbe given and let x0be a boundary
point of A. We say that limit x→x 0f(x)=∞ if for every
N>0 there is a δ>0 such that 0 </bardblx−x0/bardbl<δand
x∈Aimplies f(x)>N.
(a) Prove that limit x→1(x−1)−2=∞ .
(b)Prove that limit x→01/|x|=∞ . Is it true that
limit x→01/x=∞ ?
(c) Prove that limit (x,y)→(0,0)1/(x2+y2)=∞ .
31. Letb∈Rand f:R\[b ]→Rbe a function. We write
limit x→b−f(x)=Land say that Lis the left-hand
limit offatbif for every ε>0 there is a δ>0 such
thatx<band 0<|x−b|<δimplies |f(x)−L|<ε.
(a) Formulate a deﬁnition of right-hand limit,o r
limit x→b+f(x).
(b) Find limit x→0− 1/(1+e1/x) and
limit x→0+ 1/(1+e1/x).
(c) Sketch the graph of 1/(1 +e1/x).
32. Show that fis continuous at x0if and only if
limit
x→x 0/bardblf(x)−f(x0)/bardbl=0.
33. Letf:A⊂Rn→Rmsatisfy
/bardblf(x)−f(y)/bardbl≤K/bardblx−y/bardblαfor all xandyinAfor

<<<PAGE 132>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 105
2.3 Differentiation 105
positive constants Kandα. Show that fis continuous.
(Such functions are called H¨older-continuous or, if
α=1,Lipschitz-continuous.)
34. Show that f:Rn→Rmis continuous at all points if
and only if the inverse image of every open set is open.35. (a)Find a speciﬁc number δ>0 such that if |a|<δ,
then|a3+3a2+a|<1/100.
(b) Find a speciﬁc number δ>0 such that if
x2+y2<δ2, then
|x2+y2+3xy+180xy5|<1/10,000.
2.3Differentiation
In Section 2.1 we considered a few methods for graphing functions. By these meth-
ods alone it may be impossible to compute enough information to grasp even thegeneral features of a complicated function. From elementary calculus, we know thatthe idea of the derivative can greatly aid us in this task; for example, it enables usto locate maxima and minima and to compute rates of change. The derivative alsohas many applications beyond this, as you have surely has discovered in elementarycalculus.
Intuitively, we know from our work in Section 2.2 that a continuous function is one
that has no “breaks” in its graph. A differentiable function from R
2toRought to be
such that not only are there no breaks in its graph, but there is a well-deﬁned planetangent to the graph at each point. Thus, there must not be any sharp folds, corners, orpeaks in the graph (see Figure 2.3.1). In other words, the graph must be smooth.
Partial Derivatives
To make these ideas precise, we need a sound deﬁnition of what we mean by the phrase“f(x
1,...,xn) is differentiable at x=(x1,...,xn).” Actually, this deﬁnition is not quite
as simple as one might think. Toward this end, however, let us introduce the notion of thepartial derivative. This notion relies only on our knowledge of one-variable calculus.(A quick review of the deﬁnition of the derivative in a one-variable calculus text mightbe advisable at this point.)
xyz
z = f(x, y)Peak
PitFold
xyz
(a) (b)Corner
ﬁgure 2.3.1 (a) A smooth graph and (b) a nonsmooth one.

<<<PAGE 133>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 106
106 Differentiation
Deﬁnition Partial Derivatives LetU⊂Rnbe an open set and suppose
f:U⊂Rn→Ris a real-valued function. Then ∂f/∂x1,...,∂f/∂xn, the partial
derivatives offwith respect to the ﬁrst, second, ...,nth variable, are the real-
valued functions of nvariables, which, at the point ( x1,...,xn)=x, are deﬁned
by
∂f
∂xj(x1,...,xn)=lim
h→0f(x1,x2,...,xj+h,...,xn)−f(x1,...,xn)
h
=lim
h→0f(x+hej)−f(x)
h
if the limits exist, where 1 ≤j≤nandejis the jth standard basis vector deﬁned
byej=(0,...,1 ,..., 0), with 1 in the jth slot (see Section 1.5). The domain of
the function ∂f/∂xjis the set of x∈Rnfor which the limit exists.
In other words, ∂f/∂xjis just the derivative of fwith respect to the variable xj,
with the other variables held ﬁxed. If f:R3→R, we shall often use the notation
∂f/∂x,∂f/∂y,∂f/∂zin place of ∂f/∂x1,∂f/∂x2,∂f/∂x3.I ff:U⊂Rn→Rm, then
we can write
f(x1,...,xn)=(f1(x1,...,xn),..., fm(x1,...,xn)),
so that we can speak of the partial derivatives of each component; for example, ∂fm/∂xn
is the partial derivative of the mthcomponent with respect to xn, the nth variable.
example 1 Iff(x,y)=x2y+y3, ﬁnd∂f/∂xand∂f/∂y.
solution To ﬁnd ∂f/∂xwe hold yconstant (think of it as some number, say 1) and differentiate
only with respect to x; this yields
∂f
∂x=∂(x2y+y3)
∂x=2xy.
Similarly, to ﬁnd ∂f/∂ywe hold xconstant and differentiate only with respect to y:
∂f
∂y=∂(x2y+y3)
∂y=x2+3y2.
▲
To indicate that a partial derivative is to be evaluated at a particular point, for example,
at (x0,y0), we write
∂f
∂x(x0,y0)o r∂f
∂x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
x=x0,y=y0or∂f
∂x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(x0,y0).
When we write z=f(x,y) for the dependent variable, we sometimes write ∂z/∂xfor
∂f/∂x. Strictly speaking, this is an abuse of notation, but it is common practice to use
these two notations interchangeably.

<<<PAGE 134>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 107
2.3 Differentiation 107
example 2 Ifz=cosxy+xcosy=f(x,y), ﬁnd the two partial derivatives ( ∂z/∂x)(x0,y0) and
(∂z/∂y)(x0,y0).
solution First we ﬁx y0and differentiate with respect to x, giving
∂z
∂x(x0,y0)=∂(cos xy0+xcosy0)
∂x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
x=x0
=(−y0sinxy0+cosy0)|x=x0
=− y0sinx0y0+cosy0.
Similarly, we ﬁx x0and differentiate with respect to yto obtain
∂z
∂y(x0,y0)=∂(cos x0y+x0cosy)
∂y/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
y=y0
=(−x0sinx0y−x0siny)|y=y0
=− x0sinx0y0−x0siny0.▲
example 3 Find∂f/∂xiff(x,y)=xy//radicalbig
x2+y2.
solution By the quotient rule,
∂f
∂x=y/radicalbig
x2+y2−xy(x//radicalbig
x2+y2)
x2+y2=y(x2+y2)−x2y
(x2+y2)3/2=y3
(x2+y2)3/2.▲
A deﬁnition of differentiability that requires only the existence of partial derivatives
turns out to be insufﬁcient. Many standard results, such as the chain rule for functions
of several variables, would not follow, as Example 4 shows. Below, we shall see how torectify this situation.
example
4 Letf(x,y)=x1/3y1/3. By deﬁnition,
∂f
∂x(0, 0) =limit
h→0f(h,0 )−f(0, 0)
h=limit
h→00−0
h=0,
and, similarly, ( ∂f/∂y)(0, 0) =0 (these are not indeterminate forms!). It is necessary
to use the original deﬁnition of partial derivatives, because the functions x1/3andy1/3
are not themselves differentiable at 0. Suppose we restrict fto the line y=xto get
f(x,x)=x2/3(see Figure 2.3.2). We can view the substitution y=xas the composition
f◦gof the function g:R→R2, deﬁned by g(x)=(x,x), and f:R2→R, deﬁned
byf(x,y)=x1/3y1/3.
Thus, the composite f◦gis given by ( f◦g)(x)=x2/3. Each component of gis
differentiable in x, and fhas partial derivatives at (0, 0), but f◦g is not differentiable
atx=0, in the sense of one-variable calculus. In other words, the composition of
f with g is not differentiable in contrast to the calculus of functions of one variable,
where the composition of differentiable functions isdifferentiable. Later, we shall give
a deﬁnition of differentiability that has the pleasant consequence that the compositionof differentiable functions isdifferentiable.
There is another reason for being dissatisﬁed with the mere existence of partial
derivatives of f(x,y)=x
1/3y1/3: There is no plane tangent, in any reasonable sense, to
the graph at (0, 0). The xyplane is tangent to the graph along the xandyaxes because
fhas slope zero at (0, 0) along these axes; that is, ∂f/∂x=0 and∂f/∂y=0 at (0, 0).

<<<PAGE 135>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 108
108 Differentiation
x
=
y
yz
x
ﬁgure 2.3.2 The portion of the graph of
x1/3y1/3in the ﬁrst quadrant.
Thus, if there is a tangent plane, it must be the xyplane. However, as is evident from
Figure 2.3.2, the xyplane is not tangent to the graph in other directions, because the
graph has a severe crinkle, and so the xyplane cannot be said to be tangent to the graph
off.▲
The Linear or Afﬁne Approximation
To “motivate” our deﬁnition of differentiability, let us compute what the equation of the
plane tangent to the graph of f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→f(x,y)a t( x0,y0) ought to be if
fis smooth enough. In R3, a nonvertical plane has an equation of the form
z=ax+by+c.
If it is to be the plane tangent to the graph of f, the slopes along the xandyaxes
must be equal to ∂f/∂xand∂f/∂y, the rates of change of fwith respect to xandy.
Thus, a=∂f/∂x,b=∂f/∂y[evaluated at ( x0,y0)]. Finally, we may determine the
constant cfrom the fact that z=f(x0,y0) when x=x0,y=y0. Thus, we get the
linear approximation (or, more accurately said, afﬁne approximation ):
z=f(x0,y0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0), (1)
which should be the equation of the plane tangent to the graph of fat (x0,y0), if fis
“smooth enough” (see Figure 2.3.3).
Our deﬁnition of differentiability will mean in effect that the plane deﬁned by the
linear approximation (1) is a “good” approximation of fnear ( x0,y0). To get an idea of
z
y
x(x, y) 0 0Tangent plane 
of graph f at
00 (xy,, 00 (xy,)) f
00 (xy,, 00 (xy,)) f
(x,y)ﬁgure 2.3.3 For points ( x,y) near ( x0,y0),
the graph of the tangent plane is close to
the graph of f.

<<<PAGE 136>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 109
2.3 Differentiation 109
what we might mean by a good approximation, let us return for a moment to one-variable
calculus. If fis differentiable at a point x0, then we know that
limit
/Delta1x→0f(x0+/Delta1x)−f(x0)
/Delta1x=f/prime(x0).
Letx=x0+/Delta1xand rewrite this as
limit
x→x0f(x)−f(x0)
x−x0=f/prime(x0).
Using the trivial limit limit x→x0f/prime(x0)=f/prime(x0), we can rewrite the preceding equation
as
limit
x→x0f(x)−f(x0)
x−x0=limit
x→x0f/prime(x0);
that is,
limit
x→x0/bracketleftbiggf(x)−f(x0)
x−x0−f/prime(x0)/bracketrightbigg
=0;
that is,
limit
x→x0f(x)−f(x0)−f/prime(x0)(x−x0)
x−x0=0.
Thus, the tangent line lthrough ( x0,f(x0)) with slope f/prime(x0) is close to fin the sense
that the difference between f(x) and l(x)=f(x0)+f/prime(x0)(x−x0), the equation of
the tangent line goes to zero even when divided by x−x0asxgoes to x0. This is the
notion of a “good approximation” that we will adapt to functions of several variables,with the tangent line replaced by the tangent plane [see equation (1), given earlier].
Differentiability for Functions of Two Variables
Using the linear approximation, we are ready to deﬁne the notion of differentiability.
Deﬁnition Differentiable: Two Variables Let f:R2→R.W es a y fis
differentiable at (x0,y0), if∂f/∂xand∂f/∂yexist at ( x0,y0) and if
f(x,y)−f(x0,y0)−/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)−/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0)
/bardbl(x,y)−(x0,y0)/bardbl→0
(2)
as (x,y)→(x0,y0). This equation expresses what we mean by saying that
f(x0,y0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0)
is agood approximation to the function f.
It is not always easy to use this deﬁnition to see whether fis differentiable, but it
will be easy to use another criterion, given shortly in Theorem 9.

<<<PAGE 137>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 110
110 Differentiation
Tangent Plane
We have used the informal notion of the plane tangent to the graph of a function to
motivate our deﬁnition of differentiability. Now we are ready to adopt a formal deﬁnitionof the tangent plane.
Deﬁnition Tangent Plane Letf:R2→Rbe differentiable at x0=(x0,y0).
The plane in R3deﬁned by the equation
z=f(x0,y0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0)
is called the tangent plane of the graph of fat the point ( x0,y0,f(x0,y0)).
example 5 Compute the plane tangent to the graph of z=x2+y4+exyat the point (1, 0, 2) .
solution Use formula (1), with x0=1,y0=0, and z0=f(x0,y0)=2. The partial derivatives
are
∂z
∂x=2x+yexyand∂z
∂y=4y3+xexy.
At (1, 0, 2), these partial derivatives are 2 and 1, respectively. Thus, by formula (1), thetangent plane is
z=2(x−1)+1(y−0)+2, that is, z=2x+y.
▲
Let us write Df(x0,y0) for the row matrix
/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
,
so that the deﬁnition of differentiability asserts that
f(x0,y0)+Df(x0,y0)/bracketleftBigx−x0
y−y0/bracketrightBig
=f(x0,y0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0) (3)
is our good approximation to fnear ( x0,y0). As earlier, “good” is taken in the sense that
expression (3) differs from f(x,y) by something small times/radicalbig
(x−x0)2+(y−y0)2.
We say that expression (3) is the best linear approximation tofnear ( x0,y0).
Differentiability: The General Case
Now we are ready to give a deﬁnition of differentiability for maps fofRntoRm, using
the preceding discussion as motivation. The derivative Df(x0)o f f=(f1,..., fm)a t
a point x0is a matrix Twhose elements are tij=∂fi/∂xjevaluated at x0.2
2It turns out that we need to postulate the existence of only some matrix giving the best linear approxi-
mation near x0∈Rn, because in fact this matrix is necessarily the matrix whose ijth entry is ∂fi/∂xj
(see the Internet supplement for Chapter 2).

<<<PAGE 138>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 111
2.3 Differentiation 111
Deﬁnition Differentiable, nVariables, mFunctions LetUbe an open
set in Rnand let f:U⊂Rn→Rmbe a given function. We say that fis
differentiable atx0∈Uif the partial derivatives of fexist at x0and if
limit
x→x 0/bardblf(x)−f(x0)−T(x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl=0, (4)
where T=Df(x0) is the m×nmatrix with matrix elements ∂fi/∂xjevaluated
atx0andT(x−x0) means the product of Twith x−x0(regarded as a column
matrix). We call Tthederivative offatx0.
We shall always denote the derivative Toffatx0byDf(x0), although in some
books it is denoted df(x0) and referred to as the differential off. In the case where
m=1, the matrix Tis just the row matrix
/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x1(x0)···∂f
∂xn(x0)/bracketrightbigg
.
(Sometimes, when there is danger of confusion, we separate the entries by commas.)
Furthermore, setting n=2 and putting the result back into equation (4), we see that
conditions (2) and (4) do agree. Thus, if we let h=x−x0, a real-valued function fof
nvariables is differentiable at a point x0if
limit
h→01
/bardblh/bardbl/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglef(x
0+h)−f(x0)−n/summationdisplay
j=1∂f
∂xj(x0)hj/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=0,
because
Th=n/summationdisplay
j=1hj∂f
∂xj(x0).
For the general case of fmapping a subset of RntoRm, the derivative is the m×n
matrix given by
Df(x0)=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂f
1
∂x1···∂f1
∂xn......
∂f
m
∂x1···∂fm
∂xn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦,
where ∂f
i/∂xjis evaluated at x0. The matrix Df(x0) is, appropriately, called the matrix
of partial derivatives of fatx0.
example 6 Calculate the matrices of partial derivatives for these functions.
(a) f(x,y)=(ex+y+y,y2x)
(b) f(x,y)=(x2+cosy,yex)
(c) f(x,y,z)=(zex,−yez)

<<<PAGE 139>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 112
112 Differentiation
solution (a) Here f:R2→R2is deﬁned by f1(x,y)=ex+y+yand f2(x,y)=y2x. Hence,
Df(x,y) is the 2 ×2 matrix
Df(x,y)=/bracketleftbigg
ex+yex+y+1
y22xy/bracketrightbigg
.
(b) We have
Df(x,y)=/bracketleftbigg
2x−sin y
yexex/bracketrightbigg
.
(c) In this case,
Df(x,y,z)=/bracketleftbigg
zex0 ex
0−ez−yez/bracketrightbigg
. ▲
Gradients
For real-valued functions we use special terminology for the derivative.
Deﬁnition Gradient Consider the special case f:U⊂Rn→R. Here Df(x)
i sa1×nmatrix:
Df(x)=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x1···∂f
∂xn/bracketrightbigg
.
We can form the corresponding vector ( ∂f/∂x1,...,∂f/∂xn), called the gradient
offand denoted by ∇f,o rg r a d f.
From the deﬁnition, we see that for f:R3→R,
∇f=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj+∂f
∂zk,
while for f:R2→R,
∇f=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj.
The geometric signiﬁcance of the gradient will be discussed in Section 2.6. In terms
of inner products, we can write the derivative of fas
Df(x)(h)=∇ f(x)·h.
example 7 Letf:R3→R,f(x,y,z)=xey. Then
∇f=/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x,∂f
∂y,∂f
∂z/parenrightbigg
=(ey,xey,0 ).▲

<<<PAGE 140>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 113
2.3 Differentiation 113
example 8 Iff:R2→Ris given by ( x,y)/mapsto→exy+sinxy, then
∇f(x,y)=(yexy+ycosxy)i+(xexy+xcosxy)j
=(exy+cosxy)(yi+xj).▲
In one-variable calculus it is shown that if fis differentiable, then fis continuous.
We will state in Theorem 8 that this is also true for differentiable functions of several
variables. As we know, there are plenty of functions of one variable that are continuousbut not differentiable, such as f(x)=|x|. Before stating the result, let us give an
example of a function of two variables whose partial derivatives exist at a point, but
which is not continuous at that point.
example
9 Letf:R2→Rbe deﬁned by
f(x,y)=/braceleftbigg1i f x=0o ri f y=0
0 otherwise.
Because fis constant on the xandyaxes, where it equals 1,
∂f
∂x(0, 0) =0 and∂f
∂y(0, 0) =0.
But fis not continuous at (0, 0), because limit (x,y)→(0,0)f(x,y) does not exist. ▲
Some Basic Theorems
The ﬁrst of these basic theorems relates differentiability and continuity.
Theorem 8Let f:U⊂Rn→Rmbe differentiable at x0∈U. Then fis
continuous at x0.
This result is very reasonable, because “differentiability” means that there is enough
smoothness to have a tangent plane, which is stronger than just being continuous. Consultthe Internet supplement for Chapter 2 for the formal proof.
As we have seen, it is usually easy to tell when the partial derivatives of a function
exist using what we know from one-variable calculus. However, the deﬁnition of differ-entiability looks somewhat complicated, and the required approximation condition inequation (4) may seem, and sometimes is, difﬁcult to verify. Fortunately, there is a simplecriterion, given in the following theorem, that tells us when a function is differentiable.
Theorem 9Let f:U⊂Rn→Rm. Suppose the partial derivatives ∂fi/∂xj
offall exist and are continuous in a neighborhood of a point x∈U. Then fis
differentiable at x.

<<<PAGE 141>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 114
114 Differentiation
We give the proof in the Internet supplement for Chapter 2. Notice the following
hierarchy:
? ?Deﬁnition
Theorem 9 of derivative
Continuous partials ⇒Differentiable ⇒Partials exist
Each converse statement, obtained by reversing an implication, is invalid. [For a coun-
terexample to the converse of the ﬁrst implication, use f(x)=x2sin (1/ x),f(0)=0;
for the second, see Example 1 in the Internet supplement for Chapter 2 or use Example 4in this section.]
A function whose partial derivatives exist and are continuous is said to be of class
C
1. Thus, Theorem 9 says that any C1function is differentiable.
example 10 Let
f(x,y)=cosx+exy
x2+y2.
Show that fis differentiable at all points ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0).
solution Observe that the partial derivatives
∂f
∂x=(x2+y2)(yexy−sinx)−2x(cos x+exy)
(x2+y2)2
∂f
∂y=(x2+y2)xexy−2y(cos x+exy)
(x2+y2)2
are continuous except when x=0 and y=0 (by the results in Section 2.2). Thus, fis
differentiable by Theorem 9. ▲
In the Internet supplement we show that f(x,y)=xy//radicalbig
x2+y2[with f(0, 0)=0]
is continuous, has partial derivatives at (0, 0), yet is notdifferentiable there. See Fig-
ure 2.3.4. By Theorem 9, its partial derivatives cannot be continuous at (0, 0).
z
y
xﬁgure 2.3.4 This function is not differentiable
at (0, 0), because it is “crinkled.”

<<<PAGE 142>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 115
2.3 Differentiation 115
exercises
1.Find∂f/∂x,∂f/∂yif
(a) f(x,y)=xy
(b) f(x,y)=exy
(c) f(x,y)=xcosxcosy
(d) f(x,y)=(x2+y2)l o g( x2+y2)
2.Evaluate the partial derivatives ∂z/∂x,∂z/∂yfor the
given function at the indicated points.
(a)z=/radicalbig
a2−x2−y2; (0, 0), ( a/2,a/2)
(b)z=log√1+xy; (1, 2), (0, 0)
(c)z=eaxcos (bx+y); (2π/b,0 )
3.In each case following, ﬁnd the partial derivatives
∂w/∂x,∂w/∂y.
(a)w=xex2+y2
(b)w=x2+y2
x2−y2
(c)w=exylog (x2+y2)
(d)w=x/y
(e)w=cos ( yexy) sin x
4.Decide which of the following functions are C1, which
are just differentiable.
(a) f(x,y)=2xy
(x2+y2)2
(b) f(x,y)=x
y+y
x
(c) f(r,θ)=1
2rsin 2θ ,r>0
(d) f(x,y)=xy/radicalbig
x2+y2
(e) f(x,y)=x2y
x4+y2
5.Find the equation of the plane tangent to the surface
z=x2+y3at (3, 1, 10).
6.Letf(x,y)=ex+y. Find the equation for the tangent
plane to the graph of fat the point (0, 0).
7.Letf(x,y)=ex−y. Find the equation for the tangent
plane to the graph of fat the point (1, 1).
8.Using the respective functions in Exercise 1, computethe plane tangent to the graphs at the indicated points.
(a) (0, 0)
(b)(0, 1)(c) (0, π)
(d) (0, 1)
9.Compute the matrix of partial derivatives of thefollowing functions:
(a) f:R
2→R2,f(x,y)=(x,y)
(b) f:R2→R3,f(x,y)=(xey+cosy,x,x+ey)
(c) f:R3→R2,f(x,y,z)=(x+ez+y,yx2)
(d) f:R2→R3,f(x,y)=(xyexy,xsiny,5xy2)
10. Compute the matrix of partial derivatives of
(a) f(x,y)=(ex, sinxy)
(b) f(x,y,z)=(x−y,y+z)
(c) f(x,y)=(x+y,x−y,xy)
(d) f(x,y,z)=(x+z,y−5z,x−y)
11. Find the equation of the tangent plane to
f(x,y)=x2−2xy+2y2having slope 2 in the positive
xdirection and slope 4 in the positive ydirection.
12. Letf(x,y)=e(2x+3y).
(a) Find the tangent plane to fat (0, 0).
(b) Use this to approximate f(.1, 0) and f(0,.1).
(c) With a calculator, ﬁnd the exact values of f(.1, 0)
and f(0,.1).
13. Where does the plane tangent to z=ex−ya t( 1 ,1 ,1 )
meet the zaxis?
14. Why should the graphs of f(x,y)=x2+y2and
g(x,y)=−x2−y2+xy3be called “tangent” at (0, 0)?
15. Letf(x,y)=exy. Show that x(∂f/∂x)=y(∂f/∂y).
16. Use the linear approximation to approximate a suitablefunction f(x,y) and thereby estimate the following:
(a) (0.99e
0.02)8
(b)(0.99)3+(2.01)3−6(0.99)(2 .01)
(c)/radicalbig
(4.01)2+(3.98)2+(2.02)2
17. LetPbe the tangent plane to the graph of
g(x,y)=8−2x2−3y2at the point (1, 2, −6). Let
f(x,y)=4−x2−y2. Find the point on the graph of f
which has tangent plane parallel to P.
18. Letf(x,y)=xey2−yex2.
(a)Find the equation for the tangent plane to the graphoffat (1, 2).

<<<PAGE 143>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 116
116 Differentiation
(b) What point on the surface z=x2−y2has a
tangent plane parallel to the plane found in part (a)?
19. Compute the gradients of the following functions:
(a) f(x,y,z)=xexp (−x2−y2−z2) (Note that
expu=eu.)
(b) f(x,y,z)=xyz
x2+y2+z2
(c) f(x,y,z)=z2excosy
20. Compute the tangent plane at (1, 0, 1) for each of the
functions in Exercise 19. [The solution to part (c) only isin the Study Guide.]
21. Find the equation of the tangent plane to z=x2+2y3
a t( 1 ,1 ,3 ) .
22. Let
f(x,y)=/braceleftbiggx2y4
x4+6y8if (x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
0i f ( x,y)=(0, 0)
(a)Show that∂f
∂x(0, 0) and∂f
∂y(0, 0) exist.(b)Show that fis not differentiable at (0,0) by showing
that fis not continuous at (0,0).
23. LetPbe the tangent plane to f(x,y)=x2y3at
(1, 2, 8). Let lbe the line contained in Pwhich passes
through the point (1, 3, 20) and passes directly above(2, 1). That is, lcontains the point (1, 3, 20) and a point
of the form (2, 1, z). Find a parametrization for l.
24. Calculate ∇h( 1 ,1 ,1 )i f h(x,y,z)=(x+z)ex−y.
25. Letf(x,y,z)=x2+y2−z2. Calculate ∇f( 0 ,0 ,1 ) .
26. Evaluate the gradient of f(x,y,z)=log (x2+y2+z2)
a t( 1 ,0 ,1 ) .
27. Describe all H¨ older-continuous functions with α> 1
(see Exercise 33, Section 2.2). (H INT: What is the
derivative of such a function?)
28. Suppose f:Rn→Rmis a linear map. What is the
derivative of f?
2.4Introduction to Paths and Curves
In this section, we introduce some of the basic geometry and computational methods
for paths in the plane and space. This will be an important ingredient for the chain ruletreated in the next section. We will return to paths with additional topics in Chapter 4.
Paths and Curves
We often think of a curve as a line drawn on paper, such as a straight line, a circle,or a sine curve. It is useful to think of a curve Cmathematically as the set of values
of a function that maps an interval of real numbers into the plane or space. We shallcall such a map a path. We usually denote a path by c. The image Cof the path then
corresponds to the curve we see on paper (see Figure 2.4.1). Often we write tfor the
ﬁgure 2.4.1 The map cis the
path; its image Cis the curve we
“see.”
pathcurve C image of c
cb
xyz
=
a()c
 =
ba()c

<<<PAGE 144>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 117
2.4 Introduction to Paths and Curves 117
independent variable and imagine it to be time, so that c(t) is the position at time tof
a moving particle, which traces out a curve as tvaries. We also say cparametrizes C.
Strictly speaking, we should distinguish between c(t)a sa point in space and as a vector
based at the origin.
example 1 The straight line LinR3through the point ( x0,y0,z0) in the direction of vector vis the
image of the path
c(t)=(x0,y0,z0)+tv
fort∈R(see Figure 2.4.2). Thus, our notion of curve includes straight lines as special
cases.
vvc
xytz
= 0
||() ( x,y0,z0)
0(x,y0,z0)||t
L+tv
ﬁgure 2.4.2 Lis the straight line in space
through ( x0,y0,z0) and in direction v; its
equation is c(t)=(x0,y0,z0)+tv.
▲
example 2 The unit circle C:x2+y2=1 in the plane is the image of the path
c:R→R2, c(t)=(cost, sint), 0 ≤t≤2π
(see Figure 2.4.3). The unit circle is also the image of the path ˜c(t)=(cos 2t , sin 2t ),
0≤t≤π. Thus, different paths may parametrize the same curve. ▲sint
tt)
cosc(
ty
x
ﬁgure 2.4.3 c(t)=( cos t,sint)i sa
path whose image Cis the unit
circle.Paths and Curves Apath inRnis a map c:[a,b]→Rn;i ti sapath in the
plane ifn=2 and a path in space ifn=3. The collection Cof points c(t)a st
varies in [ a,b] is called a curve, and c(a) and c(b) are its endpoints. The path c
is said to parametrize the curve C. We also say c(t)traces out Castvaries.
Ifcis a path in R3, we can write c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)), and we call x(t),y(t),
andz(t) the component functions ofc. We form component functions similarly
inR2or, generally, in Rn. We also consider paths whose domain is the whole real
line as in the next example.
example 3 The path c(t)=(t,t2) traces out a parabolic arc. This curve coincides with the graph
f(x)=x2(see Figure 2.4.4).

<<<PAGE 145>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 118
118 Differentiation
c(−1) = (−1, 1) (1, 1) =  c(1)
c(0) = (0, 0)xy
y = x2
ﬁgure 2.4.4 The image of c(t)=(t,t2) is the
parabola y=x2.
▲
example 4 A wheel of radius Rrolls to the right along a straight line at speed v. Use vector methods
to ﬁnd the path c(t) of the point on the wheel that initially lies at a distance rbelow the
center.
solution We place the wheel in the xyplane with its center initially at (0, R), so that the position
of the center at time tis given by the path C(t)=(vt,R). (Refer to Figure 2.4.5.)
The position of the point c(t)relative to the center is given by the vector d(t)=
c(t)−C(t) that has the initial value −rjand rotates in the clockwise direction. The
rate of rotation is such that the wheel makes a full rotation after the center has moved
a distance 2π R(equal to the circumference of the wheel). This takes a time 2π R/v,s o
the angular velocity dθ/dtof the wheel is v/R. Because the rotation is clockwise, the
vector function d(t) is of the form
d(t)=r/parenleftbigg
cos/bracketleftBig
−v
Rt+θ/bracketrightBig
i+sin/bracketleftBig
−v
Rt+θ/bracketrightBig
j/parenrightbigg
for some initial angle θ. Because d(0)=−rj,w eh a v ec o s θ=0 and sin θ=− 1, so
θ=−π/2, and hence
d(t)=r/parenleftbigg
cos/bracketleftBig
−v
Rt−π
2/bracketrightBig
i+sin/bracketleftBig
−v
Rt−π
2/bracketrightBig
j/parenrightbigg
.
d(0)C(0)
c(0)c(t )1
d(t )1C(t )1  C
dtid=
c2()t2()tC
2()tdv
ﬁgure 2.4.5 The vector d(t) points from the wheel's center, C(t), to the position c(t) of a point
on the wheel and rotates in the clockwise direction while the wheel moves to the right.

<<<PAGE 146>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 119
2.4 Introduction to Paths and Curves 119
y
xc(t ) = ( t − sin t, 1 − cos t )
2p
ﬁgure 2.4.6 The curve traced by a point moving on the rim of
a rolling circle is called a cycloid.
Using cos ( ϕ−π/2)=sinϕand sin ( ϕ−π/2)=− cosϕ, along with cos ( −ϕ)=cosϕ
and sin ( −ϕ)=−sinϕ,w eg e t
d(t)=r/parenleftbigg
−sinvt
Ri−cosvt
Rj/parenrightbigg
.
Finally, the path c(t) is given by adding the components of the vector function d(t)t o
the coordinates of the path C(t); the result is
c(t)=/parenleftbigg
vt−rsinvt
R,R−rcosvt
R/parenrightbigg
.
In the special case v=R=r=1, we get c(t)=(t−sint,1−cost). The image
curve Cof this path cis shown in Figure 2.4.6; it is called a cycloid. ▲57.5
2.5
2.5 5 7.5 2.5− 7.5−− 5
2.5−
−5
7.5−
ﬁgure 2.4.7 An example of a
hypocycloid.The preceding example considered the path of a point not necessarily on the rim of a
wheel rolling along a straight line. When the wheel rolls on a circle, the resulting curve
is called an epicycle. These are the epicycles discussed in the Ptolemaic theory in the
introduction. If the wheel is outside the circle and the point is on the rim, the curve iscalled an epicycloid, and when the wheel is inside the circle, it is a hypocycloid.A n
example of the latter is shown in Figure 2.4.7.
The French mathematician Blaise Pascal studied the cycloid in 1649 as a
way of distracting himself at a time when he was suffering from a painfultoothache. When the pain disappeared, he took it as a sign that God wasnot displeased with his thoughts. Pascal’s results stimulated other mathematiciansto investigate this curve, and subsequently numerous remarkable propertieswere found. One of these was discovered by the Dutchman Christian Huygens,who used it in the construction of a “perfect” pendulum clock.
Historical Note
Velocity and Tangents to Paths
If we think of c(t) as the curve traced out by a particle and tas time, it is reasonable to
deﬁne the velocity vector as follows.

<<<PAGE 147>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 120
120 Differentiation
Deﬁnition Velocity Vector Ifcis a path and it is differentiable, we say cis a
differentiable path. The velocity ofcat time tis deﬁned by3
c/prime(t)=lim
h→0c(t+h)−c(t)
h.
We normally draw the vector c/prime(t) with its tail at the point c(t). The speed of
the path c(t)i ss=/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl, the length of the velocity vector. If c(t)=(x(t),y(t))
inR2, then
c/prime(t)=(x/prime(t),y/prime(t))=x/prime(t)i+y/prime(t)j
and if c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)) inR3, then
c/prime(t)=(x/prime(t),y/prime(t),z/prime(t))=x/prime(t)i+y/prime(t)j+z/prime(t)k.
Here, x/prime(t) is the one-variable derivative dx/dt. If we accept limits of vectors interpreted
componentwise, the formulas for the velocity vector follow from the deﬁnition of the
derivative. However, the limit can be interpreted in the sense of vectors as well. InFigure 2.4.8, we see that [c( t+h)−c(t)]/happroaches the tangent to the path as
h→0.
Tangent Vector The velocity c/prime(t) is a vector tangent to the path c(t) at time
t.I fCis a curve traced out by cand if c/prime(t) is not equal to 0, then c/prime(t) is a vector
tangent to the curve Cat the point c(t).
ﬁgure 2.4.8 The vector c'(t)i s
tangent to the path c(t).
Cz
y
xc' (t)
c(t + h) − c(t)
c(t)c(t + h)
3Iftlies at the endpoint of an interval, we should, as in one-variable calculus, take right- or left-handed
limits.

<<<PAGE 148>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 121
2.4 Introduction to Paths and Curves 121
If we think of the derivative Dc(t) as a matrix, it will be a column vector with the
entries x/prime(t),y/prime(t), and z/prime(t). Thus, the derivative here is consistent with our earlier
notion.
example 5 Compute the tangent vector to the path c(t)=(t,t2,et)a tt=0.
solution Here c/prime(t)=(1, 2t,et), and so at t=0 we obtain the tangent vector (1, 0, 1). ▲
example 6 Describe the path c(t)=(cost, sint,t). Find the velocity vector at the point on the
image curve where t=π/2.
solution For a given t, the point (cos t, sint, 0) lies on the circle x2+y2=1 in the xyplane.
Therefore, the point (cos t, sint,t) lies tunits above the point (cos t, sint,0 ) i f tis
positive and −tunits below (cos t, sint,0 )i f tis negative. As tincreases, (cos t, sint,t)
wraps around the cylinder x2+y2=1 with the zcoordinate increasing. The curve this
traces out is called a helix , which is depicted in Figure 2.4.9. At t=π/2,c/prime(π/2)=
(−sinπ/2, cosπ/2, 1)=(−1, 0, 1) =−i+k.
x2+y2= 1
(cos t, sin t, 0)(cos t, sin t,t)c´(π/2)=−j+k
z
xy
ﬁgure 2.4.9 The helix c(t)=( cos t,sint,t) wraps
around the cylinder x2+y2=1.
▲
example 7 The cycloidal path of a particle on the edge of a wheel of radius Rwith speed vis given
byc(t)=(vt−Rsin (vt/R),R−Rcos (vt/R)). (See Example 4.) Find the velocity
c/prime(t) of the particle as a function of t. When is the velocity zero? Is the velocity vector
ever vertical?
solution To ﬁnd the velocity, we differentiate:
c/prime(t)=/parenleftbiggd
dt/parenleftbigg
vt−Rsinvt
R/parenrightbigg
,d
dt/parenleftbigg
R−Rcosvt
R/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbigg
v−vcosvt
R,vsinvt
R/parenrightbigg
.
In vector notation, c/prime(t)=(v−vcos (vt/R))i+(vsin (vt/R))j. The component in the
direction of iisv(1−cos (vt/R)), which is zero whenever vt/Ris an integer multiple of
2π. For such values of t, sin (vt/R) is zero as well, so the only times at which the velocity
is zero are when t=2πnR/vfor some integer n. At such times, c(t)=(2πnR,0 ) ,
so the moving point is touching the ground. These moments occur at time intervals of
2πR/v(more frequently for small wheels, as well as for rapidly rolling ones).
The velocity vector is never vertical, because the horizontal component vanishes
only when the vertical one does as well. ▲

<<<PAGE 149>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 122
122 Differentiation
xy
ﬁgure 2.4.10 Velocity vectors for the
curve traced out by a point on the rim of
a rolling wheel.
Figure 2.4.10 shows some velocity vectors superimposed on the cycloidal path of
Figure 2.4.6.
Tangent Line
The tangent line to a path at a point is the line through the point in the direction
of the tangent vector. Using the point-direction form of the equation of a line, we obtainthe parametric equation for the tangent line.
Tangent Line to a Path Ifc(t) is a path, and if c/prime(t0)/negationslash=0, the equation of its
tangent line at the point c(t0)i s
l(t)=c(t0)+(t−t0)c/prime(t0).
IfCis the curve traced out by c, then the line traced out by lis the tangent line to
the curve Catc(t0).
Notice that we have written the equation in such a way that lgoes through the point
c(t0)a tt=t0(rather than t=0). See Figure 2.4.11.
example 8 A path in R3goes through the point (3, 6, 5) at t=0 with tangent vector i−j. Find the
equation of the tangent line.
solution The equation of the tangent line is
l(t)=(3, 6, 5) +t(i−j)=(3, 6, 5) +t(1,−1, 0) =(3+t,6−t,5 ).
In (x,y,z) coordinates, the tangent line is x=3+t,y=6−t,z=5. ▲
Physically, we can interpret motion along the tangent line as the path that a particle
on a curve would follow if it were set free at a certain moment.
lcc
tt
t()
00
)()(
)(tlﬁgure 2.4.11 The tangent line to a path.

<<<PAGE 150>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 123
2.4 Introduction to Paths and Curves 123
example 9 Suppose that a particle follows the path c(t)=(et,e−t, cos t) until it ﬂies off on a
tangent at t=1. Where is it at t=3?
solution The velocity vector is ( et,−e−t,−sin t), which at t=1 is the vector ( e,−1/e ,−sin 1).
The particle is at ( e,1/e, cos 1) at t=1. The equation of the tangent line is l(t)=
(e,1/e, cos 1) +(t−1)(e,−1/e ,−sin 1). At t=3, the position on this line is
l(3)=/parenleftbigg
e,1
e, cos 1/parenrightbigg
+2/parenleftbigg
e,−1
e,−sin 1/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbigg
3e,−1
e, cos 1 −2 sin 1/parenrightbigg
∼=(8.155,−0.368, −1.143) .▲
exercises
Sketch the curves that are the images of the paths in Exercises 1 to 4.
1.x=sint,y=4 cos t, where 0 ≤t≤2π
2.x=2 sin t,y=4 cos t, where 0 ≤t≤2π
3.c(t)=(2t−1,t+2,t)
4.c(t)=(−t,2t,1/t), where 1 ≤t≤3
5.Consider the circle Cof radius 2, centered at the origin.
(a) Find a parametrization for Cinducing a
counterclockwise orientation and starting at
(2, 0).(b)Find a parametrization for Cinducing a clockwise
orientation and starting at (0, 2).
(c) Find a parametrization for Cif it is now centered at
the point (4, 7).
6.Give a parametrization for each of the following curves:
(a) The line passing through (1, 2, 3) and (−2, 0, 7)
(b) The graph of f(x)=x2
(c) The square with vertices (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1), and
(1, 0) (Break it up into line segments.)
(d) The ellipse given byx2
9+y2
25=1
In Exercises 7 to 10, determine the velocity vector of the given path.
7.c(t)=6ti+3t2j+t3k
8.c(t)=(sin 3t )i+(cos 3t )j+2t3/2k9.r(t)=(cos2t,3t−t3,t)
10. r(t)=(4e/prime,6t4, cos t)
In Exercises 11 to 14, compute the tangent vectors to the given path.
11. c(t)=(et, cos t)
12. c(t)=(3t2,t3)
13. c(t)=(tsint,4t)
14. c(t)=(t2,e2)15. When is the velocity vector of a point on the rim of arolling wheel horizontal? What is the speed at this
point?
16. If the position of a particle in space is (6t ,3t2,t3)a t
time t, what is its velocity vector at t=0?
In Exercises 17 and 18, determine the equation of the tangent line to the given path at the speciﬁed value of t.
17. (sin 3t , cos 3t ,2t5/2);t=1 18. (cos2t,3t−t3,t);t=0

<<<PAGE 151>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 124
124 Differentiation
In Exercises 19 to 22, suppose that a particle following the given path c(t)ﬂies off on a tangent at t =t0. Compute the
position of the particle at the given time t 1.
19. c(t)=(t2,t3−4t, 0), where t0=2,t1=3
20. c(t)=(et,e−t, cos t), where t0=1,t1=2
21. c(t)=(4et,6t4, cos t), where t0=0,t1=1
22. c(t)=(sinet,t,4−t3), where t0=1,t1=2
23. The position vector for a particle moving on a helix is
c(t)=(cos( t), sin( t),t2).
(a) Find the speed of the particle at time t0=4π.
(b)Isc/prime(t) ever orthogonal to c(t)?(c) Find a parametrization for the tangent line to c(t)a t
t0=4π.
(d) Where will this line intersect the xyplane?
24. Consider the spiral given by c(t)=(etcos(t),etsin(t)).
Show that the angle between candc/primeis constant.
25. Letc(t)=(t3,t2,2t) and
f(x,y,z)=(x2−y2,2xy,z2).
(a) Find ( f◦c)(t).
(b) Find a parametrization for the tangent line to the
curve f◦catt=1.
2.5Properties of the Derivative
In elementary calculus, we learn how to differentiate sums, products, quotients, and
composite functions. We now generalize these ideas to functions of several variables,paying particular attention to the differentiation of composite functions. The rule fordifferentiating composites, called the chain rule, takes on a more profound form for
functions of several variables than for those of one variable.
Iffis a real-valued function of one variable, written as z=f(y), and yis a function
ofx, written y=g(x), then zbecomes a function of xthrough substitution, namely,
z=f(g(x)), and we have the familiar chain rule:
dz
dx=dz
dydy
dx=f/prime(g(x))g/prime(x).
Iffis a real-valued function of three variables u,v, and w, written in the form z=
f(u,v,w), and the variables u,v,ware each functions of x,u=g(x),v=h(x), and
w=k(x), then by substituting g(x),h(x), and k(x) for u,v, and w, we obtain zas a
function of x:z=f(g(x),h(x),k(x)). The chain rule in this case reads:
dz
dx=∂z
∂udu
dx+∂z
∂vdv
dx+∂z
∂wdw
dx.
One of the goals of this section is to explain such formulas in detail.
Sums, Products, Quotients
These rules work just as they do in one-variable calculus.

<<<PAGE 152>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 125
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 125
Theorem 10 Sums, Products, Quotients
(i)Constant Multiple Rule. Let f:U⊂Rn→Rmbe differentiable at x0and
letcbe a real number. Then h(x)=cf(x) is differentiable at x0and
Dh(x0)=cDf(x0) (equality of matrices).
(ii)Sum Rule. Let f:U⊂Rn→Rmandg:U⊂Rn→Rmbe differentiable
atx0. Then h(x)=f(x)+g(x) is differentiable at x0and
Dh(x0)=Df(x0)+Dg(x0) (sum of matrices).
(iii) Product Rule. Let f:U⊂Rn→Randg:U⊂Rn→Rbe differentiable
atx0and let h(x)=g(x)f(x). Then h:U⊂Rn→Ris differentiable at x0
and
Dh(x0)=g(x0)Df(x0)+f(x0)Dg(x0).
(Note that each side of this equation is a 1 ×nmatrix; a more general product
rule is presented in Exercise 31 at the end of this section.)
(iv) Quotient Rule. With the same hypotheses as in rule (iii), let h(x)=f(x)/g(x)
and suppose gis never zero on U. Then his differentiable at x0and
Dh(x0)=g(x0)Df(x0)−f(x0)Dg(x0)
[g(x0)]2.
proof The proofs of rules (i) through (iv) proceed almost exactly as in the one-
variable case, with a slight difference in notation. We shall prove rules (i) and (ii),
leaving the proofs of rules (iii) and (iv) as Exercise 27.
(i) To show that Dh(x0)=cDf(x0), we must show that
limit
x→x 0/bardblh(x)−h(x0)−cDf(x0)(x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl=0,
that is, that
limit
x→x 0/bardblcf(x)−cf(x0)−cDf(x0)(x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl=0,
[see equation (4) of Section 2.3]. This is certainly true, since fis differentiable and
the constant ccan be factored out [see Theorem 3(i), Section 2.2].

<<<PAGE 153>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 126
126 Differentiation
(ii) By the triangle inequality, we may write
/bardblh(x)−h(x0)−[Df(x0)+Dg(x0)](x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
=/bardblf(x)−f(x0)−[Df(x0)](x−x0)+g(x)−g(x0)−[Dg(x0)](x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
≤/bardblf(x)−f(x0)−[Df(x0)](x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl+/bardblg(x)−g(x0)−[Dg(x0)](x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl,
and each term approaches 0 as x→x0. Hence, rule (ii) holds. ■
example 1 Verify the formula for Dhin rule (iv) of Theorem 10 with
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2andg(x,y,z)=x2+1.
solution Here
h(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2
x2+1,
so that by direct differentiation
Dh(x,y,z)=/bracketleftbigg∂h
∂x,∂h
∂y,∂h
∂z/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg(x2+1)2x−(x2+y2+z2)2x
(x2+1)2,2y
x2+1,2z
x2+1/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg2x(1−y2−z2)
(x2+1)2,2y
x2+1,2z
x2+1/bracketrightbigg
.
By rule (iv), we get
Dh=gDf−fDg
g2=(x2+1)[2x,2y,2z]−(x2+y2+z2)[2x,0 ,0 ]
(x2+1)2,
which is the same as what we obtained directly. ▲
Chain Rule
As we mentioned earlier, it is in the differentiation of composite functions that we meet
apparently substantial alterations of the formula from one-variable calculus. However, ifwe use the Dnotation, that is, matrix notation for derivatives, the chain rule for functions
of several variables looks similar to the one-variable rule.
Theorem 11 Chain Rule LetU⊂RnandV⊂Rmbe open sets. Let g:U⊂
Rn→Rmand f:V⊂Rm→Rpbe given functions such that gmaps UintoV,
so that f◦gis deﬁned. Suppose gis differentiable at x0and fis differentiable at
y0=g(x0). Then f◦gis differentiable at x0and
D(f◦g)(x0)=Df(y0)Dg(x0). (1)
The right-hand side is the matrix product of Df(y0) with Dg(x0).

<<<PAGE 154>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 127
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 127
We shall now give a proof of the chain rule under the additional assumption that the
partial derivatives of f are continuous, building up to the general case by developing
two special cases that are themselves important. (The complete proof of Theorem 11without the additional assumption of continuity is given in the Internet supplement forChapter 2.)
First Special Case of the Chain Rule
Suppose c:R→R3is a differentiable path and f:R3→R. Let h(t)=f(c(t))=
f(x(t),y(t),z(t)), where c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)). Then
dh
dt=∂f
∂xdx
dt+∂f
∂ydy
dt+∂f
∂zdz
dt. (2)
That is,
dh
dt=∇ f(c(t))·c/prime(t),
where c/prime(t)=(x/prime(t),y/prime(t),z/prime(t)).
This is the special case of Theorem 11 in which we take c=gandfto be real-valued,
andm=3. Notice that
∇f(c(t))·c/prime(t)=Df(c(t))Dc( t),
where the product on the left-hand side is the dot product of vectors, while the producton the right-hand side is matrix multiplication, and where we regard Df(c(t)) as a row
matrix and Dc(t)a sa column matrix. The vectors ∇f(c(t)) and c
/prime(t) have the same
components as their matrix equivalents; the notational change indicates the switch frommatrices to vectors.
proof of equation (2) By deﬁnition,
dh
dt(t0)=limit
t→t0h(t)−h(t0)
t−t0.
Adding and subtracting two terms, we write
h(t)−h(t0)
t−t0=f(x(t),y(t),z(t))−f(x(t0),y(t0),z(t0))
t−t0
=f(x(t),y(t),z(t))−f(x(t0),y(t),z(t))
t−t0
+f(x(t0),y(t),z(t))−f(x(t0),y(t0),z(t))
t−t0
+f(x(t0),y(t0),z(t))−f(x(t0),y(t0),z(t0))
t−t0.
Now we invoke the mean-value theorem from one-variable calculus, which states: If
g:[a,b]→Ris continuous and is differentiable on the open interval (a,b),then there
is a point c in (a,b)such that g (b)−g(a)=g/prime(c)(b−a). Applying this to fas a
function of x, we can assert that for some cbetween xandx0,
f(x,y,z)−f(x0,y,z)=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(c,y,z)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0).

<<<PAGE 155>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 128
128 Differentiation
In this way, we ﬁnd that
h(t)−h(t0)
t−t0=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(c,y(t),z(t))/bracketrightbiggx(t)−x(t0)
t−t0+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x(t0),d,z(t))/bracketrightbiggy(t)−y(t0)
t−t0
+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂z(x(t0),y(t0),e)/bracketrightbiggz(t)−z(t0)
t−t0,
where c,d, and elie between x(t) and x(t0), between y(t) and y(t0), and between z(t)
andz(t0), respectively. Taking the limit t→t0, using the continuity of the partials
∂f/∂x,∂f/∂y,∂f/∂z, and the fact that c,d, and econverge to x(t0),y(t0), and z(t0),
respectively, we obtain formula (2). ■
Second Special Case of the Chain Rule
Letf:R3→Rand let g:R3→R3. Write
g(x,y,z)=(u(x,y,z),v(x,y,z),w(x,y,z))
and deﬁne h:R3→Rby setting
h(x,y,z)=f(u(x,y,z),v(x,y,z),w(x,y,z)).
In this case, the chain rule states that
/bracketleftbigg∂h
∂x∂h
∂y∂h
∂z/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂u∂f
∂v∂f
∂w/bracketrightbigg⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂u
∂x∂u
∂y∂u
∂z
∂v
∂x∂v
∂y∂v
∂z
∂w
∂x∂w
∂y∂w
∂z⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦. (3)
In this special case, we have taken n=m=3 and p=1 for concreteness,
andU=R
3andV=R3for simplicity, and have written out the matrix product
[Df(y0)][Dg(x0)] explicitly (with the arguments x0andy0suppressed in the matrices).
proof of the second special case of the chain rule By deﬁnition, ∂h/∂x
is obtained by differentiating hwith respect to x, holding yandzﬁxed. But then
(u(x,y,z),v(x,y,z),w(x,y,z)) may be regarded as a vector function of the single
variable x. The ﬁrst special case applies to this situation and, after the variables are
renamed, gives
∂h
∂x=∂f
∂u∂u
∂x+∂f
∂v∂v
∂x+∂f
∂w∂w
∂x. (3/prime)
Similarly,
∂h
∂y=∂f
∂u∂u
∂y+∂f
∂v∂v
∂y+∂f
∂w∂w
∂y(3/prime/prime)
and
∂h
∂z=∂f
∂u∂u
∂z+∂f
∂v∂v
∂z+∂f
∂w∂w
∂z. (3/prime/prime/prime)

<<<PAGE 156>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 129
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 129
In actual calculations, at the last step, we usually express∂f
∂u,∂f
∂v, and∂f
∂win terms of
x,y,z. These equations are exactly what would be obtained by multiplying out the
matrices in equation (3). ■
proof of theorem 11 The general case in equation (1) may be proved in two steps.
First, equation (2) is generalized to mvariables; that is, for f(x1,...,xm) and c(t)=
(x1(t),...,xm(t)), we have
dh
dt=m/summationdisplay
i=1∂f
∂xidxi
dt,
where h(t)=f(x1(t),...,xm(t)). Second, the result obtained in the ﬁrst step is used
to obtain the formula
∂hj
∂xi=m/summationdisplay
k=1∂fj
∂yk∂yk
∂xi,
where f=(f1,..., fp) is a vector function of arguments y1,..., ym;g(x1,...,xn)=
(y1(x1,..., xn),..., ym(x1,...,xn)); and hj(x1,...,xn)=fj(y1(x1,...,xn),...,
ym(x1,...,xn)). (Using the letter yfor both functions and arguments is an abuse of
notation, but it can help us remember the formula.) This formula is equivalent to formula
(1) after the matrices are multiplied out. ■
The pattern of the chain rule will become clear once you have worked some additional
examples. For instance,
∂
∂xf(u(x,y),v(x,y),w(x,y),z(x,y))=∂f
∂u∂u
∂x+∂f
∂v∂v
∂x+∂f
∂w∂w
∂x+∂f
∂z∂z
∂x,
with a similar formula for ∂f/∂y.
The chain rule can help us understand the relationship between the geometry of
a mapping f:R2→R2and the geometry of curves in R2. (Similar statements may
be made about R3or, generally, Rn.) If c(t) is a path in the plane, then as we saw in
Section 2.4, c/prime(t) represents the tangent (or velocity) vector of the path c(t), and this
tangent (or velocity) vector is thought of as beginning at c(t). Now let p(t)=f(c(t)),
where f:R2→R2. The path prepresents the image of the path c(t) under the mapping
f. The tangent vector to pis given by the chain rule:
matrix column
vectormultiplication
t Dc c' f/H11005((( t(( t((matrix
.(p'
In other words, the derivative matrix of f maps the tangent (or velocity) vector of
a path cto the tangent (or velocity) vector of the corresponding image path p(see
Figure 2.5.1). Thus, points are mapped by f, while tangent vectors to curves are
mapped by the derivative of f, evaluated at the base point of the tangent vector in
the domain.

<<<PAGE 157>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 130
130 Differentiation
ﬁgure 2.5.1 Tangent vectors are
mapped by the derivative
matrix.Df(c(t)) maps vectors
f maps points
The path c(t)c(t)Df(c(t))c'(t)  p'(t) = 
f(c(t)) p(t) =
p(t) is the image of c(t) under fxy
xy
c'(t)
example 2 Verify the chain rule in the form of formula (3/prime) for
f(u,v,w)=u2+v2−w,
where
u(x,y,z)=x2y,v(x,y,z)=y2, w(x,y,z)=e−xz.
solution Here
h(x,y,z)=f(u(x,y,z),v(x,y,z),w(x,y,z))
=(x2y)2+y4−e−xz=x4y2+y4−e−xz.
Thus, differentiating directly,
∂h
∂x=4x3y2+ze−xz.
On the other hand, using the chain rule,
∂h
∂x=∂f
∂u∂u
∂x+∂f
∂v∂v
∂x+∂f
∂w∂w
∂x=2u(2xy)+2v·0+(−1)(−ze−xz)
=(2x2y)(2xy)+ze−xz,
which is the same as the preceding equation. ▲
example 3 Given g(x,y)=(x2+1,y2) and f(u,v)=(u+v,u,v2), compute the derivative of
f◦gat the point ( x,y)=(1, 1) using the chain rule.
solution The matrices of partial derivatives are
Df(u,v)=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂f
1
∂u∂f1
∂v
∂f2
∂u∂f2
∂v
∂f3
∂u∂f3
∂v⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦=⎡
⎣11
1002v⎤
⎦and Dg(x,y)=/bracketleftbigg2x0
02 y/bracketrightbigg
.

<<<PAGE 158>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 131
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 131
When ( x,y)=(1, 1), note that g(x,y)=(u,v)=(2, 1). Hence,
D(f◦g)(1, 1) =Df(2, 1)D g(1, 1) =⎡
⎣11
1002⎤
⎦/bracketleftbigg
20
02/bracketrightbigg
=⎡
⎣22
2004⎤
⎦
is the required derivative.
▲
example 4 Let f(x,y) be given and make the substitution x=rcosθ,y=rsinθ(polar
coordinates). Write a formula for ∂f/∂θ.
solution By the chain rule,
∂f
∂θ=∂f
∂x∂x
∂θ+∂f
∂y∂y
∂θ,
that is,
∂f
∂θ=−rsinθ∂f
∂x+rcosθ∂f
∂y.▲
example 5 Letf(x,y)=(cos y+x2,ex+y) and g(u,v)=(eu2,u−sinv). (a) Write a formula
forf◦g. (b) Calculate D(f◦g)(0, 0) using the chain rule.
solution (a) We have
(f◦g)(u,v)=f(eu2,u−sinv)
=/parenleftbig
cos (u−sinv)+e2u2,eeu2+u−sinv/parenrightbig
.
(b) By the chain rule,
D(f◦g)(0, 0) =[Df(g(0, 0))][ Dg(0, 0)] =[Df(1, 0)][ Dg(0, 0)] .
Now
Dg(0, 0) =/bracketleftbigg
2ueu20
1−cosv/bracketrightbigg
(u,v)=(0,0)=/bracketleftbigg00
1−1/bracketrightbigg
and
Df(1, 0) =/bracketleftbigg2x−sin y
ex+yex+y/bracketrightbigg
(x,y)=(1,0)=/bracketleftbigg20
ee/bracketrightbigg
.
[Remember that Dfis evaluated at g(0, 0), not at (0, 0)!]. Thus,
D(f◦g)(0, 0) =/bracketleftbigg20
ee/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg001−1/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg00
e−e/bracketrightbigg
.
▲
example 6 Let f:U⊂Rn→Rmbe differentiable, with f=(f1,..., fm), and let g(x)=
sin [ f(x)·f(x)]. Compute Dg(x).

<<<PAGE 159>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 132
132 Differentiation
solution By the chain rule, Dg(x)=cos [ f(x)·f(x)]Dh(x), where h(x)=[f(x)·f(x)]=
f2
1(x)+···+ f2
m(x). Then
Dh(x)=/bracketleftbigg∂h
∂x1···∂h
∂xn/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg
2f1∂f1
∂x1+···+ 2fm∂fm
∂x1··· 2f1∂f1
∂xn+···+ 2fm∂fm
∂xn/bracketrightbigg
,
which can be written 2 f(x)Df(x), where we regard fas a row matrix,
f=[f1··· fm] and Df=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂f
1
∂x1···∂f1
∂xn......
∂f
m
∂x1···∂fm
∂xn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦.
Thus, Dg(x)=2[cos ( f(x)·f(x))]f(x)Df(x).
▲
exercises
1.Iff:U⊂Rn→Ris differentiable, prove that
x/mapsto→f2(x)+2f(x) is differentiable as well, and
compute its derivative in terms of Df(x).
2.Prove that the following functions are differentiable, and
ﬁnd their derivatives at an arbitrary point:
(a) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→2
(b) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x+y
(c) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→2+x+y
(d) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2
(e) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→exy
(f) f:U→R,(x,y)/mapsto→/radicalbig
1−x2−y2, where
U={(x,y)|x2+y2<1}
(g) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x4−y4
3.Verify the ﬁrst special case of the chain rule for thecomposition f◦cin each of the cases:
(a) f(x,y)=xy,c(t)=(e
t, cos t)
(b) f(x,y)=exy,c(t)=(3t2,t3)
(c) f(x,y)=(x2+y2)l o g/radicalbig
x2+y2,c(t)=
(et,e−t)
(d) f(x,y)=xexp(x2+y2),c(t)=(t,−t)
4.What is the velocity vector for each path c(t)i n
Exercise 3? [The solution to part (b) only is in the StudyGuide to this text.]5.Letf:R3→Randg:R3→Rbe differentiable. Prove
that
∇(fg)=f∇g+g∇f.
6.Letf:R3→Rbe differentiable. Making the
substitution
x=ρcosθsinφ,y=ρsinθsinφ,z=ρcosφ
(spherical coordinates) into f(x,y,z), compute
∂f/∂ρ,∂f/∂θ, and∂f/∂φ in terms of
∂f/∂x,∂f/∂y, and∂f/∂z.
7.Letf(u,v)=(tan ( u−1)−ev,u2−v2) and
g(x,y)=(ex−y,x−y). Calculate f◦gand
D(f◦g)(1, 1).
8.Letf(u,v,w)=(eu−w, cos (v+u)+
sin (u+v+w)) and g(x,y)=(ex, cos ( y−x),e−y).
Calculate f◦gandD(f◦g)(0, 0).
9.Find (∂/∂s)(f◦T)(1, 0), where f(u,v)=cosusinv
andT:R2→R2is deﬁned by
T(s,t)=(cos ( t2s), log√
1+s2).
10. Suppose that the temperature at the point ( x,y,z)i n
space is T(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2. Let a particle follow

<<<PAGE 160>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 133
2.5 Properties of the Derivative 133
the right-circular helix σ(t)=(cost, sint,t) and let
T(t) be its temperature at time t.
(a) What is T/prime(t)?
(b) Find an approximate value for the temperature at
t=(π/2)+0.01.
11. Letf(x,y,z)=(3y+2,x2+y2,x+z2). Let
c(t)=(cos( t), sin( t),t).
(a) Find the path p=f◦cand the velocity vector
p/prime(π).
(b) Find c(π),c/prime(π) and Df(−1, 0, π).
(c) Thinking of Df(−1, 0, π) as a linear map, ﬁnd
Df(−1, 0, π)(c/prime(π)).
12. Leth:R3→R5andg:R2→R3be given by
h(x,y,z)=(xyz,exz,xsin(y),−9
x, 17) and
g(u,v)=(v2+2u,π,2√u). Find D(h◦g)(1, 1).
13. Suppose that a duck is swimming in the circle
x=cost,y=sintand that the water temperature is
given by the formula T=x2ey−xy3. Find dT/dt, the
rate of change in temperature the duck might feel: (a) by
the chain rule; (b) by expressing Tin terms of tand
differentiating.
14. Letf:Rn→Rmbe a linear mapping so that (by
Exercise 28, Section 2.3) Df(x) is the matrix of f.
Check the validity of the chain rule directly for linearmappings.
15. Letf:R2→R2;(x,y)/mapsto→(ex+y,ex−y). Let c(t)b ea
path with c(0)=(0, 0) and c/prime(0)=(1, 1). What is the
tangent vector to the image of c(t) under fatt=0?
16. Letf(x,y)=1//radicalbig
x2+y2. Compute ∇f(x,y).
17. Write out the chain rule for each of the followingfunctions and justify your answer in each case usingTheorem 11.
(a)∂h/∂x, where h(x,y)=f(x,u(x,y))
(b)dh/dx, where h(x)=f(x,u(x),v(x))
(c)∂h/∂x, where h(x,y,z)=f(u(x,y,z),
v(x,y),w(x))18. Verify the chain rule for ∂h/∂x, where
h(x,y)=f(u(x,y),v(x,y)) and
f(u,v)=u2+v2
u2−v2,u(x,y)=e−x−y,v(x,y)=exy.
19. (a)Lety(x) be deﬁned implicitly by G(x,y(x))=0,
where Gis a given function of two variables. Prove
that if y(x) and Gare differentiable, then
dy
dx=−∂G/∂x
∂G/∂yif∂G
∂y/negationslash=0.
(b)Obtain a formula analogous to that in part (a) if
y1,y2are deﬁned implicitly by
G1(x,y1(x),y2(x))=0,
G2(x,y1(x),y2(x))=0.
(c) Let ybe deﬁned implicitly by
x2+y3+ey=0.
Compute dy/dxin terms of xandy.
20. Thermodynamics texts4use the relationship
/parenleftBig∂y
∂x/parenrightBig/parenleftBig∂z
∂y/parenrightBig/parenleftBig∂x
∂z/parenrightBig
=−1.
Explain the meaning of this equation and prove that it istrue. [H
INT: Start with a relationship F(x,y,z)=0 that
deﬁnes x=f(y,z),y=g(x,z), and z=h(x,y) and
differentiate implicitly.]
21. Dieterici’ s equation of state for a gas is
P(V−b)ea/RVT=RT,
where a,b, and Rare constants. Regard volume Vas a
function of temperature Tand pressure Pand prove that
∂V
∂T=/parenleftBig
R+a
TV/parenrightBig/slashBig/parenleftBigRT
V−b−a
V2/parenrightBig
.
22. This exercise gives another example of the fact that thechain rule is not applicable if fis not differentiable.
Consider the function
f(x,y)=⎧
⎨
⎩xy2
x2+y2(x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
0( x,y)=(0, 0).
4See S. M. Binder, “Mathematical Methods in Elementary Thermodynamics,” J. Chem. Educ., 43 (1966): 85–92. A proper understanding of
partial differentiation can be of signiﬁcant use in applications; for example, see M. Feinberg, “Constitutive Equation for Ideal Gas Mixtures and
Ideal Solutions as Consequences of Simple Postulates,” Chem. Eng. Sci., 32 (1977): 75–78.

<<<PAGE 161>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 134
134 Differentiation
Show that
(a)∂f/∂xand∂f/∂yexist at (0, 0).
(b)Ifg(t)=(at,bt) for constants aandb, then f◦g
is differentiable and ( f◦g)/prime(0)=
ab2/(a2+b2), but∇f(0, 0)·g/prime(0)=0.
23. Prove that if f:U⊂Rn→Ris differentiable at
x0∈U, there is a neighborhood Vof0∈Rnand a
function R1:V→Rsuch that for all h∈V,w eh a v e
x0+h∈U,
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+[Df(x0)]h+R1(h)
and
R1(h)
/bardblh/bardbl→0a sh →0.
24. Suppose x0∈Rnand 0≤r1<r2. Show that there is a
C1function f:Rn→Rsuch that f(x)=0 for
/bardblx−x0/bardbl≥r2;0<f(x)<1 for r1</bardblx−x0/bardbl<r2;
and f(x)=1 for/bardblx−x0/bardbl≤r1.[HINT: Apply a cubic
polynomial with g(r2
1)=1 and g(r2
2)=g/prime(r2
2)=
g/prime(r2
1)=0t o/bardblx −x0/bardbl2when r1</bardblx−x0/bardbl<r2.]
25. Find a C1mapping f:R3→R3that takes the vector
i+j+kemanating from the origin to i−jemanating
from (1, 1, 0) and takes kemanating from (1, 1, 0) to
k−iemanating from the origin.
26. What is wrong with the following argument? Suppose
w=f(x,y,z) and z=g(x,y). By the chain rule,
∂w
∂x=∂w
∂x∂x
∂x+∂w
∂y∂y
∂x+∂w
∂z∂z
∂x=∂w
∂x+∂w
∂z∂z
∂x.
Hence, 0 =(∂w/∂z)(∂z/∂x), and so ∂w/∂z=0o r
∂z/∂x=0, which is, in general, absurd.
27. Prove rules (iii) and (iv) of Theorem 10. (H INT: Use the
same addition and subtraction tricks as in theone-variable case and Theorem 8.)
28. Show that h:Rn→Rmis differentiable if and only if
each of the mcomponents hi:Rn→Ris differentiable.
(HINT: Use the coordinate projection function and the
chain rule for one implication and consider
/bracketleftBig/bardblh(x)−h(x0)−Dh(x0)(x−x0)/bardbl
/bardblx−x0/bardbl/bracketrightBig2
=/summationtextm
i=1[hi(x)−hi(x0)Dhi(x0)(x−x0)]2
/bardblx−x0/bardbl2
to obtain the other.)29. Use the chain rule and differentiation under the integralsign, namely,
d
dx/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dy=/integraldisplayb
a∂f
∂x(x,y)dy,
to show that
d
dx/integraldisplayx
0f(x,y)dy=f(x,x)+/integraldisplayx
0∂f
∂x(x,y)dy.
30. For what integers p>0i s
f(x)=/braceleftBigxpsin (1/ x) x/negationslash=0
0 x=0
differentiable? For what pis the derivative continuous?
31. Suppose f:Rn→Randg:Rn→Rmare
differentiable. Show that the product function
h(x)=f(x)g(x) from RntoRmis differentiable and
that if x0andyare in Rn, then [D h(x0)]y=
f(x0){[Dg(x0)]y}+{ [Df(x0)]y}g(x0).
32. Letg(u,v)=(eu,u+sinv) and f(x,y,z)=(xy,yz).
Compute D(g◦f) at (0, 1, 0) using the chain rule.
33. Letf:R4→Randc(t):R→R4. Suppose
∇f(1, 1,π,e6)=(0, 1, 3, −7), c(π)=(1, 1,π,e6),
andc/prime(π)=(19, 11, 0, 1). Findd(f◦c)
dtwhen t=π.
34. Suppose f:Rn→Rmandg:Rp→Rq.
(a) What must be true about the numbers n,m,p, and
qforf◦gto make sense?
(b) What must be true about the numbers n,m,p, and
qforg◦fto make sense?
(c) When does f◦fmake sense?
35. Ifz=f(x−y), use the chain rule to show that
∂z
∂x+∂z
∂y=0.
36. Letw=x2+y2+z2,x=uv,y=ucosv,
z=usinv. Use the chain rule to ﬁnd∂w
∂uwhen( u,v)=(1, 0).

<<<PAGE 162>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 135
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 135
2.6Gradients and Directional Derivatives
In Section 2.1 we studied the graphs of real-valued functions. Now we take up this
study again, using the methods of calculus. Speciﬁcally, gradients will be used to obtaina formula for the plane tangent to a level surface.
Gradients in R3
Let us recall the deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition The Gradient Iff:U⊂R3→Ris differentiable, the gradient
offat (x,y,z) is the vector in space given by
∇f=/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x,∂f
∂y,∂f
∂z/parenrightbigg
.
This vector is also denoted ∇f(x,y,z). Thus, ∇fis just the matrix of the derivative
Df, written as a vector.
example 1 Letf(x,y,z)=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2=r, the distance from 0to (x,y,z). Then
∇f(x,y,z)=/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x,∂f
∂y,∂f
∂z/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbiggx/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,y/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,z/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2/parenrightbigg
=r
r,
where ris the point ( x,y,z). Thus, ∇fis the unit vector in the direction of ( x,y,z).
▲
example 2 Iff(x,y,z)=xy+z, then
∇f(x,y,z)=/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x,∂f
∂y,∂f
∂z/parenrightbigg
=(y,x,1 ).▲
Suppose f:R3→Ris a real-valued function. Let vandx∈R3be ﬁxed vectors
and consider the function from RtoRdeﬁned by t/mapsto→f(x+tv). The set of points
of the form x+tv,t∈R, is the line Lthrough the point xparallel to the vector v
(see Figure 2.6.1).
xyz
x + tv x
tvtv translatedL
vﬁgure 2.6.1 The equation of Lisl(t)=x+tv.

<<<PAGE 163>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 136
136 Differentiation
Directional Derivatives
The function t/mapsto→f(x+tv) represents the function frestricted to the line L.F o r
example, if a bird ﬂies along this line with velocity vso that x+tvis its position at
time t, and if frepresents the temperature as a function of position, then f(x+tv)i s
the temperature at time t. We may ask: How fast are the values of fchanging along the
lineLat the point x? Because the rate of change of a function is given by a derivative,
we could say that the answer to this question is the value of the derivative of this function
oftatt=0 (when t=0,x+tvreduces to x). This would be the derivative of fat the
point xin the direction of L; that is, of v. We can formalize this concept as follows.
Deﬁnition Directional Derivatives Iff:R3→R, the directional deriva-
tiveoffatxalong the vector vis given by
d
dtf(x+tv)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0
if this exists.
In the deﬁnition of a directional derivative, we normally choose vto be a unit
vector. In this case, we are moving in the direction vwith unit speed and we refer
tod
dtf(x+tv)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0as the directional derivative of fin the direction v.
We now elaborate on why a unit vector is chosen in the deﬁnition of the directional
derivative. Suppose that fmeasures the temperature in degrees and that we are interested
in how fast the temperature changes as we move in a particular direction. If we are
measuring distance in meters, then the rate of change of temperature will be measuredin degrees per meter. Suppose, for simplicity, that the temperature is changing at aconstant rate—say, two degrees per meter—as we move in a given direction vstarting at
x. Thus, when we go one meter ahead, the temperature changes by two degrees. That is,
f(x+v)−f(x)=2.
Such a relation is going to hold only when vis a unit vector, reﬂecting the fact that we
are going ahead by onemeter. More generally, the deﬁnition of the directional derivative
is going to truly measure only the rate of change of fwith respect to distance along a
line in a given direction if vis a unit vector.
From the deﬁnition, we can see that the directional derivative can also be deﬁned by
the formula
limit
h→0f(x+hv)−f(x)
h.
Theorem 12Iff:R3→Ris differentiable, then all directional derivatives
exist. The directional derivative at xin the direction vis given by
Df(x)v=grad f(x)·v=∇ f(x)·v=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(x)/bracketrightbigg
v1+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂y(x)/bracketrightbigg
v2+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂z(x)/bracketrightbigg
v3,
where v=(v1,v2,v3).

<<<PAGE 164>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 137
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 137
proof Letc(t)=x+tv, so that f(x+tv)=f(c(t)). By the ﬁrst special case of
the chain rule, ( d/dt)f(c(t))=∇ f(c(t))·c/prime(t). However, c(0)=xandc/prime(0)=v,
and so
d
dtf(x+tv)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇ f(x)·v,
as we were required to prove. ■
Notice that one does not have to use straight lines when computing the rate of change
offin a speciﬁc direction v. Indeed, for a general path c(t) with c(0)=xandc/prime(0)=v,
we have from the chain rule,
d
dtf(c(t))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇ f(c(t))·c/prime(t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇ f(x)·v.
example 3 Letf(x,y,z)=x2e−yz. Compute the rate of change of fin the direction of the unit
vector
v=/parenleftbigg1√
3,1√
3,1√
3/parenrightbigg
at the point (1, 0, 0) .
solution The required rate of change is, using Theorem 12,
∇f·v=(2xe−yz,−x2ze−yz,−x2ye−yz)·/parenleftbigg1√
3,1√
3,1√
3/parenrightbigg
,
which, at the point (1, 0, 0), becomes
(2, 0, 0) ·/parenleftbigg1√
3,1√
3,1√
3/parenrightbigg
=2√
3.
▲
example 4 In the last example, ﬁnd the rate of change of fin the direction of the vector w=
(1, 1, 1).
solution wis not a unit vector. Replacing wby
v=w
/bardblw/bardbl=/parenleftbigg1√
3,1√
3,1√
3/parenrightbigg
and proceeding as in Example 3, we again obtain 2 /√
3 as our answer. ▲
Directions of Fastest Increase
From Theorem 12 we can also obtain the geometric signiﬁcance of the gradient:
Theorem 13Assume ∇f(x)/negationslash=0. Then ∇f(x) points in the direction along
which fis increasing the fastest.
proof Ifnis a unit vector, the rate of change of fin direction nis given by ∇f(x)·n=
/bardbl∇f(x)/bardblcosθ, where θis the angle between nand∇f(x). This is maximum when
θ=0; that is, when nand∇fare parallel. [If ∇f(x)=0this rate of change is 0 for
anyn.] ■

<<<PAGE 165>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 138
138 Differentiation
In other words, if we wish to move in a direction in which fwill increase most
quickly, we should proceed in the direction ∇f(x). Analogously, if we wish to move in a
direction in which f decreases the fastest, we should proceed in the direction −∇f(x).
example 5 In what direction from (0, 1) does f(x,y)=x2−y2increase the fastest?
solution The gradient is
∇f=2xi−2yj,
and so at (0, 1) this is
∇f|(0,1)=−2j.
By Theorem 13, fincreases fastest in the direction −j. (Can you see why this answer
is consistent with Figure 2.1.9?) ▲
Gradients and Tangent Planes to Level Sets
Now we ﬁnd the relationship between the gradient of a function fand its level surfaces.
The gradient points in the direction in which the values of fchange most rapidly,
whereas a level surface lies in the directions in which they do not change at all. If fis
reasonably well behaved, the gradient and the level surface will be perpendicular.
Theorem 14 The Gradient is Normal to Level Surfaces Letf:R3→R
be aC1map and let ( x0,y0,z0) lie on the level surface Sdeﬁned by f(x,y,z)=k,
forka constant. Then ∇f(x0,y0,z0) is normal to the level surface in the following
sense: If vis the tangent vector at t=0 of a path c(t)i nSwith c(0)=(x0,y0,z0),
then∇f(x0,y0,z0)·v=0 (see Figure 2.6.2).
proof Letc(t) lie in S; then f(c(t))=k. Let vbe as in the hypothesis; then v=c/prime(0).
Hence, the fact that f(c(t)) is constant in t, and the chain rule give
0=d
dtf(c(t))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇ f(c(0))·v.
■
ﬁgure 2.6.2 Geometric
signiﬁcance of the gradient: ∇fis
orthogonal to the surface Son
which fis constant.v translated
xyz
v
Sc(t)0 00 (xyz,,) fΔ
0 00 (xyz,,)parallel translated so
that it beginsat 0 00 (xyz,,) fΔ
0 00 (xyz,,)

<<<PAGE 166>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 139
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 139
If we study the conclusion of Theorem 14, we see that it is reasonable to deﬁne the
plane tangent to Sas the orthogonal plane to the gradient.
Deﬁnition Tangent Planes to Level Surfaces Let Sbe the surface
consisting of those ( x,y,z) such that f(x,y,z)=k, forka constant. The tangent
plane ofSat a point ( x0,y0,z0)o fSis deﬁned by the equation
∇f(x0,y0,z0)·(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0)=0 (1)
if∇f(x0,y0,z0)/negationslash=0. That is, the tangent plane is the set of points ( x,y,z) that
satisfy equation (1).
This extends the deﬁnition we gave earlier for the tangent plane of the graph of a
function (see Exercise 15 at the end of this section).
example 6 Compute the equation of the plane tangent to the surface deﬁned by 3 xy+z2=4a t
(1, 1, 1).
solution Here f(x,y,z)=3xy+z2and∇f=(3y,3x,2z), which at (1, 1, 1) is the vector
(3, 3, 2). Thus, the tangent plane is
(3, 3, 2) ·(x−1,y−1,z−1)=0;
that is,
3x+3y+2z=8. ▲
In Theorem 14 and the deﬁnition following it, we could just as well have worked in
two dimensions as in three. Thus, if we have f:R2→Rand consider a level curve
C={(x,y)|f(x,y)=k},
then∇f(x0,y0) is perpendicular to Cfor any point ( x0,y0)o nC. Likewise, the tangent
line to Cat (x0,y0) has the equation
∇f(x0,y0)·(x−x0,y−y0)=0 (2)
if∇f(x0,y0)/negationslash=0; that is, the tangent line is the set of points ( x,y) that satisfy equation
(2) (see Figure 2.6.3).
C
xy
Tangent line to Cf translate d/Delta1
ﬁgure 2.6.3 In the plane, the gradient ∇f
is orthogonal to the curve f= constant.

<<<PAGE 167>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 140
140 DifferentiationΔ
4P(fz
xP
PP
R→R1
234
5P
PP()1
23
5P()P()
)
P()ff:3yΔ
ΔfΔfΔfﬁgure 2.6.4 The gradient ∇fof a function
f:R3→Ris a vector ﬁeld on R3; at each point
Pi,∇f(Pi) is a vector emanating from P i.
The Gradient Vector Field
We often speak of ∇fas agradient vector ﬁeld . The word “ﬁeld” means that ∇fassigns
a vector to each point in the domain of f. In Figure 2.6.4 we describe the gradient ∇f
not by drawing its graph, which, if f:R3→R, would be a subset of R6—that is, the set
of tuples ( x,∇f(x)), but by representing ∇f(P), for each point P , as a vector emanating
from the point P rather than from the origin. Like a graph, this pictorial method of
depicting ∇fcontains the point P and the value ∇f(P) in the same picture.
The gradient vector ﬁeld has important geometric signiﬁcance. It shows the direction
in which fis increasing the fastest and the direction that is orthogonal to the level sur-
faces (or curves in the plane) of f. That it does both of these at once is quite plausible.
To see this, imagine a hill as shown in Figure 2.6.5(a). Let hbe the height function,
a function of two variables. If we draw level curves of h, these are just level contours
of the hill. We could imagine them as level paths on the hill [see Figure 2.6.5(b)]. One
thing should be obvious to anyone who has gone for a hike: To get to the top of the
hill the fastest, we should walk perpendicular to level contours.5This is consistent with
Theorems 13 and 14, which state that the direction of fastest increase (the gradient) is
orthogonal to the level curves.
(a)n
n
A curve of
steepes t ascen t
up the hillCountour
map of a hill
250 feet hi gh
Earth
h
(b)h
h=50
h=100
h=150
h=200
ﬁgure 2.6.5 A physical illustration of the two facts (a) ∇fis the direction of fastest increase of f,
and (b) ∇fis orthogonal to the level curves.
5This discussion assumes that one walks at the same speed in all directions. Of course, hikers know
that this is not necessarily realistic.

<<<PAGE 168>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 141
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 141
example 7 The gravitational force on a unit mass mat (x,y,z) produced by a mass Mat the origin
inR3is, according to Newton’ s law of gravitation, given by
F=−GmM
r2n,
where Gis a constant; r=/bardblr/bardbl=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2, which is the distance of ( x,y,z)
from the origin; and n=r/r, the unit vector in the direction of r=xi+yj+zk, which
is the position vector from the origin to ( x,y,z).
Note that F=∇(GmM /r)=− ∇ V; that is, Fis the negative of the gradient of the
gravitational potential V=− GmM /r. This can be veriﬁed as in Example 1. Notice
thatFis directed inward toward the origin. Also, the level surfaces of Vare spheres.
The gradient vector ﬁeld Fis normal to these spheres, which conﬁrms the result of
Theorem 14. ▲
example 8 Find a unit vector normal to the surface Sgiven by z=x2y2+y+1 at the point
(0, 0, 1).
solution Letf(x,y,z)=x2y2+y+1−z, and consider the level surface deﬁned by f(x,y,z)=
0. Because this is the set of points ( x,y,z) with z=x2y2+y+1, we see that this level
set coincides with the surface S. The gradient is given by
∇f(x,y,z)=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj+∂f
∂zk=2xy2i+(2x2y+1)j−k,
and so
∇f(0, 0, 1) =j−k.
This vector is perpendicular to Sat (0, 0, 1), and so to ﬁnd a unit normal nwe divide
this vector by its length to obtain
n=∇f(0, 0, 1)
/bardbl∇f(0, 0, 1)/bardbl=1√
2(j−k).▲
example 9 Consider two conductors, one charged positively and the other negatively. Between
them, an electric potential is set up. This potential is a function φ:R3→R(an example
of ascalar ﬁeld). The electric ﬁeld is given by E=− ∇ φ. From Theorem 14 we know that
Eis perpendicular to level surfaces of φ. These level surfaces are called equipotential
surfaces, because the potential is constant on them (see Figure 2.6.6).
Lower
potentialLines of constant f
E
Higher
potentialﬁgure 2.6.6 Equipotential surfaces (the dotted
lines) are orthogonal to the electric force ﬁeld E.
▲

<<<PAGE 169>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 142
142 Differentiation
exercises
1.Show that the directional derivative of
f(x,y,z)=z2x+y3at (1, 1, 2) in the direction
(1/√
5)i+(2/√
5)jis 2√
5.
2.Compute the directional derivatives of the following
functions at the indicated points in the givendirections:
(a) f(x,y)=x+2xy−3y
2,(x0,y0)=(1, 2),
v=3
5i+4
5j
(b) f(x,y)=log/radicalbig
x2+y2,(x0,y0)=(1, 0),
v=(1/√
5)(2i+j)
(c) f(x,y)=excos(πy), (x0,y0)=(0,−1),
v=−(1/√
5)i+(2/√
5)j
(d) f(x,y)=xy2+x3y,(x0,y0)=(4,−2),
v=(1/√
10)i+(3/√
10)j
3.Compute the directional derivatives of the followingfunctions along unit vectors at the indicated points indirections parallel to the given vector:
(a) f(x,y)=x
y,(x0,y0)=(e,e),d=5i+12j
(b) f(x,y,z)=ex+yz,(x0,y0,z0)=( 1 ,1 ,1 ) ,
d=(1,−1, 1)
(c) f(x,y,z)=xyz,(x0,y0,z0)=( 1 ,0 ,1 ) ,
d=(1, 0,−1)
4.Y ou are walking on the graph of f(x,y)=
ycos(πx)−xcos(πy)+10, standing at the point (2, 1,
13). Find an x,y-direction you should walk in to stay at
the same level.
5.(a)Letf:R3→R,x0∈R3.I fv is a unit vector in
R3, show that the maximum value of the directional
derivative of fatx0along vis||∇f(x0)||.
(b) Let f(x,y,z)=x3−y3+z3. Find the maximum
value for the directional derivative of fat the point
(1, 2, 3).
6.Find a vector which is normal to the curve
x3+xy+y3=11 at (1, 2).
7.Find the rate of change of f(x,y,z)=xyzin the
direction normal to the surface yx2+xy2+yz2=3a t
(1, 1, 1).
8.Find the planes tangent to the following surfaces at theindicated points:
(a)x
2+2y2+3xz=10, at the point (1, 2,1
3)(b)y2−x2=3, at the point (1, 2, 8)
(c)xyz=1, at the point (1, 1, 1)
9.Find the equation for the plane tangent to each surface
z=f(x,y) at the indicated point:
(a)z=x3+y3−6xy, at the point (1, 2, −3)
(b)z=(cos x)(cos y), at the point (0, π/2, 0)
(c)z=(cos x)(sin y), at the point (0, π/2, 1)
10. Compute the gradient ∇ffor each of the following
functions:
(a) f(x,y,z)=1//radicalbig
x2+y2+z2
(b) f(x,y,z)=xy+yz+xz
(c) f(x,y,z)=1
x2+y2+z2
11. For the functions in Exercise 10, what is the direction offastest increase at (1, 1, 1)? [The solution to part (c)only is in the Study Guide to this text.]
12. Show that a unit normal to the surface
x3y3+y−z+2=0 at (0, 0, 2) is given by
n=(1/√
2)(j−k).
13. Find a unit normal to the surface cos( xy)=ez−2a t
(1,π,0 ) .
14. Verify Theorems 13 and 14 for
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2.
15. Show that the deﬁnition following Theorem 14 yields,as a special case, the formula for the plane tangent to thegraph of f(x,y) by regarding the graph as a level
surface of F(x,y,z)=f(x,y)−z(see Section 2.3).
16. Letf(x,y)=−(1−x2−y2)1/2for (x,y) such that
x2+y2<1. Show that the plane tangent to the graph
offat (x0,y0,f(x0,y0)) is orthogonal to the vector
with components ( x0,y0,f(x0,y0)). Interpret this
geometrically.
17. For the following functions f:R3→Rand
g:R→R3, ﬁnd∇fandg/primeand evaluate ( f◦g)/prime(1).
(a) f(x,y,z)=xz+yz+xy,g(t)=(et, cos t, sint)
(b) f(x,y,z)=exyz,g(t)=(6t,3t2,t3)
(c) f(x,y,z)=(x2+y2+z2)l o g/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,
g(t)=(et,e−t,t)

<<<PAGE 170>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 143
2.6 Gradients and Directional Derivatives 143
18. Compute the directional derivative of fin the given
directions vat the given points P .
(a) f(x,y,z)=xy2+y2z3+z3x,P=
(4,−2,−1), v=1/√
14(i+3j+2k)
(b) f(x,y,z)=xyz,P=(e,e,0 ) ,v =12
13i+3
13j+4
13k
19. Y ou are standing on the graph of
f(x,y)=100−2x2−3y2at the point (2, 3, 65).
(a) What are the xycoordinates of the highest point on
the graph?
(b) Show that the gradient of fis the zero vector at
the point found in (a).
20. Find the two points on the hyperboloid
x2+4y2−z2=4, where the tangent plane is parallel
to the plane 2 x+2y+z=5.
21. Letr=xi+yj+zkandr=/bardblr/bardbl.Prove that
∇/parenleftBig1
r/parenrightBig
=−r
r3.
22. Captain Ralph is in trouble near the sunny side of
Mercury. The temperature of the ship’ s hull when he
is at location ( x,y,z) will be given by
T(x,y,z)=e−x2−2y2−3z2, where x,y, and zare
measured in meters. He is currently at (1, 1, 1).
(a) In what direction should he proceed in order to
decrease the temperature most rapidly?
(b) If the ship travels at e8meters per second, how fast
will be the temperature decrease if he proceeds in
that direction?
(c) Unfortunately, the metal of the hull will crack if
cooled at a rate greater than√
14e2degrees per
second. Describe the set of possible directions inwhich he may proceed to bring the temperaturedown at no more than that rate.
23. A function f:R2→Ris said to be independent of the
second variable if there is a function g:R→Rsuch
that f(x,y)=g(x) for all xinR. In this case, calculate
∇fin terms of g/prime.
24. Letfandgbe functions from R3toR. Suppose fis
differentiable and ∇f(x)=g(x)x. Show that spheres
centered at the origin are contained in the level sets for
f; that is, fis constant on such spheres.
25. A function f:Rn→Ris called an even function if
f(x)=f(−x) for every xinRn.I ffis differentiable
and even, ﬁnd Dfat the origin.26. Suppose that a mountain has the shape of an ellipticparaboloid z=c−ax
2−by2, where a,b, and care
positive constants, xandyare the east–west and
north–south map coordinates, and zis the altitude above
sea level ( x,y,zare all measured in meters). At the
point (1, 1), in what direction is the altitude increasingmost rapidly? If a marble were released at (1, 1), in whatdirection would it begin to roll?
27. An engineer wishes to build a railroad up the mountainof Exercise 26. Straight up the mountain is much toosteep for the power of the engines. At the point (1, 1), inwhat directions may the track be laid so that it will beclimbing with a 3% grade—that is, anangle whose tangent is 0.03? (There are twopossibilities.) Make a sketch of the situation indicatingthe two possible directions for a 3% grade at (1, 1).
28. In electrostatics, the force Pof attraction between two
particles of opposite charge is given by P=k(r//bardblr/bardbl3)
(Coulomb’ s law), where kis a constant and
r=xi+yj+zk. Show that Pis the gradient of
f=−k//bardblr/bardbl.
29. The electrostatic potential Vdue to two inﬁnite parallel
ﬁlaments with linear charge densities λand−λis
V=(λ/2πε 0)l n(r2/r1), where r2
1=(x−x0)2+y2
andr2
2=(x+x0)2+y2. We think of the ﬁlaments as
being in the z-direction, passing through the xyplane at
(−x0, 0) and ( x0, 0). Find ∇V(x,y).
30. For each of the following, ﬁnd the maximum andminimum values attained by the function falong the
path c(t):
(a) f(x,y)=xy;c(t)=(cost, sint); 0≤t≤2π
(b) f(x,y)=x
2+y2;c(t)=(cost, 2 sin t); 0≤t≤
2π
31. Suppose that a particle is ejected from the surface
x2+y2−z2=−1 at the point (1, 1,√
3) along the
normal directed toward the xyplane to the surface at
time t=0 with a speed of 10 units per second. When
and where does it cross the xyplane?
32. Letf:R3→Rand regard Df(x,y,z) as a linear map
ofR3toR. Show that the kernel (that is, the set of
vectors mapped to zero) of Dfis the plane in R3
orthogonal to ∇f.

<<<PAGE 171>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 144
144 Differentiation
review exercises for chapter 2
1.Describe the graphs of:
(a) f(x,y)=3x2+y2
(b) f(x,y)=xy+3x
2.Describe some appropriate level surfaces and sections of
the graphs of:
(a) f(x,y,z)=2x2+y2+z2
(b) f(x,y,z)=x2
(c) f(x,y,z)=xyz
3.Compute the derivative Df(x) of each of the following
functions:
(a) f(x,y)=(x2y,e−xy)
(b) f(x)=(x,x)
(c) f(x,y,z)=ex+ey+ez
(d) f(x,y,z)=(x,y,z)
4.Suppose f(x,y)=f(y,x) for all ( x,y). Prove that
(∂f/∂x)(a,b)=(∂f/∂y)(b,a).
5.Letf(u,v)=(cosu,v+sinu) and
g(x,y,z)=(x2+πy2,xz). Compute D(f◦g)a t
(0, 1, 1) using the chain rule.
6.Use the chain rule to ﬁnd D(f◦g)(−2, 1) for
f(u,v,w)=(v2+uw,u2+w2,u2v−w3) and
g(x,y)=(xy3,x2−y2,3x+5y).
7.Use the chain rule to ﬁnd D(f◦g)(−1, 2) for
f(u,v,w)=(v2+w2,u3−vw,u2v+w) and
g(x,y)=(3x+2y,x3y,y2−x2).
8.Letf(x,y)=(xy,x
y,x+y) and
g(w,s,t)=(wes,sewt). Find D(f◦g)(3, 1, 0).
9.Letr(t)=(tcos(πt),tsin(πt),t) be a path. Where will
the tangent line to ratt=5 intersect the xyplane?
10. Letf(x,y)=x2e−xy.
(a)Find a vector normal to the graph of fat (1, 2).
(b)Find the equation of the tangent plane to the graphoffat (1, 2).
(c) What point on the surface given by z=x
2−y2has
a tangent plane parallel to the plane found in (b)?
11. Letf(x,y)=(1−x2−y2)1/2. Show that the plane
tangent to the graph of fat (x0,y0,f(x0,y0)) isorthogonal to the vector ( x0,y0,f(x0,y0)). Interpret
geometrically.
12. LetF(u,v) and u=h(x,y,z),v=k(x,y,z)b eg i v e n
(differentiable) real-valued functions and let f(x,y,z)
be deﬁned by f(x,y,z)=F(h(x,y,z),k(x,y,z)).
Write a formula for the gradient of fin terms of the
partial derivatives of F,h, and k.
13. Find an equation for the tangent plane of the graph of f
at the point ( x0,y0,f(x0,y0)) for:
(a) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x−y+2,
(x0,y0)=(1, 1)
(b) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+4y2,
(x0,y0)=(2,−1)
(c) f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→xy,
(x0,y0)=(−1,−1)
(d) f(x,y)=log (x+y)+xcosy+arctan( x+y),
(x0,y0)=(1, 0)
(e) f(x,y)=/radicalbig
x2+y2,( x0,y0)=(1, 1)
(f) f(x,y)=xy,( x0,y0)=(2, 1)
14. Compute an equation for the tangent planes of thefollowing surfaces at the indicated points.
(a)x
2+y2+z2=3 , ( 1 ,1 ,1 )
(b)x3−2y3+z3=0 , ( 1 ,1 ,1 )
(c) (cos x)(cos y)ez=0, ( π/2, 1, 0)
(d)exyz=1 , ( 1 ,1 ,0 )
15. Draw some level curves for the following functions:
(a) f(x,y)=1/xy
(b) f(x,y)=x2−xy−y2
16. Consider a temperature function T(x,y)=xsiny. Plot
a few level curves. Compute ∇Tand explain its meaning.
17. Find the following limits if they exist:
(a) limit (x,y)→(0,0)cosxy−1
x
(b)limit (x,y)→(0,0)√|(x+y)/(x−y)|,x/negationslash=y
18. Compute the ﬁrst partial derivatives and gradients of thefollowing functions:
(a) f(x,y,z)=xe
z+ycosx
(b) f(x,y,z)=(x+y+z)10
(c) f(x,y,z)=(x2+y)/z

<<<PAGE 172>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 145
Review Exercises for Chapter 2 145
19. Compute∂
∂x[xexp (1 +x2+y2)]
20. Letf:R2→R4andg:R2→R2be given by
f(x,z)=(x2−y2, 0, sin( xy), 1) and
g(x,y)=(yex2,xey2). Compute D(f◦g)(1, 2).
21. Letf(x,y)=(x2+y2)e−(x2+y2+10). Find the rate of
change of fat (2, 1) in the direction pointing toward the
origin.
22. Lety(x) be a differentiable function deﬁned implicitly
byF(x,y(x))=0. From Exercise 19(a), Section 2.5, we
know that
dy
dx=−∂F/∂x
∂F/∂y.
Consider the surface z=F(x,y), and suppose Fis
increasing as a function of xand as a function of y; that
is,∂F/∂x>0 and∂F/∂y>0. By considering the
graph and the plane z=0, show that for zﬁxed at z=0,
yshould decrease asxincreases and xshould decrease
asyincreases. Does this agree with the minus sign in the
formula for dy/dx?
23. (a) Consider the graph of a function f(x,y) [Figure
2.R.1(a)]. Let ( x0,y0) lie on a level curve C,s o
∇f(x0,y0) is perpendicular to this curve. Show that
the tangent plane of the graph is the plane that (i)
contains the line perpendicular to ∇f(x0,y0) and
lying in the horizontal plane z=f(x0,y0), and (ii)
has slope /bardbl∇f(x0,y0)/bardblrelative to the xyplane.
(a) (b)
(
x
(
(
0
,
y
0
,
f
(
f
f
x
(
(
0
, y0))Level curve
raised to grap h
Leve l curve C
Grap h 
f
f(ffx((0,y0) f
(x((0,y0)z
xy
Slope o f tangent p lane 
=  
 || f ||  
f
(1, 0, 0)z
xy
(1,(1, 0 0,0, 2) 2)
0
ﬁgure 2.R.1 (a) The relationship between the gradient of a function and the tangent plane to
the graph [Exercise 23(a)]. For a speciﬁc instance of the tangent plane in (b) see Exercise 23(b).(By the slope of a plane Prelative to the xyplane
we mean the tangent of the angle θ,0≤θ≤π,
between the upward-pointing normal ptoPand the
unit vector k.)
(b) Use this method to show that the tangent plane of
the graph of f(x,y)=(x+cosy)x2a t( 1 ,0 ,2 )i s
as sketched in Figure 2.R.1(b).
24. Find the plane tangent to the surface z=x2+y2at the
point (1, −2, 5). Explain the geometric signiﬁcance, for
this surface, of the gradient of f(x,y)=x2+y2(see
Exercise 23).
25. In which direction is the directional derivative of
f(x,y)=(x2−y2)/(x2+y2) at (1, 1) equal to
zero?
26. Find the directional derivative of the given function at
the given point and in the direction of the given vector.
(a) f(x,y,z)=excos( yz), p0=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) ,
v=(2, 1,−2)
(b) f(x,y,z)=xy+yz+zx, p0=( 1 ,1 ,2 ) ,
v=(10,−1, 2)
27. Find the tangent plane and normal to the hyperboloid
x2+y2−z2=18 at (3, 5, −4).
28. Let ( x(t),y(t)) be a path in the plane, 0 ≤t≤1, and let
f(x,y)b ea C1function of two variables. Assume that
(dx/dt)fx+(dy/dt)fy≤0. Show that f(x(1),y(1))≤
f(x(0),y(0)).

<<<PAGE 173>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 146
146 Differentiation
29. A bug ﬁnds itself in a toxic environment. The toxicity
l e v e li sg i v e nb y T(x,y)=2x2−4y2.T h eb u gi sa t
(−1, 2). In what direction should it move to lower the
toxicity the fastest?
30. Find the direction in which the function w=x2+xy
increases most rapidly at the point ( −1, 1). What is the
magnitude of ∇wat this point? Interpret this magnitude
geometrically.
31. Letfbe deﬁned on an open set SinRn. We say that fis
homogeneous of degree pover Siff(λx)=λpf(x) for
every real λand for every xinSfor which λx∈S.
(a) If such a function is differentiable at x, show that
x·∇f(x)=pf(x). This is known as Euler’s
theorem for homogeneous functions. [H INT:F o r
ﬁxed x, deﬁne g(λ)=f(λx) and compute g/prime(1).]
(b) Find pand check Euler’ s theorem for the function
f(x,y,z)=x−2y−√xz, on the region where
xz>0.
32. Ifz=[f(x−y)]/y(where fis differentiable and
y/negationslash=0), show that the identity
z+y(∂z/∂x)+y(∂z/∂y)=0 holds.
33. Given z=f((x+y)/(x−y)) for faC1function,
show that
x∂z
∂x+y∂z
∂y=0.
34. Letfhave partial derivatives ∂f(x)/∂xi, where
i=1, 2,...,n, at each point xof an open set UinRn.I f
fhas a local maximum or a local minimum at the point
x0inU, show that ∂f(x0)/∂xi=0 for each i.
35. Consider the functions deﬁned in R2by the following
formulas:
(i)f(x,y)=xy/(x2+y2)i f ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0),
f(0, 0) =0
(ii) f(x,y)=x2y2/(x2+y4)i f( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0),
f(0, 0) =0
(a) In each case, show that the partial derivatives
∂f(x,y)/∂xand∂f(x,y)/∂yexist for every ( x,y)
inR2, and evaluate these derivatives explicitly in
terms of xandy.
(b) Explain why the functions described in (i) and (ii)
are or are not differentiable at (0, 0).
36. Compute the gradient vector ∇f(x,y) at all points ( x,y)
inR2for each of the following functions:
(a) f(x,y)=x2y2log (x2+y2)i f
(x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0), f(0, 0) =0(b) f(x,y)=xysin [1/( x2+y2)] if
(x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0), f(0, 0) =0
37. Find the directional derivatives of the followingfunctions at the point (1, 1) in the direction ( i+j)/√
2:
(a) f(x,y)=xtan−1(x/y)
(b) f(x,y)=cos (/radicalbig
x2+y2)
(c) f(x,y)=exp (−x2−y2)
38. (a) Let u=i−2j+2kandv=2i+j−3k. Find:
/bardblu/bardbl, u·v,u×v, and a vector in the same direction
asu, but of unit length.
(b) Find the rate of change of exysin(xyz) in the
direction ua t( 0 ,1 ,1 ) .
39. Leth(x,y)=2e−x2+e−3y2denote the height on a
mountain at position ( x,y). In what direction from (1, 0)
should one begin walking in order to climb the fastest?
40. Compute an equation for the plane tangent to the graphof
f(x,y)=e
x
x2+y2
atx=1,y=2.
41. (a) Give a careful statement of the general form of the
chain rule.
(b)Letf(x,y)=x2+yandh(u)=(sin 3u , cos 8u ).
Letg(u)=f(h(u)). Compute dg/duatu=0 both
directly andby using the chain rule.
42. (a) Sketch the level curves of f(x,y)=−x2−9y2for
c=0,−1,−10.
(b) On your sketch, draw in ∇fat (1, 1). Discuss.
43. At time t=0, a particle is ejected from the surface
x2+2y2+3z2=6 at the point (1, 1, 1) in a direction
normal to the surface at a speed of 10 units per second.At what time does it cross the sphere
x
2+y2+z2=103?
44. At what point(s) on the surface in Exercise 43 is thenormal vector parallel to the line x=y=z?
45. Compute ∂z/∂xand∂z/∂yif
z=u2+v2
u2−v2, u=e−x−y, v=exy
(a) by substitution and direct calculation, and (b) by thechain rule.

<<<PAGE 174>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 147
Review Exercises for Chapter 2 147
46. Compute the partial derivatives as in Exercise 45 if
z=uv,u=x+y, andv=x−y.
47. What is wrong with the following argument? Suppose
thatw=f(x,y) and y=x2. By the chain rule,
∂w
∂x=∂w
∂x∂x
∂x+∂w∂y
∂y∂x=∂w
∂x+2x∂w
∂y.
Hence, 0 =2x(∂w/∂y), and so ∂w/∂y=0. Choose an
explicit example to really see that this is incorrect.
48. A boat is sailing northeast at 20 km/h. Assuming that thetemperature drops at a rate of 0.2
◦C/km in the northerly
direction and 0.3◦C/km in the easterly direction, what is
the time rate of change of temperature as observed on theboat?
49. Use the chain rule to ﬁnd a formula for(d/dt) exp [ f(t)g(t)].
50. Use the chain rule to ﬁnd a formula for ( d/dt)(f(t)g(t)).
51. Verify the chain rule for the function
f(x,y,z)=[ln (1+x2+2z2)]/(1+y2) and the path
c(t)=(t,1−t2, cos t).
52. Verify the chain rule for the function
f(x,y)=x2/(2+cosy) and the path x=et,y=e−t.
53. Suppose that u(x,t) satisﬁes the differential equation
ut+uux=0 and that x, as a function x=f(t)o ft,
satisﬁes dx/dt=u(x,t). Prove that u(f(t),t)i s
constant in t.
54. The displacement at time tand horizontal position on a
linexof a certain violin string is given by
u=sin (x−6t)+sin (x+6t). Calculate the velocity of
the string at x=1 when t=1
3.
55. Theideal gas law PV=nRT involves a constant R, the
number nof moles of the gas, the volume V, the Kelvin
temperature T, and the pressure P.
(a) Show that each of n,P,T,Vis a function of the
remaining variables, and determine explicitly thedeﬁning equations.
(b) Calculate ∂V/∂T,∂T/∂P,∂P/∂Vand show that
their product equals −1.
56. Thepotential temperature θis deﬁned in terms of
temperature Tand pressure pby
θ=T/parenleftbigg
1000
p/parenrightbigg0.286
.The temperature and pressure may be thought of asfunctions of position ( x,y,z) in the atmosphere and also
of time t.
(a) Find formulas for ∂θ/∂ x,∂θ/∂ y,∂θ/∂ z,∂θ/∂t in
terms of partial derivatives of Tandp.
(b) The condition ∂θ/∂ z<0 is regarded as an
unstable atmosphere, for it leads to large verticalexcursions of air parcels from a single upward ordownward impetus. Meteorologists use theformula
∂θ
∂z=θ
T/parenleftbigg
∂T
∂z+g
Cp/parenrightbigg
,
where g=32.2 and Cpis a positive constant. How
does the temperature change in the upward directionfor an unstable atmosphere?
57. The speciﬁc volume V, pressure P, and temperature T
of a van der Waals gas are related by
P=RT/(V−β)−α/V2, where α,β, and Rare
constants.
(a)Explain why any two of V,P, and Tcan be
considered independent variables that determine thethird variable.
(b)Find∂T/∂P,∂P/∂V,∂V/∂T. Identify which
variables are constant, and interpret each partialderivative physically.
(c)Verify that(∂T/∂P)(∂P/∂V)(∂V/∂T)=−1( not +1!).
58. The height hof the Hawaiian volcano Mauna Loa is
(roughly) described by the function
h(x,y)=2.59−0.00024 y2−0.00065 x2, where
his the height above sea level in miles and xandy
measure east–west and north–south distances inmiles from the top of the mountain. At ( x,y)=
(−2,−4):
(a)How fast is the height increasing in the direction(1, 1) (that is, northeastward)? Express your answerin miles of height per mile of horizontal distancetraveled.
(b)In what direction is the steepest upward path?
59. (a) In what direction is the directional derivative of
f(x,y)=(x2−y2)/(x2+y2) at (1, 1)
equal to zero?
(b) How about at an arbitrary point ( x0,y0) in the ﬁrst
quadrant?
(c) Describe the level curves of f. In particular, discuss
them in terms of the result of part (b).

<<<PAGE 175>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:27 148
148 Differentiation
60. (a) Show that the curve x2−y2=c, for anyvalue
ofc, satisﬁes the differential equation
dy/dx=x/y.
(b) Draw in a few of the curves x2−y2=c, say for
c=±1. At several points ( x,y) along each of these
curves, draw a short segment of slope x/y; check
that these segments appear to be tangent to the
curve. What happens when y=0? What happens
when c=0?
61. Suppose that fis a differentiable function of one
variable and that a function u=g(x,y) is deﬁned by
u=g(x,y)=xyf/parenleftbigg
x+y
xy/parenrightbigg
.Show that usatisﬁes a (partial) differential equation of
the form
x2∂u
∂x−y2∂u
∂y=G(x,y)u
and ﬁnd the function G(x,y).
62. (a) Let Fbe a function of one variable and fa function
of two variables. Show that the gradient vector of
g(x,y)=F(f(x,y)) is parallel to the gradient
vector of f(x,y).
(b) Let f(x,y) and g(x,y) be functions such that
∇f=λ∇gfor some function λ(x,y). What is the
relation between the level curves of fandg?
Explain why there might be a function Fsuch that
g(x,y)=F(f(x,y)).

<<<PAGE 176>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 149
3
Higher-Order Derivatives:
Maxima and Minima
All that is superﬂuous displeases God and Nature.
All that displeases God and Nature is evil. ---Dante Alighieri, circa 1300
... namely, because the shape of the whole universe is most perfect, and, in fact, designedby the wisest creator, nothing in all of the world will occur in which no maximum or minimumrule is somehow shining forth. ---Leonhard Euler
Leonhard Euler
(by EmanuelHandman)(1707–1783).In one-variable calculus, to test a function f(x) for a local maximum
or minimum, we often use the second derivative. We look for critical
points x0—that is, points x0for which f/prime(x0)=0, and at each such point we
check the sign of the second derivative f/prime/prime(x0).I ff/prime/prime(x0)<0,f(x0) is a lo-
cal maximum of f;i ff/prime/prime(x0)>0,f(x0) is a local minimum of f;i ff/prime/prime(x0)=0,
the test fails.
This chapter extends these methods to real-valued functions of sev-
eral variables. We begin in Section 3.1 with a discussion of iterated andhigher-order partial derivatives, and in Section 3.2 we discuss the multi-variable form of Taylor's theorem; this is then used in Section 3.3 to derivetests for maxima, minima, and saddle points. As with functions of onevariable, such methods help us to visualize the shape of a graph.
In Section 3.4, we study the problem of maximizing a real-valued func-
tion subject to supplementary conditions, also referred to as constraints.For example, we might wish to maximize f(x,y,z) among those ( x,y,z)
constrained to lie on the unit sphere, x
2+y2+z2=1. Section 3.5 discusses
a technical theorem (the implicit function theorem) useful for studyingconstraints. It will also be useful later in our study of surfaces.
149

<<<PAGE 177>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 150
150 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
3.1Iterated Partial Derivatives
The preceding chapter developed considerable information concerning the derivative
of a map and investigated the geometry associated with the derivative of real-valuedfunctions by making use of the gradient. In this section, we proceed to study higher-order derivatives, with the goal of proving the equality of the “mixed second partialderivatives” of a function. We begin by deﬁning the necessary terms.
Letf:R
3→Rbe of class C1. Recall that this means that ∂f/∂x,∂f/∂y, and∂f/∂z
exist and are continuous. If these derivatives, in turn, have continuous partial derivatives,we say that fis of class C
2,o ri stwice continuously differentiable. Likewise, if we say
fis of class C3, we mean fhas continuous iterated partial derivatives of third order,
and so on. Here are a few examples of how second-order derivatives are written:
∂2f
∂x2=∂
∂x/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x/parenrightbigg
,∂2f
∂x∂y=∂
∂x/parenleftbigg∂f
∂y/parenrightbigg
,∂2f
∂z∂y=∂
∂z/parenleftbigg∂f
∂y/parenrightbigg
, etc.
The process can, of course, be repeated for third-order derivatives, and so on. If fis
a function of only xandyand∂f/∂x,∂f/∂yare continuously differentiable, then by
taking second partial derivatives, we get the four functions
∂2f
∂x2,∂2f
∂y2,∂2f
∂x∂y, and∂2f
∂y∂x.
All of these are called iterated partial derivatives, while ∂2f/∂x∂yand∂2f/∂y∂xare
called mixed partial derivatives.
example 1 Find all second partial derivatives of f(x,y)=xy+(x+2y)2.
solution The ﬁrst partials are
∂f
∂x=y+2(x+2y),∂f
∂y=x+4(x+2y).
Now differentiate each of these expressions with respect to xandy:
∂2f
∂x2=2,∂2f
∂y2=8
∂2f
∂x∂y=5,∂2f
∂y∂x=5. ▲
example 2 Find all second partial derivatives of f(x,y)=sinxsin2y.
solution We proceed just as in Example 1:
∂f
∂x=cosxsin2y,∂f
∂y=2 sin xsinycosy=sinxsin 2 y;
∂2f
∂x2−=− sinxsin2y,∂2f
∂y2=2 sin xcos 2 y;
∂2f
∂x∂y=cosxsin 2 y,∂2f
∂y∂x=2 cos xsinycosy=cosxsin 2 y. ▲

<<<PAGE 178>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 151
3.1 Iterated Partial Derivatives 151
example 3 Letf(x,y,z)=exy+zcosx.Then
∂f
∂x=yexy−zsinx,∂f
∂y=xexy,∂f
∂z=cosx,
∂2f
∂z∂x=− sinx,∂2f
∂x∂z=− sinx, etc.
▲
The Mixed Partials Are Equal
In all these examples note that the pairs of mixed partial derivatives, such as ∂2f/∂x∂y
and∂2f/∂y∂x,o r∂2f/∂z∂xand∂2f/∂x∂z, are equal. It is a basic and perhaps sur-
prising fact that this is always the case for C2functions. We shall prove this in the next
theorem for functions f(x,y) of two variables, but the proof can be readily extended
to functions of nvariables.
Theorem 1 Equality of Mixed Partials Iff(x,y) is of class C2(is twice
continuously differentiable), then the mixed partial derivatives are equal; that is,
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x.
proof Consider the following expression (see Figure 3.1.1):
S(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)=f(x0+/Delta1x,y0+/Delta1y)−f(x0+/Delta1x,y0)
−f(x0,y0+/Delta1y)+f(x0,y0).
Holding y0and/Delta1yﬁxed, deﬁne
g(x)=f(x,y0+/Delta1y)−f(x,y0),
so that S(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)=g(x0+/Delta1x)−g(x0),which expresses S as a difference of differ-
ences. By the mean-value theorem for functions of one variable, g(x0+/Delta1x)−g(x0)
equals g/prime(¯x)/Delta1xfor some ¯xbetween x0andx0+/Delta1x. Hence,
S(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)=/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x(¯x,y0+/Delta1y)−∂f
∂x(¯x,y0)/bracketrightbigg
/Delta1x.
+− +
−(x , y  + Δy)00 (x  + Δx, y  + Δy)0 0
(x , y )00 (x  + Δx, y  ) 0 0
xy
A BC Dﬁgure 3.1.1 The algebra behind the
equality of mixed partials: writing the
difference of differences in twoways.

<<<PAGE 179>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 152
152 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Applying the mean-value theorem again, there is a ¯ybetween y0andy0+/Delta1ysuch that
S(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)=∂2f
∂y∂x(¯x,¯y)/Delta1x/Delta1y.
Because ∂2f/∂y∂xis continuous, it follows that
∂2f
∂y∂x(x0,y0)= limit
(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)→(0,0)1
/Delta1x/Delta1y[S(/Delta1x,/Delta1y)].
Noting that Sis symmetric in /Delta1xand/Delta1y, we show in a similar way that ∂2f/∂x∂yis
given by the same limit formula, which proves the result. ■
Historical NoteThe equality of mixed partial derivatives is one of the most important results of
multivariable calculus. It will reappear on several occasions later in the book,when we study vector identities.
In the next historical note, we will discuss the role of partial derivatives in the
formulation of many of the basic equations governing physical phenomena.One of the giants in this era was Leonhard Euler (1707--1783), who developed theequations of fluid mechanics that bear his name---the Euler equations. It was inconnection with the needs of this development that he discovered, around 1734,the equality of mixed partial derivatives. Euler was about 27 years old at the time.
In Exercise 17 we ask you to deduce from Theorem 1 that for a C3function of x,y,
andz,
∂3f
∂x∂y∂z=∂3f
∂z∂y∂x=∂3f
∂y∂z∂x, etc.
In other words, we can compute iterated partial derivatives in any order we please.
example 4 Verify the equality of the mixed second partial derivatives for the function
f(x,y)=xey+yx2.
solution Here
∂f
∂x=ey+2xy,∂f
∂y=xey+x2,
∂2f
∂y∂x=ey+2x,∂2f
∂x∂y=ey+2x,
and so we have
∂2f
∂y∂x=∂2f
∂x∂y.
▲
Sometimes the notation fx,fy,fzis used for the partial derivatives: fx=∂f/∂x, and
so on. With this notation, we write fxy=(fx)y, and so equality of the mixed partials is
denoted by fxy=fyx. Notice that fxy=∂2f/∂y∂x, so the order of xandyis reversed
in the two notations; fortunately, the equality of mixed partials makes this potential
ambiguity irrelevant. The following example illustrates this subscript notation.

<<<PAGE 180>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 153
3.1 Iterated Partial Derivatives 153
example 5 Let
z=f(x,y)=exsinxy
and write x=g(s,t),y=h(s,t) for certain functions gandh. Let
k(s,t)=f(g(s,t),h(s,t)).
Calculate kst.
solution By the chain rule,
ks=fxgs+fyhs=(exsinxy+yexcosxy)gs+(xexcosxy)hs.
Differentiating in tusing the product rules gives
kst=(fx)tgs+fx(gs)t+(fy)ths+fy(hs)t.
Applying the chain rule again to ( fx)tand ( fy)tgives
(fx)t=fxxgt+fxyhtand ( fy)t=fyxgt+fyyht,
and so kstbecomes
kst=(fxxgt+fxyht)gs+fxgst+(fyxgt+fyyht)hs+fyhst
=fxxgtgs+fxy(htgs+hsgt)+fyyhths+fxgst+fyhst.
Notice that this last formula is symmetric in ( s,t), verifying the equality kst=kts.
Computing fxx,fxy, and fyy,w eg e t
kst=(exsinxy+2yexcosxy−y2exsinxy)gtgs
+(xexcosxy+excosxy−xyexsinxy)(htgs+hsgt)
−(x2exsinxy)hths+(exsinxy+yexcosxy)gst+(xexcosxy)hst,
in which it is understood that x=g(s,t) and y=h(s,t). ▲
Some Partial Differential Equations
Philosophy [nature] is written in that great book which ever is before our eyes---I mean the
universe---but we cannot understand it if we do not ﬁrst learn the language and grasp thesymbols in which it is written. The book is written in mathematical language, and thesymbols are triangles, circles and other geometrical ﬁgures, without whose help it isimpossible to comprehend a single word of it; without which one wanders in vain througha dark labyrinth. ---Galileo
 Historical Note
This quotation illustrates the Greek belief, again popular in the time of Galileo,
that much of nature could be described using mathematics. In the latter part of
the seventeenth century this thinking was dramatically reinforced when Newtonused his law of gravitation to derive Kepler's three laws of celestial motion (seeSection 4.1) to explain the tides, and to show that the earth was flattened at thepoles. The impact of this philosophy on mathematics was substantial, and manymathematicians sought to “mathematize ” nature. The extent to which

<<<PAGE 181>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 154
154 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
mathematics pervades the physical sciences today (and, to an increasing
amount, economics and the social and life sciences) is testament to the successof these endeavors. Correspondingly, the attempts to mathematize nature haveoften led to new mathematical discoveries.
Many of the laws of nature were described in terms of either ordinary
differential equations (ODEs, equations involving the derivatives of functions ofone variable alone, such as the laws of planetary motion) or partial differentialequations (PDEs), that is, equations involving partial derivatives of functions. Togive you some historical perspective and offer motivation for studying partialderivatives, we present a brief description of three of the most famous partialdifferential equations: the heat equation, the potential equation (or Laplace’sequation), and the wave equation. (Further information on some PDEs is given inSection 8.5.)
THE HEAT EQUATION. In the early part of the nineteenth century the French
mathematician Joseph Fourier (1768--1830) took up the study of heat. Heat flowhad obvious applications to both industrial and scientific problems: A betterunderstanding of it would, for example, make possible more efficient smeltingof metals and would enable scientists to determine the temperature of a bodygiven the temperature at its boundary, and to approximate the temperature ofthe earth’s interior.
Let a homogeneous body
B⊂R3(Figure 3.1.2) be represented by some
region in 3-space. Let T(x,y,z,t) denote the temperature of the body at the point
(x,y,z) at time t. Fourier proved, on the basis of physical principles (described in
Section 8.5), that Tmust satisfy the partial differential equation called the heat
equation ,
k/parenleftbigg
∂2T
∂x2+∂2T
∂y2+∂2T
∂z2/parenrightbigg
=∂T
∂t, (1)
where kis a constant whose value depends on the conductivity of the material
comprising the body.
Fourier used this equation to solve problems in heat conduction. In fact, his
investigations into the solutions of equation (1) led him to the discovery of Fourier
series .
z
y
x(x, y, z)B
ﬁgure 3.1.2 A homogeneous body in space.

<<<PAGE 182>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 155
3.1 Iterated Partial Derivatives 155
THE POTENTIAL EQUATION. Consider the gravitational potential V(often called
Newton’s potential) of a mass mat a point ( x,y,z) caused by a point mass M
situated at the origin. This potential is given by V=−GmM /r, where
r=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2. The potential Vsatisfies the equation
∂2V
∂x2+∂2V
∂y2+∂2V
∂z2=0 (2)
everywhere except at the origin, as we will check in the next chapter (see also
Exercise 25). This equation is known as Laplace’s equation. Pierre-Simon de
Laplace (1749--1827) had worked on the gravitational attraction of nonpoint
masses and was the first to consider equation (2) with regard to gravitationalattraction. He gave arguments (later shown to be incorrect) that equation (2)held for any body and any point whether inside or outside that body. However,Laplace was not the first person to write down equation (2). The potentialequation appeared for the first time in one of Euler’s major papers in 1752,“Principles of the Motions of Fluids,” in which he derived the potential equationwith regard to the motion of (incompressible) fluids. Euler remarked that he hadno idea how to solve equation (2). Poisson later showed that if ( x,y,z) lies inside
an attracting body, then Vsatisfies the equation
∂
2V
∂x2+∂2V
∂y2+∂2V
∂z2=−4πρ, (3)
where ρis the mass density of the attracting body. Equation (3) is now called
Poisson’s equation. Poisson was also the first to point out the importance
of this equation for problems involving electric fields. Notice that if thetemperature Tis constant in time, then the heat equation (1) reduces to
Laplace’s equation (2).
Laplace’s and Poisson’s equations are fundamental to many fields besides
fluid mechanics, gravitational fields, and electrostatic fields. For example, theyare useful for studying soap films and liquid crystals (see The Parsimonious
Universe: Shape and Form in the Natural World by S. Hildebrandt and A. Tromba,
Springer-Verlag, New York/Berlin, 1995).
THE WAVE EQUATION. The linear wave equation in space has the form
∂2f
∂x2+∂2f
∂y2+∂2f
∂z2=c2∂2f
∂t2. (4)
The one-dimensional wave equation
∂2f
∂x2=c2∂2f
∂t2(4/prime)
was derived in about 1727 by Johann II Bernoulli and several years later by JeanLe Rond d’Alembert in the study of how to determine the motion of a vibratingstring (such as a violin string). Equation (4) became useful in the study of bothvibrating bodies and elasticity. As we shall see when we consider Maxwell’sequations for electromagnetism in Section 8.5, this equation also arises in thestudy of the propagation of electromagnetic radiation and sound waves.

<<<PAGE 183>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 156
156 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 6 As we have pointed out, the heat equation, originating around 1800, is one of the
important and classic partial differential equations. It describes the conduction of heat
in a solid body. For example, understanding the dissipation of heat is important for
industry, as well as for scientists understanding heat stresses on a capsule reentering the
earth’ s atmosphere.
Consider a thin rod of length l(Figure 3.1.3).
We now show that
u(x,t)=1
t1/2e−x2/4t
is a solution of the heat equation
∂u
∂t=∂2u
∂x2.
solution By the chain rule
∂u
∂t=−1
2t3/2e−x2/4t+1
t1/2e−x2/4td
dt/parenleftBig−x2
4t/parenrightBig
=−1
2t3/2e−x2/4t+1
t1/2·x2
4t2e−x2/4t
=1
2t3/2/parenleftbigg
−1+x2
2t/parenrightbigg
e−x2/4t,
whereas
∂u
∂x=−x
2t3/2e−x2/4t
∂2u
∂x2=−1
2t3/2e−x2/4t+x2
4te−x2/4t
=∂u
∂t.
This solution is called a fundamental solution to the heat equation. ▲1
ﬁgure 3.1.3 A thin rod.
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 6, compute the second partial derivatives ∂2f/∂x2,∂2f/∂x∂y,∂2f/∂y∂x,∂2f/∂y2for each of the
following functions. V erify Theorem 1 in each case.
1.f(x,y)=2xy/(x2+y2)2, on the region where
(x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
2.f(x,y,z)=ez+(1/x)+xe−y, on the region where
x/negationslash=0
3.f(x,y)=cos ( xy2)
4.f(x,y)=e−xy2+y3x4
5.f(x,y)=1/(cos2x+e−y)6.f(x,y)=log (x−y)
7.Find all second partial derivatives of the following
functions at the point x0.
(a) f(x,y)=sin(xy);x0=(π,1 )
(b) f(x,y)=xy8+x2+y4;x0=(2,−1)
(c) f(x,y,z)=exyz;x0=( 0 ,0 ,0 )
8.Find all second partial derivatives of
f(x,y)=sec3(4y−3x).

<<<PAGE 184>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 157
3.1 Iterated Partial Derivatives 157
9.Can there exist a C2function f(x,y) with
fx=2x−5yand fy=4x+y?
10. The heat conduction equation is ut=kuxx. Determine
whether u(x,t)=e−ktsin(x) is a solution.
11. Show that the following functions satisfy the
one-dimensional wave equation
∂2f
∂x2=1
c2∂2f
∂t2.
(a) f(x,t)=sin(x−ct)
(b) f(x,t)=sin(x) sin( ct)
(c) f(x,t)=(x−ct)6+(x+ct)6
12. (a) Show that T(x,t)=e−ktcosxsatisﬁes the
one-dimensional heat equation
k∂2T
∂x2=∂T
∂t.
(b) Show that T(x,y,t)=e−kt(cos x+cosy) satisﬁes
the two-dimensional heat equation
k/parenleftBig∂2T
∂x2+∂2T
∂y2/parenrightBig
=∂T
∂t.
(c) Show that T(x,y,z,t)=e−kt(cos x+
cosy+cosz) satisﬁes the three-dimensional heat
equation
k/parenleftBig∂2T
∂x2+∂2T
∂y2+∂2T
∂z2/parenrightBig
=∂T
∂t.
13. Find∂2z/∂x2,∂2z/∂x∂y,∂2z/∂y∂x, and∂2z/∂y2for
(a)z=3x2+2y2
(b)z=(2x2+7x2y)/3xy, on the region where x/negationslash=0
andy/negationslash=0
14. Find all the second partial derivatives of
(a)z=sin (x2−3xy)
(b)z=x2y2e2xy
15. Find fxy,fyz,fzx, and fxyzfor
f(x,y,z)=x2y+xy2+yz2.
16. Letz=x4y3−x8+y4.
(a) Compute ∂3z/∂y∂x∂x,∂3z/∂x∂y∂x, and
∂3z/∂x∂x∂y(also denoted ∂3z/∂x2∂y).
(b) Compute ∂3z/∂x∂y∂y,∂3z/∂y∂x∂y, and
∂3z/∂y∂y∂x(also denoted ∂3z/∂y2∂x).
17. Use Theorem 1 to show that if f(x,y,z) is of class C3,
then
∂3f
∂x∂y∂z=∂3f
∂y∂z∂x.18. Verify that
∂3f
∂x∂y∂z=∂3f
∂z∂y∂x
forf(x,y,z)=zexy+yz3x2.
19. Verify that fxzw=fzwxfor
f(x,y,z,w)=exyzsin (xw).
20. Iff(x,y,z,w) is of class C3, show that fxzw=fzwx.
21. Evaluate all ﬁrst and second partial derivatives of thefollowing functions:
(a) f(x,y)=xarctan ( x/y)
(b) f(x,y)=cos/radicalbig
x2+y2
(c) f(x,y)=exp (−x2−y2)
22. Letw=f(x,y) be a function of two variables and let
x=u+v,y=u−v. Show that
∂2w
∂u∂v=∂2w
∂x2−∂2w
∂y2.
23. Letf:R2→Rbe a C2function and let c(t)b ea C2
curve in R2. Write a formula for the second derivative
(d2/dt2)((f◦c)(t)) using the chain rule twice.
24. Letf(x,y,z)=exztan ( yz) and let x=g(s,t),
y=h(s,t),z=k(s,t), and deﬁne the function
m(s,t)=f(g(s,t),h(s,t),k(s,t)). Find a formula for
mstusing the chain rule and verify that your answer is
symmetric in sandt.
25. A function u=f(x,y) with continuous second partial
derivatives satisfying Laplace’ s equation
∂2u
∂x2+∂2u
∂y2=0
is called a harmonic function. Show that the function
u(x,y)=x3−3xy2is harmonic.
26. Which of the following functions are harmonic? (SeeExercise 25.)
(a) f(x,y)=x
2−y2
(b) f(x,y)=x2+y2
(c) f(x,y)=xy
(d) f(x,y)=y3+3x2y
(e) f(x,y)=sinxcosh y
(f)f(x,y)=exsiny

<<<PAGE 185>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 14:23 158
158 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
27. (a) Is the function f(x,y,z)=x2−2y2+z2
harmonic? What about f(x,y,z)=x2+y2−z2?
(b) Laplace’ s equation for functions of nvariables is
∂2f
∂x2
1+∂2f
∂x2
2+···+∂2f
∂x2n=0.
Find an example of a function of nvariables that is
harmonic, and show that your example is harmonic.
28. Show that the following functions are harmonic:
(a) f(x,y)=arctany
x
(b) f(x,y)=log(x2+y2)
29. LetfandgbeC2functions of one variable. Set
φ=f(x−t)+g(x+t).
(a) Prove that φsatisﬁes the wave equation:
∂2φ/∂t2=∂2φ/∂x2.
(b) Sketch the graph of φagainst tandxiff(x)=x2
andg(x)=0.
30. (a) Show that function g(x,t)=2+e−tsinxsatisﬁes
the heat equation: gt=gxx. [Here g(x,t)
represents the temperature in a metal rod at position
xand time t.]
(b) Sketch the graph of gfort≥0. (H INT: Look at
sections by the planes t=0,t=1, and t=2.)
(c) What happens to g(x,t)a st→∞ ? Interpret this
limit in terms of the behavior of heat in the rod.31. Show that Newton’ s potential V=−GmM /rsatisﬁes
Laplace’ s equation
∂2V
∂x2+∂2V
∂y2+∂2V
∂z2=0 for ( x,y,z)/negationslash=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) .
32. Let
f(x,y)=/braceleftBigxy(x2−y2)/(x2+y2), ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
0, (x,y)=(0, 0)
(see Figure 3.1.4).
(a)If (x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0), calculate ∂f/∂xand∂f/∂y.
(b)Show that ( ∂f/∂x)(0, 0) =0=(∂f/∂y)(0, 0).
(c)Show that ( ∂2f/∂x∂y)(0, 0) =1,
(∂2f/∂y∂x)(0, 0) =−1.
(d)What went wrong? Why are the mixed partials not
equal?
0−2
−1
1
2−2
−1
01
2−2−1012
y axisx axis
ﬁgure 3.1.4 The graph of the function in Exercise 32.
3.2Taylor’s Theorem
When we introduced the derivative in Chapter 2, we saw that the linear approximation
of a function played an essential role for a geometric reason—ﬁnding the equation of a
tangent plane—as well as an analytic reason—ﬁnding approximate values of functions.Taylor’ s theorem deals with the important issue of ﬁnding quadratic and higher-order
approximations.
Taylor’ s theorem is a central tool for ﬁnding accurate numerical approximations of
functions, and as such plays an important role in many areas of applied and computationalmathematics. We shall use it in the next section to develop the second derivative test formaxima and minima of functions of several variables.
The strategy used to prove Taylor’ s theorem is to reduce it to the one-variable case by
probing a function of many variables along lines of the form l(t)=x
0+themanating
from a point x0and heading in the direction h. Thus, it will be useful for us to begin by
reviewing Taylor’ s theorem from one-variable calculus.
Single-Variable Taylor Theorem
When recalling a theorem from an earlier course, it is helpful to ask these basic questions:What is the main point of the theorem? What are the key ideas in the proof? Can Iunderstand the result better the second time around?

<<<PAGE 186>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 159
3.2 Taylor’s Theorem 159
The main point of the single-variable Taylor theorem is to ﬁnd approximations of a
function near a given point that are accurate to a higher order than the linear approxima-
tion. The key idea in the proof is to use the fundamental theorem of calculus, followed by
integration by parts. In fact, just by recalling these basic ideas, we can reconstruct the en-tire proof. Thinking in this way will help organize all the pieces that need to come togetherto develop a mastery of Taylor approximations of functions of one and several variables.
For a smooth function f:R→Rof one variable, Taylor’ s theorem asserts that:
f(x
0+h)=f(x0)+f/prime(x0)·h+f/prime/prime(x0)
2h2+···+f(k)(x0)
k!hk+Rk(x0,h), (1)
where
Rk(x0,h)=/integraldisplayx0+h
x0(x0+h−τ)k
k!fk+1(τ)dτ
is the remainder. For small h, this remainder is small to order kin the sense that
lim
h→0Rk(x0,h)
hk=0. (2)
In other words, Rk(x0,h) is small compared to the already small quantity hk.
The preceding is the formal statement of Taylor’ s theorem. What about the proof?
As promised, we begin with the fundamental theorem of calculus, written in the form:
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime(τ)dτ.
Next, we write dτ=−d(x0+h−τ) and integrate parts1to give:
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+f/prime(x0)h+/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime/prime(τ)(x0+h−τ)dτ,
which is the ﬁrst-order Taylor formula. Integrating by parts again:
/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime/prime(τ)(x0+h−τ)dτ
=−1
2/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime/prime(τ)d(x0+h−τ)2
=1
2f/prime/prime(x0)h2+1
2/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime/prime/prime(τ)(x0+h−τ)2dτ,
which, when substituted into the preceding formula, gives the second-order Taylor
formula:
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+f/prime(x0)h+1
2f/prime/prime(x0)h2+1
2/integraldisplayx0+h
x0f/prime/prime/prime(τ)(x0+h−τ)2dτ.
This is Taylor’ s theorem for k=2.
1Recall that integration by parts (the product rule for the derivative read backward) reads as:
/integraldisplayb
audv=uvb
a−/integraldisplayb
avdu.
Here we choose u=f/prime(τ) andv=x0+h−τ.

<<<PAGE 187>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 160
160 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Taylor’ s theorem for general kproceeds by repeated integration by parts. The state-
ment (2) that Rk(x0,h)/hk→0a s h→0 is seen as follows. For τin the interval
[x0,x0+h], we have |x0+h−τ|≤| h|, and fk+1(τ), being continuous, is bounded;
say,|fk+1(τ)|≤M. Then:
|Rk(x0,h)|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay
x0+h
x0(x0+h−τ)k
k!fk+1(τ)dτ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle≤|h|
k+1
k!M
and, in particular, |Rk(x0,h)/hk|≤| h|M/k!→0a sh→0.
Taylor’s Theorem for Many Variables
Our next goal in this section is to prove an analogous theorem that is valid for functions
of several variables. We already know a ﬁrst-order version; that is, when k=1. Indeed,
iff:Rn→Ris differentiable at x0and we deﬁne
R1(x0,h)=f(x0+h)−f(x0)−[Df(x0)](h),
so that
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+[Df(x0)](h)+R1(x0,h),
then by the deﬁnition of differentiability,
|R1(x0,h)|
/bardblh/bardbl→0a sh →0;
that is, R1(x0,h) vanishes to ﬁrst order at x0. In summary, we have:
Theorem 2 First-Order Taylor Formula Let f:U⊂Rn→Rbe differ-
entiable at x0∈U. Then
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+n/summationdisplay
i=1hi∂f
∂xi(x0)+R1(x0,h),
where R1(x0,h)//bardblh/bardbl→0a sh →0inRn.
The second-order version is as follows:
Theorem 3 Second-Order Taylor Formula Let f:U⊂Rn→Rhave
continuous partial derivatives of third order.2Then we may write
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+n/summationdisplay
i=1hi∂f
∂xi(x0)+1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1hihj∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)+R2(x0,h),
where R2(x0,h)//bardblh/bardbl2→0a sh →0and the second sum is over all i’ s and j’s
between 1 and n(so there are n2terms).
2For the statement of the theorem as given here, factually needs only to be of class C2, but for a
convenient form of the remainder we assume fis of class C3.

<<<PAGE 188>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 161
3.2 Taylor’s Theorem 161
Notice that this result can be written in matrix form as
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂f
∂x1,...,∂f
∂xn/bracketrightbigg⎡
⎢⎣h1
...
hn⎤
⎥⎦
+1
2[h1,...,hn]⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂
2f
∂x1∂x1∂2f
∂x1∂x2···∂2f
∂x1∂xn
∂2f
∂x2∂x1∂2f
∂x2∂x2···∂2f
∂x2∂xn
...
∂2f
∂xn∂x1∂2f
∂xn∂x2···∂2f
∂xn∂xn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣h
1
h2
...
hn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦,
+R
2(x0,h),
where the derivatives of fare evaluated at x0.
In the course of the proof of the Theorem 3, we shall obtain a useful explicit formula
for the remainder, as in the single-variable theorem.
proof of theorem 3 Letg(t)=f(x0+th) with x0andhﬁxed, which is a C3
function of t. Now apply the single-variable Taylor theorem (1) to g, with k=2, to
obtain
g(1)=g(0)+g/prime(0)+g/prime/prime(0)
2!+R2,
where
R2=/integraldisplay1
0(t−1)2
2!g/prime/prime/prime(t)dt.⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
By the chain rule,
g
/prime(t)=n/summationdisplay
i=1∂f
∂xi(x0+th)hi; g/prime/prime(t)=n/summationdisplay
i,j=1∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0+th)hihj,
and
g/prime/prime/prime(t)=n/summationdisplay
i,j,k=1∂3f
∂xi∂xj∂xk(x0+th)hihjhk.
Writing R2=R2(x0,h), we have thus proved:
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+n/summationdisplay
i=1hi∂f
∂xi(x0)+1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1hihj∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)+R2(x0,h),
where
R2(x0,h)=n/summationdisplay
i,j,k=1/integraldisplay1
0(t−1)2
2∂3f
∂xi∂xj∂xk(x0+th)hihjhkdt.⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭(3)

<<<PAGE 189>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 162
162 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
The integrand is a continuous function of tand is therefore bounded by a positive
constant Con a small neighborhood of x0(because it has to be close to its value at x0).
Also note that |hi|≤/bardbl h/bardbl, for /bardblh/bardblsmall, and so
|R2(x0,h)|≤/bardbl h/bardbl3C. (4)
In particular,
|R2(x0,h)|
/bardblh/bardbl2≤/bardblh/bardblC→0a sh →0,
as required by the theorem.
The proof of Theorem 2 follows analogously from the Taylor formula (1) with k=1.
A similar argument for R1shows that |R1(x0,h)|//bardblh/bardbl→0a sh →0, although this
also follows directly from the deﬁnition of differentiability. ■
Forms of the Remainder In Theorem 2,
R1(x0,h)=n/summationdisplay
i,j=1/integraldisplay1
0(1−t)∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0+th)hihjdt=n/summationdisplay
i,j=11
2∂2f
∂xi∂xj(cij)hihj,
(5)
where cijlies somewhere on the line joining x0tox0+h.
In Theorem 3,
R2(x0,h)=n/summationdisplay
i,j,k=1/integraldisplay1
0(t−1)2
2∂3f
∂xi∂xj∂xk(x0+th)hihjhkdt
=n/summationdisplay
i,j,k=11
3!∂3f
∂xi∂xj∂xk(cijk)hihjhk,( 5/prime)
where cijklies somewhere on the line joining x0tox0+h.
The formulas involving cijandcijk(called Lagrange’ s form of the remainder) are
obtained by making use of the second mean-value theorem for integrals. This states that
/integraldisplayb
ah(t)g(t)dt=h(c)/integraldisplayb
ag(t)dt,
provided h and g are continuous and g ≥0o n[ a,b];here c is some number between
aandb.3This is applied in formula (4) for the explicit form of the remainder with
h(t)=(∂2f/∂xi∂xj)(x0+th) and g(t)=1−t.
3Proof Ifg=0, the result is clear, so we can suppose g/negationslash=0; thus, we can assume/integraltextb
ag(t)dt>0.
LetMandmbe the maximum and minimum values of h, achieved at tMandtm, respectively. Because
g(t)≥0,
m/integraldisplayb
ag(t)dt≤/integraldisplayb
ah(t)g(t)dt≤M/integraldisplayb
ag(t)dt.
Thus,/parenleftbig/integraltextb
ah(t)g(t)dt/parenrightbig/slashbig/parenleftbig/integraltextb
ag(t)dt/parenrightbig
lies between m=h(tm) and M=h(tM) and therefore, by the
intermediate-value theorem, equals h(c) for some intermediate c.■

<<<PAGE 190>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 163
3.2 Taylor’s Theorem 163
The third-order Taylor formula is
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+n/summationdisplay
i=1hi∂f
∂xi(x0)+1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1hihj∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)
+1
3!n/summationdisplay
i,j,k=1hihjhk∂3f
∂xi∂xj∂xk(x0)+R3(x0,h),
where R3(x0,h)//bardblh/bardbl3→0a sh →0, and so on. The general formula can be proved
by induction, using the method of proof already given.
example 1 Compute the second-order Taylor formula for the function f(x,y)=sin (x+2y), about
the point x0=(0, 0).
solution Notice that
f(0, 0) =0,
∂f
∂x(0, 0) =cos (0 +2·0)=1,∂f
∂y(0, 0) =2 cos (0 +2·0)=2,
∂2f
∂x2(0, 0) =0,∂2f
∂y2(0, 0) =0,∂2f
∂x∂y(0, 0) =0.
Thus,
f(h)=f(h1,h2)=h1+2h2+R2(0,h),
where
R2(0,h)
/bardblh/bardbl2→0a sh →0.▲
example 2 Compute the second-order Taylor formula for f(x,y)=excosyabout the point x0=0,
y0=0.
solution Here
f(0, 0) =1,∂f
∂x(0, 0) =1,∂f
∂y(0, 0) =0,
∂2f
∂x2(0, 0) =1,∂2f
∂y2(0, 0) =−1,∂2f
∂x∂y(0, 0) =0,
and so
f(h)=f(h1,h2)=1+h1+1
2h2
1−1
2h22+R2(0,h),
where
R2(0,h)
/bardblh/bardbl2→0a sh →0.
▲

<<<PAGE 191>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 164
164 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
In the case of functions of one variable, we can expand f(x) in an inﬁnite power
series, called the Taylor series:
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+f/prime(x0)h+f/prime/prime(x0)h2
2+···+f(k)(x0)hk
k!+···,
provided we can show that Rk(x0,h)→0a sk →∞ . Similarly, for functions of several
variables, the preceding terms are replaced by the corresponding ones involving partial
derivatives, as we have seen in Theorem 3. Again, we can represent such a function byits Taylor series provided we can show that R
k→0a sk →∞ . This point is examined
further in Exercise 13.
The ﬁrst-, second-, and third-order Taylor polynomials are also called the ﬁrst-,
second-, and third-order Taylor approximations to f, since it is presumed that the
remainder is small and gets smaller as the order of the Taylor polynomial increases.
example 3 Find the ﬁrst- and second-order Taylor approximations to f(x,y)=sin(xy) at the point
(x0,y0)=(1,π/2).
solution Here
f(x0,y0)=sin (x0y0)=sin (π/2)=1
fx(x0,y0)=y0cos ( x0y0)=π
2cos (π/2)=0
fy(x0,y0)=x0cos ( x0y0)=cos (π/2)=0
fxx(x0,y0)=− y2
0sin (x0y0)=−π2
4sin (π/2)=−π2
4
fxy(x0,y0)=cos ( x0y0)−x0y0sin (x0y0)=−π
2sin (π/2)=−π
2
fyy(x0,y0)=− x2
0sin (x0y0)=−sin (π/2)=−1.
Thus, the linear (ﬁrst-order) approximation is
l(x,y)=f(x0,y0)+fx(x0,y0)(x−x0)+fy(x0,y0)(y−y0)
=1+0+0=1,
and the second-order (or quadratic) approximation is
g(x,y)=1+0+0+1
2/parenleftbigg
−π2
4/parenrightbigg
(x−1)2+/parenleftbigg
−π
2/parenrightbigg
(x−1)/parenleftbigg
y−π
2/parenrightbigg
+1
2(−1)/parenleftbigg
y−π
2/parenrightbigg2
=1−π2
8(x−1)2−π
2(x−1)/parenleftbigg
y−π
2/parenrightbigg
−1
2/parenleftbigg
y−π
2/parenrightbigg2
.
See Figure 3.2.1. ▲
example 4 Find linear and quadratic approximations to the expression (3.98 −1)2/(5.97−3)2.
Compare with the exact value.

<<<PAGE 192>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 165
3.2 Taylor’s Theorem 165
ﬁgure 3.2.1 The linear and
quadratic approximations to
z=sin(xy)near (1,π/ 2). 31
0
1
2
3012−1−0.500.5l:
xy g: z = quadraticz = 1
solution Letf(x,y)=(x−1)2/(y−3)2. The desired expression is close to f(4, 6) =1. To
ﬁnd the approximations, we differentiate:
fx=2(x−1)
(y−3)2, fy=−2(x−1)2
(y−3)3
fxy=fyx=−4(x−1)
(y−3)3, fxx=2
(y−3)2, fyy=6(x−1)2
(y−3)4.
At the point of approximation, we have
fx(4, 6) =2
3, fy=−2
3, fxy=fyx=−4
9, fxx=2
9, fyy=2
3.
The linear approximation is then
1+2
3(−0.02) −2
3(−0.03) =1.00666.
The quadratic approximation is
1+2
3(−0.02) −2
3(−0.03) +2
9(−0.02)2
2−4
9(−0.02)( −0.03) +2
3(−0.03)2
2
=1.00674.
The “exact” value using a calculator is 1.00675. ▲
exercises
1.Letf(x,z)=ex+y.
(a)Find the ﬁrst-order Taylor formula for fat (0, 0).
(b) Find the second-order Taylor formula for fat (0, 0).
2.Suppose L:R2→Ris linear, so that Lhas the form
L(x,y)=ax+by.(a)Find the ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation for L.
(b)Find the second-order Taylor approximation
forL.
(c) What will higher-order approximations look
like?

<<<PAGE 193>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 166
166 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
In each of Exercises 3 to 8, determine the second-order Taylor formula for the given function about the given point (x0,y0).
3.f(x,y)=(x+y)2, where x0=0,y0=0
4.f(x,y)=1/(x2+y2+1), where x0=0,y0=0
5.f(x,y)=ex+y, where x0=0,y0=0
6.f(x,y)=e−x2−y2cos ( xy), where x0=0,y0=0
7.f(x,y)=sin (xy)+cos ( xy), where x0=0,y0=0
8.f(x,y)=e(x−1)2cosy, where x0=1,y0=0
9.Calculate the second-order Taylor approximation to
f(x,y)=cosxsinyat the point ( π,π/2).
10. Letf(x,y)=xcos(πy)−ysin(πx). Find the
second-order Taylor approximation for fat the point
(1, 2).
11. Letg(x,y)=sin(xy)−3x2logy+1. Find the
degree 2 polynomial which best approximates gnear the
point ( π/2, 1).
12. For each of the functions in Exercises 3 to 7, use the
second-order Taylor formula to approximatef(−1,−1). Compare your approximation to the exact
value using a calculator.
13. (Challenging) A function f:R→Ris called an
analytic function provided
f(x+h)=f(x)+f/prime(x)h+···+f(k)(x)
k!hk+···
[i.e., the series on the right-hand side converges andequals f(x+h)].
(a) Suppose fsatisﬁes the following condition: On any
closed interval [ a,b], there is a constant Msuch
that for all k=1, 2, 3, ...,|f
(k)(x)|≤Mkfor all
x∈[a,b]. Prove that fis analytic.
(b)Letf(x)=/braceleftBige−1/xx>0
0 x≤0.
Show that fis aC∞function, but fis not analytic.
(c) Give a deﬁnition of analytic functions from Rnto
R. Generalize the proof of part (a) to this class offunctions.
(d) Develop f(x,y)=e
x+yin a power series about
x0=0,y0=0.
3.3Extrema of Real-Valued Functions
Historical NoteAs we saw in the book’s Historical Introduction, the early Greeks sought to
mathematize nature and to find, as in the geometric Ptolemaic model ofplanetary motion, mathematical laws governing the universe. With the revival ofGreek learning during the Renaissance, this point of view again took hold andthe search for these laws recommenced. In particular, the question was raised asto whether there was one law, one mathematical principle that governed and
superseded all others, a principle that the Creator used in His Grand Design ofthe Universe.
MAUPERTUIS’ PRINCIPLE. In 1744, the French scientist Pierre-Louis de Maupertuis
(see Figure 3.3.1) put forth his grand scheme of the world. The “metaphysicalprinciple” of Maupertuis is the assumption that nature always operates with thegreatest possible economy. In short, physical laws are a consequence of aprinciple of “economy of means”; nature always acts in such a way as tominimize some quantity that Maupertuis called the action . Action was nothing
more than the expenditure of energy over time, or energy ×time. In
applications, the type of energy changes with each case. For example, physicalsystems often try to “rearrange themselves” to have a minimum energy---such asa ball rolling from a mountain peak to a valley, or the primordial irregular earth

<<<PAGE 194>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 167
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 167
ﬁgure 3.3.1 Pierre-Louis de Maupertuis (1698--1759).
assuming a more nearly spherical shape. As another example, the spherical
shape of soap bubbles is connected with the fact that spheres are the surfaces ofleast area containing a fixed volume.
We state Maupertuis’ principle formally as: Nature always minimizes action.
Maupertuis saw in this principle an expression of the wisdom of the SupremeBeing, of God, according to which everything in nature is performed in the mosteconomical way. He wrote:
What satisfaction for the human spirit that, in contemplating these laws
which contain the principle of motion and of rest for all bodies in theuniverse, he finds the proof of existence of Him who governs the world.
Maupertuis indeed believed that he had discovered God’s fundamental law, the
very secret of Creation itself, but he was actually not the first person to pose thisprinciple.
In 1707, Leibniz wrote down the principle of least action in a letter to Johann
Bernoulli, which became lost until 1913, when it was discovered in Germany’sGotha library. For Leibniz, this principle was a natural outgrowth of his greatphilosophical treatise The Theodicy, in which he argues that God may indeed
think of all possible worlds, but would want to create only the best among them;and hence our world is necessarily the best of all possible worlds .
Action, as defined by Leibniz, was motivated by the following reasoning, used
in his letter. Think of a hiker walking along a road, and consider how to describehis action. If he travels 2 kilometers in 1 hour, you would say that he has carriedout twice as much action as he would if he traveled 2 kilometers in 2 hours.However, you w ould also say that he carries out twice as much action in traveling
2 kilometers in 2 hours as he would in traveling 1 kilometer in 1 hour. Altogetherthen, our hiker, by walking 2 kilometers in 1 hour, carries out 4times as much
action as he would in traveling 1 kilometer in 1 hour.

<<<PAGE 195>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 168
168 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Using this intuitive idea, Maupertuis defined action as the product of distance,
velocity, and mass:
Action =Mass ×Distance ×Velocity.
Mass is included in this definition to account for the hiker’s backpack. Moreover,
according to Leibniz, the kinetic energy Eis given by the formula:
E=1
2×Mass ×(Velocity)2.
So action has the same physical dimension as
Energy ×Time,
because velocity is distance divided by time.
In the 250 years after Maupertuis formulated his principle, this principle of least
action has been found to be a “theoretical basis” for Newton’s law of gravity,
Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetism, Schrodinger’s equation of quantummechanics, and Einstein’s field equation in general relativity.
There is much more to the story of the least-action principle, which we will
revisit in Section 4.1 and in the Internet supplement.
Maxima and Minima for Functions of n-Variables
As the previous remarks show, for Leibniz, Euler, and Maupertuis, and for much of
modern science as well, all in nature is a consequence of some maximum or minimumprinciple. To make such grand schemes—as well as some that are more down to earth—effective, we must ﬁrst learn the techniques of how to ﬁnd maxima and minima offunctions of nvariables.
Extreme Points
Among the most basic geometric features of the graph of a function are its extremepoints, at which the function attains its greatest and least values. In this section, wederive a method for determining these points. In fact, the method locates local extremaas well. These are points at which the function attains a maximum or minimum valuerelative only to nearby points. Let us begin by deﬁning our terms.
Deﬁnition Iff:U⊂Rn→Ris a given scalar function, a point x0∈Uis
called a local minimum offif there is a neighborhood Vofx0such that for all
points xinV,f(x)≥f(x0). (See Figure 3.3.2.) Similarly, x0∈Uis alocal
maximum if there is a neighborhood Vofx0such that f(x)≤f(x0) for all x∈V.
The point x0∈Uis said to be a local,o rrelative, extremum if it is either a local
minimum or a local maximum. A point x0is acritical point offif either fis
not differentiable at x0,o ri fi ti s , Df(x0)=0. A critical point that is not a local
extremum is called a saddle point.4
4The term “saddle point” is sometimes not used this generally; we shall discuss saddle points further
in the subsequent development.

<<<PAGE 196>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 169
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 169
ﬁgure 3.3.2 (a) Local minimum
and (b) local maximum points
for a function of two variables.
yxz
x0
G
raph o
f
f
Local minimum
(a)yxz
x0
G
raph o
f
f
Local  maximum
(b)
First-Derivative Test for Local Extrema
The location of extrema is based on the following fact, which should be familiar from
one-variable calculus (the case n=1):Every extremum is a critical point .
Theorem 4 First-Derivative Test for Local Extrema IfU⊂Rnis open,
the function f:U⊂Rn→Ris differentiable, and x0∈Uis a local extremum,
then Df(x0)=0; that is, x0is a critical point of f.
proof Suppose that fachieves a local maximum at x0. Then for any h∈Rn,
the function g(t)=f(x0+th) has a local maximum at t=0. Thus, from one-
variable calculus g/prime(0)=0.5On the other hand, by the chain rule,
g/prime(0)=[Df(x0)]h.
Thus, [ Df(x0)]h=0 for every h, and so Df(x0)=0. The case in which fachieves a
local minimum at x0is entirely analogous. ■
If we remember that Df(x0)=0means that all the components of Df(x0) are zero,
we can rephrase the result of Theorem 4: If x0is a local extremum, then
∂f
∂xi(x0)=0, i=1,...,n;
that is, each partial derivative is zero at x0. In other words, ∇f(x0)=0, where ∇fis
the gradient of f.
If we seek to ﬁnd the extrema or local extrema of a function, then Theorem 4 states that
we should look among the critical points. Sometimes these can be tested by inspection,
but usually we use tests (to be developed below) analogous to the second-derivative test
in one-variable calculus.
5Recall the proof from one-variable calculus: Because g(0) is a local maximum, g(t)≤g(0) for small
t>0, so g(t)−g(0)≤0, and hence g/prime(0)=limit t→0+(g(t)−g(0))/t≤0, where limit t→0+means
the limit as t→0,t>0. For small t<0, we similarly have g/prime(0)=limit t→0−(g(t)−g(0))/t≥0.
Therefore, g/prime(0)=0.

<<<PAGE 197>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 170
170 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 1 Find the maxima and minima of the function f:R2→R, deﬁned by f(x,y)=x2+y2.
(Ignore the fact that this example can be done by inspection.)
solution We ﬁrst identify the critical points of fby solving the two equations ∂f/∂x=0 and
∂f/∂y=0, for xandy. But
∂f
∂x=2x and∂f
∂y=2y,
so the only critical point is the origin (0, 0), where the value of the function is zero.
Because f(x,y)≥0, this point is a relative minimum—in fact, an absolute, or global,
minimum—of f. Because (0, 0) is the only critical point, there are no maxima. ▲
example 2 Consider the function f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2−y2. Ignoring for the moment that this
function has a saddle and no extrema, apply the method of Theorem 4 for the location
of extrema.
solution As in Example 1, we ﬁnd that fhas only one critical point, at the origin, and the value
offthere is zero. Examining values of fdirectly for points near the origin, we see
that f(x,0 )≥f(0, 0) and f(0,y)≤f(0, 0), with strict inequalities when x/negationslash=0 and
y/negationslash=0. Because xorycan be taken arbitrarily small, the origin cannot be either a relative
minimum or a relative maximum (so it is a saddle point). Therefore, this function can
have no relative extrema (see Figure 3.3.3).
Gaph o
 ra ff
xz
y
ﬁgure 3.3.3 A function of two variables with
a saddle point. ▲
example 3 Find all the critical points of z=x2y+y2x.
solution Differentiating, we obtain
∂z
∂x=2xy+y2,∂z
∂y=2xy+x2.
Equating the partial derivatives to zero yields
2xy+y2=0, 2 xy+x2=0.

<<<PAGE 198>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 171
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 171
Subtracting, we obtain x2=y2. Thus, x=± y. Substituting x=+ yin the ﬁrst of the
two preceding equations, we ﬁnd that
2y2+y2=3y2=0,
so that y=0 and thus x=0. If x=− y, then
−2y2+y2=− y2=0,
soy=0 and therefore x=0. Hence, the only critical point is (0, 0). For x=y,
z=2x3, which is both positive and negative for xnear zero. Thus, (0, 0) is not a
relative extremum. ▲
example 4 Refer to Figure 3.3.4, a computer-drawn graph of the function z=2(x2+y2)e−x2−y2.
Where are the critical points?
−2
−1
0
1
2 210−1−2
y axisx axis
ﬁgure 3.3.4 The volcano: z=2(x2+y2) exp ( −x2−y2).
solution Because z=2(x2+y2)e−x2−y2,w eh a v e
∂z
∂x=4x(e−x2−y2)+2(x2+y2)e−x2−y2(−2x)
=e−x2−y2[4x−4x(x2+y2)]
=4x(e−x2−y2)(1−x2−y2)
and
∂z
∂y=4y(e−x2−y2)(1−x2−y2).
These both vanish when x=y=0o rw h e n x2+y2=1. This is consistent with the
ﬁgure: Points on the crater’s rim are maxima and the origin is a minimum. ▲
Second-Derivative Test for Local Extrema
The remainder of this section is devoted to deriving a criterion, depending on the second
derivative, for a critical point to be a relative extremum. In the special case n=1, our
criterion will reduce to the familiar condition from one-variable calculus: f/prime/prime(x0)>0

<<<PAGE 199>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 172
172 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
for a minimum and f/prime/prime(x0)<0 for a maximum. But in the general context, the second
derivative is a fairly complicated mathematical object. To state our criterion, we will
introduce a version of the second derivative called the Hessian, which in turn is relatedto quadratic functions. Quadratic functions are functions g:R
n→Rthat have the
form
g(h1,...,hn)=n/summationdisplay
i,j=1aijhihj
for an n×nmatrix [ aij]. In terms of matrix multiplication, we can write
g(h1,...,hn)=[h1···hn]⎡
⎢⎣a11a12··· a1n
.........
a
n1an2··· ann⎤
⎥⎦⎡
⎢⎢⎣h1
...
hn⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
For example, if n=3,
g(h1,h2,h3)=h2
1−2h1h2+h23=[h1h2h3]⎡
⎣1−10
−10 0
00 1⎤⎦⎡⎣h
1
h2
h3⎤⎦
is a quadratic function.
We can, if we wish, assume that [ a
ij] is symmetric; in fact, gis unchanged if we replace
[aij] by the symmetric matrix [b ij], where bij=1
2(aij+aji), because hihj=hjhiand
the sum is over all iandj. The quadratic nature of gis reﬂected in the identity
g(λh1,...,λhn)=λ2g(h1,...,hn),
which follows from the deﬁnition.
Now we are ready to deﬁne Hessian functions (named after Ludwig Otto Hesse, who
introduced them in 1844).
Deﬁnition Suppose that f:U⊂Rn→Rhas second-order continuous deriva-
tives ( ∂2f/∂xi∂xj)(x0), for i,j=1,...,n, at a point x0∈U. The Hessian of
fatx0is the quadratic function deﬁned by
Hf(x0)(h)=1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)hihj
=1
2[h1,...,hn]⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂
2f
∂x1∂x1···∂2f
∂x1∂xn...
∂2f
∂xn∂x1···∂2f
∂xn∂xn⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎡
⎢⎣h
1
...
hn⎤
⎥⎦.
Notice that, by equality of mixed partials, the second-derivative matrix is
symmetric.

<<<PAGE 200>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 173
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 173
This function is usually used at critical points x0∈U. In this case, Df(x0)=0,s o
the Taylor formula (see Theorem 2, Section 3.2) may be written in the form
f(x0+h)=f(x0)+Hf(x0)(h)+R2(x0,h).
Thus, at a critical point the Hessian equals the ﬁrst nonconstant term in the Taylor
series of f .
A quadratic function g:Rn→Ris called positive-deﬁnite ifg(h)≥0 for all h∈Rn
andg(h)=0 only for h=0. Similarly, gisnegative-deﬁnite ifg(h)≤0 and g(h)=0
forh=0only. Note that if n=1,Hf(x0)(h)=1
2f/prime/prime(x0)h2, which is positive-deﬁnite
if and only if f/prime/prime(x0)>0.
Theorem 5 Second-Derivative Test for Local Extrema Iff:U⊂Rn→
Ris of class C3,x0∈Uis a critical point of f, and the Hessian Hf(x0) is positive-
deﬁnite, then x0is a relative minimum of f. Similarly, if Hf(x0) is negative-
deﬁnite, then x0is a relative maximum.
Actually, we shall prove that the extrema given by this criterion are strict. A relative
maximum x0is said to be strict iff(x)<f(x0) for nearby x/negationslash=x0. A strict relative
minimum is deﬁned similarly. Also, the theorem is valid even if fis only C2,b u tw e
have assumed C3for simplicity.
The proof of Theorem 5 requires Taylor’ s theorem and the following result from
linear algebra.
Lemma 1IfB=[bij]i sa nn ×nreal matrix, and if the associated quadratic
function
H:Rn→R,(h1,...,hn)/mapsto→1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1bijhihj
is positive-deﬁnite, then there is a constant M>0 such that for all h∈Rn;
H(h)≥M/bardblh/bardbl2.
proof For/bardblh/bardbl=1, set g(h)=H(h). Then gis a continuous function of hfor
/bardblh/bardbl=1 and so achieves a minimum value, say M.6Because His quadratic, we have
H(h)=H/parenleftbiggh
/bardblh/bardbl/bardblh/bardbl/parenrightbigg
=H/parenleftbiggh
/bardblh/bardbl/parenrightbigg
/bardblh/bardbl2=g/parenleftbiggh
/bardblh/bardbl/parenrightbigg
/bardblh/bardbl2≥M/bardblh/bardbl2
for any h/negationslash=0. (The result is obviously valid if h=0.) ■
Note that the quadratic function associated with the symmetric matrix1
2(∂2f/∂xi∂xj)
is exactly the Hessian.
6Here we are using, without proof, a theorem analogous to a theorem in calculus that states that every
continuous function on an interval [ a,b] achieves a maximum and a minimum; see Theorem 7.

<<<PAGE 201>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 174
174 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
proof of theorem 5 Recall that if f:U⊂Rn→Ris of class C3andx0∈Uis a
critical point, Taylor’ s theorem may be expressed in the form
f(x0+h)−f(x0)=Hf(x0)(h)+R2(x0,h),
where ( R2(x0,h))//bardblh/bardbl2→0a sh →0.
Because Hf(x0) is positive-deﬁnite, Lemma 1 assures us of a constant M>0 such
that for all h∈Rn
Hf(x0)(h)≥M/bardblh/bardbl2.
Because R2(x0,h)//bardblh/bardbl2→0a sh →0, there is a δ>0 such that for 0 </bardblh/bardbl<δ
|R2(x0,h)|<M/bardblh/bardbl2.
Thus, 0 <Hf(x0)(h)+R2(x0,h)=f(x0+h)−f(x0) for 0 </bardblh/bardbl<δ, so that x0is
a relative minimum; in fact, a strict relative minimum.
The proof in the negative-deﬁnite case is similar, or else follows by applying the
preceding to −f, and is left as an exercise. ■
example 5 Consider again the function f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2. Then (0, 0) is a critical
point, and fis already in the form of Taylor’ s theorem:
f((0, 0) +(h1,h2))=f(0, 0)+(h2
1+h22)+0.
We can see directly that the Hessian at (0, 0) is
Hf(0)(h)=h21+h22,
which is clearly positive-deﬁnite. Thus, (0, 0) is a relative minimum. This simple case
can, of course, be done without calculus. Indeed, it is clear that f(x,y)>0 for all
(x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0). ▲
For functions of two variables f(x,y), the Hessian may be written as follows:
Hf(x,y)(h)=1
2[h1,h2]⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣∂2f
∂x2∂2f
∂y∂x
∂2f
∂x∂y∂2f
∂y2⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦/bracketleftBigg
h
1
h2/bracketrightBigg
.
Now we shall give a useful criterion for when a quadratic function deﬁned by such a
2×2 matrix is positive-deﬁnite. This will be useful in conjunction with Theorem 5.
Lemma 2Let
B=/bracketleftbiggab
bc/bracketrightbigg
and H(h)=1
2[h1,h2]B/bracketleftBigg
h1
h2/bracketrightBigg
.
Then H(h) is positive-deﬁnite if and only if a>0 and det B=ac−b2>0.

<<<PAGE 202>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 175
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 175
proof We have
H(h)=1
2[h1,h2]/bracketleftBigg
ah1+bh2
bh1+ch2/bracketrightBigg
=1
2(ah2
1+2bh 1h2+ch22).
Let us complete the square, writing
H(h)=1
2a/parenleftbigg
h1+b
ah2/parenrightbigg2
+1
2/parenleftbigg
c−b2
a/parenrightbigg
h22.
Suppose His positive-deﬁnite. Setting h2=0, we see that a>0. Setting h1=−( b/a)h2,
we get c−b2/a>0o r ac−b2>0. Conversely, if a>0 and c−b2/a>0,H(h)i sa
sum of squares, so that H(h)≥0. If H(h)=0, then each square must be zero. This
implies that both h1andh2must be zero, so that H(h) is positive-deﬁnite. ■
Similarly, we can see that H(h) is negative-deﬁnite if and only if a<0 and
ac−b2>0. We note that an alternative formulation is that H(h) is positive- (respec-
tively, negative-) deﬁnite if a+c=trace B>0 (respectively, <0) and det B>0.
Determinant Test for Positive Deﬁniteness
There are similar criteria to test the positive (or negative) deﬁniteness of an n×n
symmetric matrix B, thus providing a maxima and minima test for functions of n-
variables. Consider the nsquare submatrices along the diagonal (see Figure 3.3.5). Bis
positive-deﬁnite (that is, the quadratic function associated with Bis positive-deﬁnite) if
and only if the determinants of these diagonal submatrices are all greater than zero. For
negative-deﬁnite B, the signs should be alternately <0 and>0. We shall not prove this
general case here.7In case the determinants of the diagonal submatrices are all nonzero,
but the Hessian matrix is not positive- or negative-deﬁnite, the critical point is of saddle
type; in this case, we can show that the point is neither a maximum nor a minimum inthe manner of Example 2.
ﬁgure 3.3.5 “Diagonal” submatrices are used in the criterion
for positive deﬁniteness; they must all have determinant >0.
7This is proved in, for example, K. Hoffman and R. Kunze, Linear Algebra, Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J., 1961, pp. 249–251. For students with sufﬁcient background in linear algebra, it should be
noted that Bis positive-deﬁnite when all of its eigenvalues (which are necessarily real, because Bis
symmetric) are positive.

<<<PAGE 203>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 176
176 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
General Second-Derivative Tests (n-variables)
Suppose x0∈Rnis a critical point for a C2function f:U→R,Uan open set
containing x0; that is,∂f
∂xi(x0)=0,i=1,···,n.Suppose that the Hessian matrix
{∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)}is positive-deﬁnite; then x0is a strict local minimum for f. If the Hessian
matrix is negative-deﬁnite, x0is a strict local maximum. If the Hessian matrix is neither
positive- nor negative-deﬁnite, but its determinant is nonzero, it is of saddle type (it is
neither a maximum nor a minimum). If the determinant of the Hessian is zero, it is said
to be of degenerate type and nothing can be said about the nature of the critical point
without further analysis. Figure 3.3.5 illustrates a simple test for the positive deﬁnitenessof a symmetric matrix. In the case of two variables, the maximum and minimum testcan be considerably simpliﬁed.
Second-Derivative Test (two variables)
Lemma 2 and Theorem 5 imply the following result:
Theorem 6 Second-Derivative Maximum-Minimum Test for Functions
of Two Variables Letf(x,y) be of class C2on an open set UinR2. A point
(x0,y0) is a (strict) local minimum of fprovided the following three conditions
hold:
(i)∂f
∂x(x0,y0)=∂f
∂y(x0,y0)=0
(ii)∂2f
∂x2(x0,y0)>0
(iii) D=/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂x2/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂y2/parenrightbigg
−/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂x∂y/parenrightbigg2
>0a t( x0,y0)
(Dis called the discriminant of the Hessian.) If in (ii) we have <0 instead of
>0 and condition (iii) is unchanged, then we have a (strict) local maximum.
IfD<0 (e.g., if∂2f
∂x2(x0,y0)=0o r∂2f
∂y2(x0,y0)=0, but∂2f
∂x∂y(x0,y0)/negationslash=
0), then ( x0,y0)i so f saddle type (neither a maximum nor a minimum).
example 6 Classify the critical points of the function f:R2→R, deﬁned by ( x,y)/mapsto→x2−
2xy+2y2.
solution As in Example 5, we ﬁnd that f(0, 0) =0, the origin is the only critical point, and the
Hessian is
Hf(0)(h)=h2
1−2h1h2+2h22=(h1−h2)2+h22,
which is clearly positive-deﬁnite. Thus, fhas a relative minimum at (0, 0). Alternatively,
we can apply Theorem 6. At (0, 0), ∂2f/∂x2=2,∂2f/∂y2=4, and ∂2f/∂x∂y=−2.
Conditions (i), (ii), and (iii) hold, so fhas a relative minimum at (0, 0). ▲

<<<PAGE 204>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 177
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 177
IfD<0 in Theorem 6, then we have a saddle point. In fact, we can prove that
f(x,y) is larger than f(x0,y0) as we move away from ( x0,y0) in some direction and
smaller in the orthogonal direction (see Exercise 32). The general appearance is thus
similar to that shown in Figure 3.3.3. The appearance of the graph near ( x0,y0) in the
case D=0 must be determined by further analysis.
We summarize the procedure for dealing with functions of two variables: After all
critical points have been found and their associated Hessians computed, some of theseHessians may be positive-deﬁnite, indicating relative minima; some may be negative-deﬁnite, indicating relative maxima; and some may be neither positive- nor negative-deﬁnite, indicating saddle points. The shape of the graph at a saddle point where D<0
is like that in Figure 3.3.3. Critical points for which D/negationslash=0 are called nondegenerate
critical points. Such points are maxima, minima, or saddle points. The remaining criticalpoints, where D=0, may be tested directly, with level sets and sections or by some
other method. Such critical points are said to be degenerate; the methods developed in
this chapter fail to provide a picture of the behavior of a function near such points, sowe examine them case by case.
example
7 Locate the relative maxima, minima, and saddle points of the function
f(x,y)=log (x2+y2+1).
solution We must ﬁrst locate the critical points of this function; therefore, according to Theorem 3,we calculate
∇f(x,y)=2x
x2+y2+1i+2y
x2+y2+1j.
Thus, ∇f(x,y)=0if and only if ( x,y)=(0, 0), and so the only critical point of f
is (0, 0). Now we must determine whether this is a maximum, a minimum, or a saddlepoint. The second partial derivatives are
∂
2f
∂x2=2(x2+y2+1)−(2x)(2x)
(x2+y2+1)2,
∂2f
∂y2=2(x2+y2+1)−(2y)(2y)
(x2+y2+1)2,
and
∂2f
∂x∂y=−2x(2y)
(x2+y2+1)2.
Therefore,
∂2f
∂x2(0, 0) =2=∂2f
∂y2(0, 0) and∂2f
∂x∂y(0, 0) =0,
which yields
D=2·2=4>0.
Because ( ∂2f/∂x2)(0, 0) >0, we conclude by Theorem 6 that (0, 0) is a local minimum.
(Can you show this just from the fact that log tis an increasing function of t>0?) ▲

<<<PAGE 205>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 178
178 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 8 The graph of the function g(x,y)=1/xyis a surface SinR3. Find the points on Sthat
are closest to the origin (0, 0, 0). (See Figure 3.3.6.)
0.5
1
1.5
20.511.520
0051015
ﬁgure 3.3.6 The surface z=1/xydeﬁned over the ﬁrst
quadrant in the xyplane. (There are similar ﬁgures in the
other quadrants, but notice that z<0 in the second and
fourth quadrants.)
solution Each point on Sis of the form ( x,y,1/xy). The distance from this point to the origin is
d(x,y)=/radicalBigg
x2+y2+1
x2y2.
It is easier to work with the square of d,s ol e t f(x,y)=x2+y2+(1/x2y2), which will
have the same minimum point. This follows from the fact that d(x,y)2≥d(x0,y0)2if
and only if d(x,y)≥d(x0,y0). Notice that f(x,y) becomes very large as xandyget
larger and larger; f(x,y) also becomes very large as ( x,y) approaches the xoryaxis
where fis not deﬁned, so fmust attain a minimum at some critical point. The critical
points are determined by:
∂f
∂x=2x−2
x3y2=0,
∂f
∂y=2y−2
y3x2=0,
that is, x4y2−1=0, and x2y4−1=0. From the ﬁrst equation we get y2=1/x4, and,
substituting this into the second equation, we obtain
x2
x8=1=1
x6.
Thus, x=± 1 and y=± 1, and it therefore follows that fhas four critical points,
namely, (1, 1), (1, −1), ( −1, 1), and ( −1,−1). Note that fhas the value 3 for all these
points, so they are all minima. Therefore, the points on the surface closest to the point (0,
0, 0) are (1, 1, 1), (1, −1,−1), ( −1, 1, −1), and ( −1,−1, 1) and the minimum distance
is√
3. Is this consistent with the graph in Figure 3.3.6? ▲

<<<PAGE 206>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 179
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 179
example 9 Analyze the behavior of z=x5y+xy5+xyat its critical points.
solution The ﬁrst partial derivatives are
∂z
∂x=5x4y+y5+y=y(5x4+y4+1)
and
∂z
∂y=x(5y4+x4+1).
The terms 5 x4+y4+1 and 5 y4+x4+1 are always greater than or equal to 1, and so
it follows that the only critical point is (0, 0).
The second partial derivatives are
∂2z
∂x2=20x3y,∂2z
∂y2=20xy3
and
∂2z
∂x∂y=5x4+5y4+1.
Thus, at (0, 0), D=−1, and so (0, 0) is a nondegenerate saddle point and the graph of
znear (0, 0) looks like the graph in Figure 3.3.3. ▲
We now look at an example for a function of three variables.
example 10 Consider f(x,y)=x2+y2+z2+2xyz. Show that (0, 0, 0) and ( −1, 1, 1) are both
critical points. Determine whether they are local minima, local maxima, saddle points,
or none of them.
solution∂f
∂x=2x+2yz,∂f
∂y=2y+2xz, and∂f
∂z=2z+2xy, all of which vanish at (0, 0, 0)
and (−1, 1, 1). Thus, these are critical points. The Hessian of fat (0, 0, 0) is
⎡
⎣200
020002⎤
⎦.
The diagonal submatrices are [2] and/bracketleftbigg20
02/bracketrightbigg
and the Hessian itself, all of which have
positive determinants. Therefore (c.f. Figure 3.3.5) (0, 0, 0) is a strict local minimum.On the other hand, the Hessian matrix of fat (−1, 1, 1) is
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂
2f
∂x2∂2f
∂x∂y∂2f
∂x∂z
∂2f
∂y∂x∂2f
∂y2∂2f
∂y∂z
∂2f
∂z∂x∂2f
∂z∂y∂2f
∂z2⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

<<<PAGE 207>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 180
180 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
or
⎡
⎣222
22 −2
2−22⎤
⎦.
The determinant of the ﬁrst diagonal matrix is 2, the second diagonal matrix
/bracketleftbigg
22
22/bracketrightbigg
is zero, and the determinant of the Hessian is −16. Thus, the critical point ( −1, 1, 1) is
of saddle type (i.e., neither a maximum nor a minimum). ▲
Global Maxima and Minima
We end this section with a discussion of the theory of absolute,o rglobal, maxima
and minima of functions of several variables. Unfortunately, the location of absolutemaxima and minima for functions on R
nis, in general, a more difﬁcult problem than
for functions of one variable.
Deﬁnition Suppose f:A→Ris a function deﬁned on a set AinR2orR3.A
point x0∈Ais said to be an absolute maximum (orabsolute minimum) point of
fiff(x)≤f(x0) [or f(x)≥f(x0)] for all x∈A.
In one-variable calculus, we learn—but often do not prove—that every continu-
ous function on a closed interval Iassumes its absolute maximum (or minimum)
value at some point x0inI. A generalization of this theoretical fact also holds in Rn.
Such theorems guarantee that the maxima or minima one is seeking actually exist;therefore, the search for them is not in vain.
Deﬁnition A set D∈Rnis said to be bounded if there is a number M>0 such
that/bardblx/bardbl<Mfor all x∈D. A set is closed if it contains all its boundary points.
As an important example, we note that the level sets {(x1,x2,···,xn)|f(x1,
x2,...,xn)=c}of a continuous function fare always closed.
Thus, a set is bounded if it can be strictly contained in some (large) ball. The appropri-
ate generalization of the one-variable theorem on maxima and minima is the followingresult, stated without proof.
Theorem 7 Global Existence Theorem for Maxima and Minima Let
Dbe closed and bounded in Rnand let f:D→Rbe continuous. Then fassumes
its absolute maximum and minimum values at some points x0andx1ofD.

<<<PAGE 208>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 181
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 181
ﬁgure 3.3.7 D=U∪∂U:T w o
examples of regions whose
boundary is a piecewise smoothcurve.
x∂UD = U ∪ ∂Uy
x∂Uy
UU
Simply stated, x0andx1are points where fassumes its largest and smallest values.
As in one-variable calculus, these points need not be uniquely determined.
Suppose now that D=U∪∂U, where Uis open and ∂Uis its boundary. If
D⊂R2, we suppose that ∂Uis a piecewise smooth curve; that is, Dis a region
bounded by a collection of smooth curves—for example, a square or the sets depicted in
Figure 3.3.7.
Ifx0andx1are in U, we know from Theorem 4 that they are critical points of f.
If they are in ∂U, and∂Uis a smooth curve (i.e., the image of a smooth path cwith
c/prime/negationslash=0), then they are maximum or minimum points of fviewed as a function on ∂U.
These observations provide a method of ﬁnding the absolute maximum and minimumvalues of fon a region D.
Strategy for Finding the Absolute Maxima and Minima on aRegion with Boundary Let fbe a continuous function of two variables
deﬁned on a closed and bounded region DinR
2, which is bounded by a smooth
closed curve. To ﬁnd the absolute maximum and minimum of fonD:
(i) Locate all critical points for finU.
(ii) Find all the critical points of fviewed as a function only on ∂U.
(iii) Compute the value of fat all of these critical points.
(iv) Compare all these values and select the largest and the smallest.
IfDis a region bounded by a collection of smooth curves (such as a square), then we
follow a similar procedure, but including in step (iii) the points where the curves meet(such as the corners of the square).
All the steps except step (ii) should now be familiar to you. To carry out step (ii)
in the plane, one way is to ﬁnd a smooth parametrization of ∂U; that is, we ﬁnd a
path c:I→∂U, where Iis some interval, which is onto ∂U. Second, we consider
the function of one variable t/mapsto→f(c(t)), where t∈I, and locate the maximum and
minimum points t
0,t1∈I(remember to check the endpoints!). Then c(t0),c(t1) will
be maximum and minimum points forfas a function on ∂U. Another method for
dealing with step (ii) is the Lagrange multiplier method, to be presented in the nextsection.

<<<PAGE 209>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 182
182 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 11 Find the maximum and minimum values of the function f(x,y)=x2+y2−x−y+1
in the disc Ddeﬁned by x2+y2≤1.
solution (i) To ﬁnd the critical points we set ∂f/∂x=∂f/∂y=0. Thus, 2 x−1=0,
2y−1=0, and hence ( x,y)=(1
2,1
2) is the only critical point in the open disc
U={(x,y)|x2+y2<1}.
(ii) The boundary ∂Ucan be parametrized by c(t)=(sint, cos t), 0≤t≤2π. Thus,
f(c(t))=sin2t+cos2t−sint−cost+1=2−sint−cost=g(t).
To ﬁnd the maximum and minimum of fon∂U, it sufﬁces to locate the maxi-
mum and minimum of g.N o w g/prime(t)=0 only when
sint=cost, that is, when t=π
4,5π
4.
Thus, the candidates for the maximum and minimum for fon∂Uare the points
c(π/4),c(5π/4), and the endpoints c(0)=c(2π).
(iii) The values of fat the critical points are: f(1
2,1
2)=1
2from step (i) and, from
step (ii),
f/parenleftbigg
c/parenleftbiggπ
4/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg
=f/parenleftbigg√
2
2,√
2
2/parenrightbigg
=2−√
2,
f/parenleftbigg
c/parenleftbigg5π
4/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg
=f/parenleftbigg
−√
2
2,−√
2
2/parenrightbigg
=2+√
2,
and
f(c(0))=f(c(2π))=f(0, 1) =1.
(iv) Comparing all the values1
2,2−√
2, 2+√
2, 1, it is clear that the absolute minimum
is1
2and the absolute maximum is 2 +√
2. ▲
In Section 3.4, we shall consider a generalization of the strategy for ﬁnding the
absolute maximum and minimum to regions DinRn.
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 16, ﬁnd the critical points of the given function and then determine whether they are local maxima, local
minima, or saddle points.
1.f(x,y)=x2−y2+xy
2.f(x,y)=x2+y2−xy
3.f(x,y)=x2+y2+2xy
4.f(x,y)=x2+y2+3xy
5.f(x,y)=e1+x2−y26.f(x,y)=x2−3xy+5x−2y+6y2+8
7.f(x,y)=3x2+2xy+2x+y2+y+4
8.f(x,y)=sin (x2+y2) [consider only the critical point
(0, 0)]
9.f(x,y)=cos ( x2+y2) [consider only the three critical
points (0, 0), (√π/2,√π/2), and (0,√π)]

<<<PAGE 210>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 183
3.3 Extrema of Real-Valued Functions 183
10. f(x,y)=y+xsiny
11. f(x,y)=excosy
12. f(x,y)=(x−y)(xy−1)
13. f(x,y)=xy+1
x+1
y
14. f(x,y)=log (2 +sinxy)
15. f(x,y)=xsiny
16. f(x,y)=(x+y)(xy+1)
17. Find all local extrema for f(x,y)=8y3+12x2−24xy.
18. Letf(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2+kyz.
(a)Verify that (0, 0, 0) is a critical point for f.
(b)Find all values of ksuch that fhas a local
minimum at (0, 0, 0).
19. Find and classify all critical points of
f(x,y)=1
3x3+1
3y3−1
2x2−5
2y2+6y+10.
20. Suppose (4, 2) is a critical point for the C2function
f(x,y). In each case, determine whether (4, 2) is a local
maximum, a local minimum, or a saddle point.
(a) fxx(4, 2) =1,fxy(4, 2) =3,fyy=5
(b) fxx(4, 2) =2,fyx(4, 2) =−1,fyy=4
(c) fxx(4, 2) =−2,fxy(4, 2) =1,fyy=3
21. Find the local maxima and minima for
z=(x2+3y2)e1−x2−y2. (See Figure 2.1.15.)
22. Letf(x,y)=x2+y2+kxy. If you imagine the graph
changing as kincreases, at what values of kdoes the
shape of the graph change qualitatively?
23. An examination of the function
f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→(y−3x2)(y−x2) will give an
idea of the difﬁculty of ﬁnding conditions that guarantee
that a critical point is a relative extremum whenTheorem 6 fails.
8Show that
(a)the origin is a critical point of f;
(b) fhas a relative minimum at (0, 0) on every straight
line through (0, 0); that is, if g(t)=(at,bt), thenf◦g:R→Rhas a relative minimum at 0, for
every choice of aandb;
(c)the origin is not a relative minimum of f.
24. Letf(x,y)=Ax2+E, where AandEare constants.
What are the critical points of f? Are they local maxima
or local minima?
25. Letf(x,y)=x2−2xy+y2. Here D=0. Can you say
whether the critical points are local minima, localmaxima, or saddle points?
26. Letf(x,y)=ax2+bx2, where a,b/negationslash=0.
(a) Show that (0, 0) is the only critical point for f.
(b) Determine the nature of this critical point in terms
ofaandb.
27. Suppose f:R3→RisC2, and that x0is a critical point
forf. Suppose Hf(x0)(h)=h2
1+h22+h23+4h2h3.
Does fhave a local maximum, minimum, or saddle at
x0?
28. Find the point on the plane 2 x−y+2z=20 nearest the
origin.
29. Show that a rectangular box of given volume has
minimum surface area when the box is a cube.
30. Show that the rectangular parallelepiped with ﬁxedsurface area and maximum volume is a cube.
31. Write the number 120 as a sum of three numbers so thatthe sum of the products taken two at a time is amaximum.
32. Show that if ( x0,y0) is a critical point of a quadratic
function f(x,y) and D<0, then there are points ( x,y)
near ( x0,y0) at which f(x,y)>f(x0,y0) and,
similarly, points for which f(x,y)<f(x0,y0).
33. Letf(x,y)=x6+x2+y6,g(x,y)=
−x6−x2−y6,h(x,y)=x6−x4+y6.
(a) Show that (0, 0) is a degenerate critical point for
f,g, and h.
(b) Show that (0, 0) is a local minimum for f, a local
maximum for g, and a saddle for h.
34. Letf(x,y)=5yex−e5x−y5.
8This interesting phenomenon was ﬁrst pointed out by the famous mathematician Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932). Another curious “pathology”
is given in Exercise 41.

<<<PAGE 211>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 184
184 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
(a) Show that fhas a unique critical point and that this
point is a local maximum for f.
(b) Show that fis unbounded on the yaxis, and thus
has no global maximum. [Note that for a function
g(x) of a single variable, a unique critical point
which is a local extremum is necessarily a global
extremum. This example shows that this is not thecase for functions of several variables.]
35. Determine the nature of the critical points of the function
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2+xy.
36. Letnbe an integer greater than 2 and set f(x,y)=
axn+cyn, where ac/negationslash=0. Determine the nature of the
critical points of f.
37. Determine the nature of the critical points of
f(x,y)=x3+y2−6xy+6x+3y.
38. Find the absolute maximum and minimum values of thefunction f(x,y)=(x
2+y2)4on the disc x2+y2≤1.
(Y ou do not have to use calculus.)
39. Repeat Exercise 38 for the function
f(x,y)=x2+xy+y2.40. A curve Cin space is deﬁned implicitly on the cylinder
x2+y2=1 by the additional equation
x2−xy+y2−z2=1. Find the point or points on C
closest to the origin.
41. Find the absolute maximum and minimum values for
f(x,y)=sinx+cosyon the rectangle Rdeﬁned by
0≤x≤2π,0≤y≤2π.
42. Find the absolute maximum and minimum values for thefunction f(x,y)=xyon the rectangle Rdeﬁned by
−1≤x≤1,−1≤y≤1.
43. Letf(x,y)=1+xy−2x+yand let Dbe the
triangular region in R2with vertices (−2, 1), (−2, 5),
and (2, 1). Find the absolute maximum and minimumvalues of fonD. Give all points where these extreme
values occur.
44. Letf(x,y)=1+xy+x−2yand let Dbe the
triangular region in R2with vertices (1, −2), (5, −2),
and (1, 2). Find the absolute maximum and minimumvalues of fonD. Give all points where these extreme
values occur.
45. Determine the nature of the critical points of
f(x,y)=xy+1/x+8/y.
In Exercises 46 through 50, D denotes the unit disc.
46. Letube a C2function on Dwhich is “strictly
subharmonic”; that is, the following inequality holds:∇
2u=(∂2u/∂x2)+(∂2u/∂y2)>0. Show that u
cannot have a maximum point in D\∂D(the set of
points in D, but not in ∂D).
47. Letube a harmonic function on D—that is, ∇2u=0o n
D\∂D—and be continuous on D. Show that if u
achieves its maximum value in D\∂D, it also achieves it
on∂D. This is sometimes called the “weak maximum
principle” for harmonic functions. [H INT: Consider
∇2(u+εex),ε>0. Y ou can use the following fact,
which is proved in more advanced texts: Given asequence {p
n},n=1, 2,..., of points in a closed
bounded set AinR2orR3, there exists a point qsuch
that every neighborhood of qcontains at least one
member of {pn}.]
48. Deﬁne the notion of a strict superharmonic function u
onDby mimicking Exercise 46. Show that ucannot
have a minimum in D\∂D.
49. Letube harmonic in Das in Exercise 47. Show that if u
achieves its minimum value in D\∂D, it also achieves iton∂D. This is sometimes called the “weak minimum
principle” for harmonic functions.
50. Letφ:∂D→Rbe continuous and let Tbe a solution
onDto∇2T=0, continuous on DandT=φon∂D.
(a) Use Exercises 46 to 49 to show that such a solution,
if it exists, must be unique.
(b) Suppose that T(x,y) represents a temperature
function that is independent of time, with φ
representing the temperature of a circular plate at itsboundary. Can you give a physical interpretation ofthe principle stated in part (a)?
51. (a) Let fbe a C1function on the real line R. Suppose
that fhas exactly one critical point x0that is a strict
local minimum for f. Show that x0is also an
absolute minimum for f; that is, that f(x)≥f(x0)
for all x.
(b) The next example shows that the conclusion of part
(a) does not hold for functions of more than onevariable. Let f:R
2→Rbe deﬁned by
f(x,y)=− y4−e−x2+2y2/radicalbig
ex+e−x2.

<<<PAGE 212>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 185
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 185
(i) Show that (0, 0) is the only critical point for f
and that it is a local minimum.
(ii) Argue informally that fhas no absolute
minimum.
52. Suppose that a pentagon is composed of a rectangle
topped by an isosceles triangle (see Figure 3.3.8). If the
length of the perimeter is ﬁxed, ﬁnd the maximum
possible area.x
yθ
ﬁgure 3.3.8 Maximize the area for ﬁxed
perimeter.
3.4Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers
Often we are required to maximize or minimize a function subject to certain constraints
orside conditions . For example, we might need to maximize f(x,y) subject to the
condition that x2+y2=1; that is, that ( x,y) lie on the unit circle. More generally, we
might need to maximize or minimize f(x,y) subject to the side condition that ( x,y)
also satisﬁes an equation g(x,y)=c, where gis some function and cequals a constant
[in the preceding example, g(x,y)=x2+y2, and c=1]. The set of such ( x,y)i sa
level curve for g.
The purpose of this section is to develop some methods for handling this sort of
problem. In Figure 3.4.1 we picture a graph of a function f(x,y). In this picture, the
maximum of fmight be at (0, 0). However, suppose we are not interested in this
maximum but only the maximum of f(x,y) when ( x,y) belongs to the unit circle; that
is, when x2+y2=1. The cylinder over x2+y2=1 intersects the graph of z=f(x,y)
in a curve that lies on this graph. The problem of maximizing or minimizing f(x,y)
subject to the constraint x2+y2=1 amounts to ﬁnding the point on this curve where
zis the greatest or the least.
The Lagrange Multiplier Method
In general, let f:U⊂Rn→Randg:U⊂Rn→Rbe given C1functions, and let Sbe
the level set for gwith value c[recall that this is the set of points x∈Rnwith g(x)=c].
z
 = 
z
f
(
f
f
x
(
(
,
y
)
x
y
z
=
z
f
(
f
f
x
(
(
,
 y) subject
 )
nstraint
 to the co n
x
2
+
y
2
= 1z
Point on 
oint on x
x2
2+y2=1
where fis maximizedﬁgure 3.4.1 The geometric meaning
of maximizing fsubject to the
constraint x2+y2=1.

<<<PAGE 213>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 186
186 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
When fis restricted to Swe again have the notion of local maxima or local minima
off(local extrema), and an absolute maximum (largest value) or absolute minimum
(smallest value) must be a local extremum. The following method provides a necessary
condition for a constrained extremum:
Theorem 8 The Method of Lagrange Multipliers Suppose that f:U⊂
Rn→Randg:U⊂Rn→Rare given C1real-valued functions. Let x0∈U
andg(x0)=c, and let Sbe the level set for gwith value c[recall that this is the
set of points x∈Rnsatisfying g(x)=c]. Assume ∇g(x0)/negationslash=0.
Iff|S, which denotes “ frestricted to S,” has a local maximum or minimum
onSatx0, then there is a real number λ(which might be zero) such that
∇f(x0)=λ∇g(x0). (1)
In general, a point x0where equation (1) holds is said to be a critical point
off|S.
proof We have not developed enough techniques to give a complete proof, but we
can provide the essential points. (The additional technicalities needed are discussed inSection 3.5 and in the Internet supplement.)
In Section 2.6 we learned that for n=3 the tangent space or tangent plane of Sat
x
0is the space orthogonal to ∇g(x0). For arbitrary nwe can give the same deﬁnition for
the tangent space of Satx0. This deﬁnition can be motivated by considering tangents
to paths c(t) that lie in S, as follows: If c(t) is a path in Sandc(0)=x0, then c/prime(0) is a
tangent vector to Satx0,b u t
d
dtg(c(t))=d
dtc=0,
and, on the other hand, by the chain rule,
d
dtg(c(t))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇g(x0)·c/prime(0),
so that ∇g(x0)·c/prime(0)=0; that is, c/prime(0) is orthogonal to ∇g(x0).
Iff|Shas a maximum at x0, then f(c(t)) has a maximum at t=0. By one-variable
calculus, df(c(t))/dt|t=0=0. Hence, by the chain rule,
0=d
dtf(c(t))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0=∇ f(x0)·c/prime(0).
Thus,∇f(x0) is perpendicular to the tangent of every curve in Sand so is perpendicular
to the whole tangent space to Satx0. Because the space perpendicular to this tangent
space is a line, ∇f(x0) and∇g(x0) are parallel. Because ∇g(x0)/negationslash=0, it follows that
∇f(x0) is a multiple of ∇g(x0), which is the conclusion of the theorem. ■
Let us extract some geometry from this proof.
Theorem 9Iff, when constrained to a surface S, has a maximum or minimum
atx0, then∇f(x0) is perpendicular to Satx0(see Figure 3.4.2).

<<<PAGE 214>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 187
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 187
ﬁgure 3.4.2 The geometry of
constrained extrema.
grad f(ffx((0,y0, z0)=z
xy
(((
(((
xx
xxx
((
((
(
0
000
, , 
yy
yyy
00
0
, , 
zz
zz
0
000
)))
)))
ff(ffx((0,y0, z0)
ngent to
 Plane ta n S
e 
face
 Surf S
These results tell us that in order to ﬁnd the constrained extrema of f, we must
look among those points x0satisfying the conclusions of these two theorems. We
shall give several illustrations of how to use each.
When the method of Theorem 8 is used, we look for a point x0and a constant
λ, called a Lagrange multiplier , such that ∇f(x0)=λ∇g(x0). This method is more
analytic in nature than the geometric method of Theorem 9. Surprisingly, Euler intro-
duced these multipliers in 1744, some 40 years before Lagrange!
Equation (1) says that the partial derivatives of fare proportional to those of g.
Finding such points x0at which this occurs means solving the simultaneous equations
∂f
∂x1(x1,...,xn)=λ∂g
∂x1(x1,...,xn)
∂f
∂x2(x1,...,xn)=λ∂g
∂x2(x1,...,xn)
...
∂f
∂xn(x1,...,xn)=λ∂g
∂xn(x1,...,xn)
g(x1,...,xn)=c⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭(2)
forx1,...,xnandλ.
Another way of looking at these equations is as follows: Think of λas an additional
variable and form the auxiliary function
h(x1,...,xn,λ)=f(x1,...,xn)−λ[g(x1,...,xn)−c].
The Lagrange multiplier theorem says that to ﬁnd the extreme points of f|S, we should
examine the critical points of h. These are found by solving the equations
0=∂h
∂x1=∂f
∂x1−λ∂g
∂x1...
0=∂h
∂xn=∂f
∂xn−λ∂g
∂xn
0=∂h
∂λ=g(x1,...,xn)−c⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭, (3)
which are the same as equations (2) above.

<<<PAGE 215>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 188
188 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Second-derivative tests for maxima and minima analogous to those in Section 3.3 will
be given in Theorem 10 later in this section. However, in many problems it is possible to
distinguish between maxima and minima by direct observation or by geometric means.Because this is often simpler, we consider examples of the latter type ﬁrst.
example
1 LetS⊂R2be the line through ( −1, 0) inclined at 45◦, and let f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→
x2+y2. Find the extrema of f|S.
solution Here S={(x,y)|y−x−1=0}, and therefore we set g(x,y)=y−x−1
andc=0. We have ∇g(x,y)=− i+j/negationslash=0. The relative extrema of f|Smust be
found among the points at which ∇fis orthogonal to S; that is, inclined at −45◦. But
∇f(x,y)=(2x,2y), which has the desired slope only when x=− y, or when ( x,y)
lies on the line Lthrough the origin inclined at −45◦. This can occur in the set Sonly
for the single point at which LandSintersect (see Figure 3.4.3). Reference to the level
curves of findicates that this point, ( −1/2, 1/2), is a relative minimum of f|S(but
not of f).
Notice that in this problem, fonShas a minimum but no maximum.
xy S
L
Level set f = 1
Level set f  = 1
2__−
1
2__( ),1
2__
ﬁgure 3.4.3 The geometry associated with ﬁnding the
extrema of f(x,y)=x2+y2restricted to
S={(x,y)|y−x−1=0}. ▲
example 2 Letf:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2−y2, and let Sbe the circle of radius 1 around the origin.
Find the extrema of f|S.
solution The set Sis the level curve for gwith value 1, where g:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2.
Because both of these functions have been studied in previous examples, we know theirlevel curves; these are shown in Figure 3.4.4. In two dimensions, the condition that∇f=λ∇gatx
0—that is, that ∇fand∇gare parallel at x0—is the same as the level
curves being tangent at x0(why?). Thus, the extreme points of f|Sare (0, ±1) and
(±1, 0). Evaluating f, we ﬁnd (0, ±1) are minima and ( ±1, 0) are maxima.
Let us also do this problem analytically by the method of Lagrange multipliers.
Clearly,
∇f(x,y)=/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x,∂f
∂y/parenrightbigg
=(2x,−2y) and ∇g(x,y)=(2x,2y).

<<<PAGE 216>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 189
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 189
x
g /H11005 1y
f = −1
f = 0
(−1, 0)
(0, −1)(0, 1)
(1, 0)f = 1
Sﬁgure 3.4.4 The geometry associated with the
problem of ﬁnding the extrema of x2−y2on
S={(x,y)|x2+y2=1}.
Note that ∇g(x,y)/negationslash=0ifx2+y2=1. Thus, according to the Lagrange multiplier
theorem, we must ﬁnd a λsuch that
(2x,−2y)=λ(2x,2y) and ( x,y)∈S, i.e., x2+y2=1.
These conditions yield three equations, which can be solved for the three unknowns
x,y, andλ. From 2 x=λ2x, we conclude that either x=0o rλ =1. If x=0, then
y=± 1 and −2y=λ2yimplies λ=− 1. Ifλ=1, then y=0 and x=± 1. Thus,
we get the points (0, ±1) and ( ±1, 0), as before. As we have mentioned, this method
only locates potential extrema; whether they are maxima, minima, or neither must be
determined by other means, such as geometric arguments or the second-derivative testgiven below.
9▲
example 3 Maximize the function f(x,y,z)=x+zsubject to the constraint x2+y2+z2=1.
solution By Theorem 7 we know that the function frestricted to the unit sphere x2+y2+z2=1
has a maximum (and also a minimum). To ﬁnd the maximum, we again use the Lagrangemultiplier theorem. We seek λand ( x,y,z) such that
1=2xλ,0 =2yλ, and 1 =2zλ,
and
x
2+y2+z2=1.
From the ﬁrst or the third equation, we see that λ/negationslash=0. Thus, from the second equation,
we get y=0. From the ﬁrst and third equations, x=z, and so from the fourth,
x=± 1/√
2=z. Hence, our points are (1/√
2, 0, 1/√
2) and ( −1/√
2, 0,−1/√
2).
Comparing the values of fat these points, we can see that the ﬁrst point yields the
maximum of f(restricted to the constraint) and the second the minimum. ▲
9In these examples, ∇g(x0)/negationslash=0on the surface S, as required by the Lagrange multiplier theorem. If
∇g(x0) were zero for some x0onS, then it would have to be included among the possible extrema.

<<<PAGE 217>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 190
190 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 4 Assume that among all rectangular boxes with ﬁxed surface area of 10 square meters
there is a box of largest possible volume. Find its dimensions.
solution Ifx,y, and zare the lengths of the sides, x≥0,y≥0,z≥0, respectively, and the volume
isf(x,y,z)=xyz. The constraint is 2( xy+xz+yz)=10; that is, xy+xz+yz=5.
Thus, the Lagrange multiplier conditions are
yz=λ(y+z)
xz=λ(x+z)
xy=λ(y+x)
xy+xz+yz=5.
First of all, x/negationslash=0, because x=0 implies yz=5 and 0 =λz, so that λ=0 and we
get the contradictory equation yz=0. Similarly, y/negationslash=0,z/negationslash=0,x+y/negationslash=0. Elimination
ofλfrom the ﬁrst two equations gives yz/(y+z)=xz/(x+z), which gives x=y;
similarly, y=z. Substituting these values into the last equation, we obtain 3 x2=5,
orx=√5/3. Thus, we get the solution x=y=z=√5/3, and xyz=(5/3)3/2.
This (cubical) shape must therefore maximize the volume, assuming there is a box ofmaximum volume.
▲
Existence of Solutions
We should note that the solution to Example 4 does notdemonstrate that the cube is
the rectangular box of largest volume with a given ﬁxed surface area; it proves that thecube is the only possible candidate for a maximum. We shall sketch a proof that it reallyis the maximum later. The distinction between showing that there is only one possible
solution to a problem and that, in fact, a solution exists is a subtle one that many (even
great) mathematicians have overlooked.
Queen Dido (ca. 900
B.C.) realized that among all planar regions with ﬁxed circum-
ference, the disc is the region of maximum area. It is not difﬁcult to prove this fact underthe assumption that there is a region of maximum area; however, proving that such aregion of maximum area exists is quite another (difﬁcult) matter. A complete proof wasnot given until the second half of the nineteenth century by the German mathematicianWeierstrass.
Let us consider a nonmathematical parallel to this situation. Put yourself in the place
of Lord Peter Wimsey, Dorothy Sayers’ famous detective:
“Undoubtedly,” said Wimsey, “but if you think that this identiﬁcation is going to make life
one grand, sweet song for you, you are mistaken.... Since we have devoted a great deal oftime and thought to the case on the assumption that it was murder, it’ s a convenience toknow that the assumption is correct.”
10
Wimsey has found the body of a dead man, and after some time has located ten
suspects. He is sure that no one else other than one of the suspects could be the murderer.
By collecting all the evidence and checking alibis, he then reduces the number of suspectsone by one, until, ﬁnally, only the butler remains; hence, he is the murderer! But wait,Peter is a very cautious man. By checking everything once again, he discovers that theman died by suicide; so there is no murder. Y ou see the point: It does not sufﬁce to ﬁnda clear and uniquely determined suspect in a criminal case where murder is suspected;you must prove that a murder actually took place.
The same goes for our cube; the fact that it is the only possible candidate for a max-
imum does not prove that it is maximum. (For more information see The Parsimonious
10Dorothy L. Sayers, Have His Carcase, Chapter 31: The Evidence of the Haberdasher’ s Assistant,
New Y ork, Avon Books, 1968, p. 312.

<<<PAGE 218>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 191
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 191
Universe: Shape and Form in the Natural World, by S. Hildebrandt and A. Tromba,
Springer-Verlag, New Y ork/Berlin, 1995.)
The key to showing that f(x,y,z)=xyzreally has a maximum lies in the fact that
fis a continuous function that is deﬁned on the unbounded surface S:xy+xz+yz=5,
and not on a bounded set, which includes its boundary, where Theorem 7 of Section 3.3
would apply. We have already seen problems of this sort for functions of one and twovariables.
The way to show that f(x,y,z)=xyz≥0 does indeed have a maximum on
xy+yz+xz=5 is to show that if x,y,o rztend to ∞, then f(x,y,z)→0. We
may then conclude that the maximum of fonSmust exist by appealing to Theo-
rem 7 (you should supply the details). So, suppose ( x,y,z) lies in Sandx→∞ ;
then y→0 and z→0 (why?). Multiplying the equation deﬁning Sbyz,w e
obtain the equation xyz+xz
2+yz2=5z→0a s x→∞ . Because x,y,z≥0,
xyz=f(x,y,z)→0. Similarly, f(x,y,z)→0 if either yorztend to ∞. Thus, a
box of maximum volume must exist.
Some general guidelines may be useful for maximum and minimum problems with
constraints. First of all, if the surface Sis bounded (as an ellipsoid is, for example), then
fmust have a maximum and a minimum on S. (See Theorem 7 in the preceding section.)
In particular, if fhas only two points satisfying the conditions of the Lagrange multiplier
theorems or Theorem 9, then one must be a maximum and one must be a minimum.Evaluating fat each point will tell the maximum from the minimum. However, if there
are more than two such points, some can be saddle points. Also, if Sis not bounded (for
example, if it is a hyperboloid), then fneed not have any maxima or minima.
Several Constraints
If a surface Sis deﬁned by a number of constraints, namely,
g1(x1,...,xn)=c1
g2(x1,...,xn)=c2
...
gk(x1,...,xn)=ck⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎭, (4)
then the Lagrange multiplier theorem may be generalized as follows: If f has a maximum
or a minimum at x
0on S,there must exist constants λ1,...,λksuch that11
∇f(x0)=λ1∇g1(x0)+···+λ k∇gk(x0). (5)
This case may be proved by generalizing the method used to prove the Lagrange mul-
tiplier theorem. Let us give an example of how this more general formulation is used.
example 5 Find the extreme points of f(x,y,z)=x+y+zsubject to the two conditions
x2+y2=2 and x+z=1.
solution Here there are two constraints:
g1(x,y,z)=x2+y2−2=0 and g2(x,y,z)=x+z−1=0.
11As with the hypothesis ∇g(x0)/negationslash=0in the Lagrange multiplier theorem, here we must assume that the
vectors ∇g1(x0),...,∇gk(x0) are linearly independent; that is, each ∇gi(x0) is not a linear combination
of the other ∇gj(x0),j/negationslash=i.

<<<PAGE 219>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 192
192 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Thus, we must ﬁnd x,y,z,λ1, andλ2such that
∇f(x,y,z)=λ1∇g1(x,y,z)+λ2∇g2(x,y,z),
g1(x,y,z)=0, and g2(x,y,z)=0.
Computing the gradients and equating components, we get
1=λ1·2x+λ2·1,
1=λ1·2y+λ2·0,
1=λ1·0+λ2·1,
x2+y2=2, and x+z=1.
These are ﬁve equations for x,y,z,λ1, andλ2. From the third equation, λ2=1, and
so 2xλ1=0, 2yλ1=1. Because the second implies λ1/negationslash=0, we have x=0. Thus,
y=±√
2 and z=1. Hence, the possible extrema are (0, ±√
2, 1). By inspection,
(0,√
2, 1) gives a relative maximum, and (0, −√
2, 1) a relative minimum.
The condition x2+y2=2 implies that xandymust be bounded. The condition
x+z=1 implies that zis also bounded. If follows that the constraint set Sis closed
and bounded. By Theorem 7 it follows that fhas a maximum and minimum on Sthat
must therefore occur at (0,√
2, 1) and (0, −√
2, 1), respectively. ▲
The method of Lagrange multipliers provides us with another tool to locate the
absolute maxima and minima of differentiable functions on bounded regions in R2(see
the strategy for ﬁnding absolute maximum and minimum in Section 3.3).
example 6 Find the absolute maximum of f(x,y)=xyon the unit disc D, where Dis the set of
points ( x,y) with x2+y2≤1.
solution By Theorem 7 in Section 3.3, we know the absolute maximum exists. First, we ﬁnd all
the critical points of finU, the set of points ( x,y) with x2+y2<1. Because
∂f
∂x=yand∂f
∂y=x,
(0, 0) is the only critical point of finU. Now consider fon the unit circle, the level
curve g(x,y)=1, where g(x,y)=x2+y2. To locate the maximum and minimum
offonC, we write down the Lagrange multiplier equations: ∇f(x,y)=(y,x)=
λ∇g(x,y)=λ(2x,2y) and x2+y2=1. Rewriting these in component form, we get
y=2λx,
x=2λy,
x2+y2=1.
Thus,
y=4λ2y,
orλ=± 1/2 and y=± x, which means that x2+x2=2x2=1o r x=± 1/√
2,
y=± 1/√
2. On Cwe compute four candidates for the absolute maximum and mini-
mum, namely,
/parenleftbigg
−1√
2,−1√
2/parenrightbigg
,/parenleftbigg
−1√
2,1√
2/parenrightbigg
,/parenleftbigg1√
2,1√
2/parenrightbigg
,/parenleftbigg1√
2,−1√
2/parenrightbigg
.

<<<PAGE 220>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 193
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 193
The value of fat both ( −1/√
2,−1/√
2) and (1 /√
2, 1/√
2) is 1/2. The value of fat
(−1/√
2, 1/√
2) and (1 /√
2,−1/√
2) is−1/2, and the value of fat (0, 0) is 0. Therefore,
the absolute maximum of fis 1/2 and the absolute minimum is −1/2, both occurring
onC. At (0, 0), ∂2f/∂x2=0,∂2f/∂y2=0 and∂2f/∂x∂y=1, so the discriminant is
−1 and thus (0, 0) is a saddle point. ▲
example 7 Find the absolute maximum and minimum of f(x,y)=1
2x2+1
2y2in the elliptical
region Ddeﬁned by1
2x2+y2≤1.
solution Again by Theorem 7, Section 3.3, the absolute maximum exists. We ﬁrst locate the
critical points of finU, the set of points ( x,y) with1
2x2+y2<1. Because
∂f
∂x=x,∂f
∂y=y,
the only critical point is the origin (0, 0).
We now ﬁnd the maximum and minimum of fonC, the boundary of U, which is the
level curve g(x,y)=1, where g(x,y)=1
2x2+y2. The Lagrange multiplier equations
are
∇f(x,y)=(x,y)=λ∇g(x,y)=λ(x,2y)
and ( x2/2)+y2=1.In other words,
x=λx
y=2λy
x2
2+y2=1.
Ifx=0, then y=± 1 and λ=1
2.I fy=0, then x=±√
2 and λ=1. If x/negationslash=0
andy/negationslash=0, we get both λ=1 and 1/2, which is impossible. Thus, the candidates
for the maxima and minima of fonCare (0, ±1), ( ±√
2, 0) and for finside D, the
candidate is (0, 0). The value of fat (0,±1) is 1/2, at ( ±√
2, 0) it is 1, and at (0, 0)
it is 0. Thus, the absolute minimum of foccurs at (0, 0) and is 0. The absolute maximum
offonDis thus 1 and occurs at the points ( ±√
2, 0). ▲
Global Maxima and Minima
The method of Lagrange multipliers enhances our techniques for ﬁnding global maximaand minima. In this respect, the following is useful.
Deﬁnition LetUbe an open region in Rnwith boundary ∂U. We say that ∂U
issmooth if∂Uis the level set of a smooth function gwhose gradient ∇gnever
vanishes (i.e., ∇g/negationslash=0). Then we have the following strategy.

<<<PAGE 221>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 194
194 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Lagrange Multiplier Strategy for Finding Absolute Maxima and
Minima on Regions with Boundary Letfbe a differentiable function on
a closed and bounded region D=U∪∂U,Uopen in Rn, with smooth
boundary ∂U.
To ﬁnd the absolute maximum and minimum of fonD:
(i) Locate all critical points of finU.
(ii) Use the method of Lagrange multiplier to locate all the critical points of
f|∂U.
(iii) Compute the values of fat all these critical points.
(iv) Select the largest and the smallest.
example 8 Find the absolute maximum and minimum of the function f(x,y,z)=
x2+y2+z2−x+yon the set D={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2≤1}.
solution As in the previous examples, we know the absolute maximum and minimum exists.Now D=U∪∂U, where
U={(x,y,z)|x
2+y2+z2<1}
and
∂U={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2=1}.
∇f(x,y,z)=(2x−1, 2y+1, 2z).
Thus, ∇f=0a t ( 1 /2,−1/2, 0) which is in U, the interior of D.
Letg(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2. Then ∂Uis the level set g(x,y,z)=1. By the method
of Lagrange multipliers, the maximum and minimum must occur at a critical point of
f|∂U; that is, at a point x0where ∇f(x0)=λ∇g(x0) for some scalar λ.
Thus,
(2x−1, 2y+1, 2z)=λ(2x,2y,2z)
or
(i) 2 x−1=2λx
(ii) 2 y+1=2λy
(iii) 2 z=2λz
Ifλ=1, then we would have 2 x−1=2xor−1=0, which is impossible.
We may assume that λ/negationslash=0 since if λ=0, we only get an interior point as above.
Thus (iii) implies that z=0 and
(iv) x2+y2=1.
Solving (i) and (ii) for xandywe ﬁnd,
(v)x=1/2(1 −λ)
(vi) y=−1/2(1 −λ)

<<<PAGE 222>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 195
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 195
Applying (iv) we can solve for λ, namely λ=1±(1/√
2). Thus, from (v) and (vi) we
have that x=±(1/√
2) and y=±(1/√
2); that is, we have four critical points on ∂U.
Evaluating fat each of these points, we see that the maximum value for fon∂Uis
1+2/√
2=1+√
2 and the minimum value is 1 −√
2. The value of fat (1/2, −1/2)
is−1/2. Comparing these values, noting that −1/2 <1−√
2, we see that the absolute
minimum is −1/2, occurring at (1/2, −1/2), and that absolute maximum is 1 +√
2,
occurring at ( −1/√
2, 1/√
2). ▲
Two Additional Applications
We now present two further applications of the mathematical techniques developed in
this section to geometry and to economics. We shall begin wth a geometric example.
example 9 Suppose we have a curve deﬁned by the equation
φ(x,y)=Ax2+2Bxy+Cy2−1=0.
Find the maximum and minimum distance of the curve to the origin. (These are thelengths of the semimajor and the semiminor axis of this quadric.)
solution The problem is equivalent to ﬁnding the extreme values of f(x,y)=x
2+y2subject
to the constraining condition φ(x,y)=0. Using the Lagrange multiplier method, we
have the following equations:
2x+λ(2Ax+2By)=0 (6)
2y+λ(2Bx+2Cy)=0 (7)
Ax2+2Bxy+Cy2=1. (8)
Adding xtimes equation (6) to ytimes equation (7), we obtain
2(x2+y2)+2λ(Ax2+2Bxy+Cy2)=0.
By equation (8), it follows that x2+y2+λ=0. Let t=−1/λ=1/(x2+y2) [the case
λ=0 is impossible, because (0, 0) is not on the curve φ(x,y)=0]. Then equations
(6) and (7) can be written as follows:
2(A−t)x+2By=0
2Bx+2(C−t)y=0.(9)
If these two equations are to have a nontrivial solution [remember that ( x,y)=(0, 0)
is not on our curve and so is not a solution], it follows from a theorem of linear algebrathat their determinant vanishes:
12
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleA−tB
BC −t/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=0.
Because this equation is quadratic in t, there are two solutions, which we shall call t
1
andt2. Because −λ=x2+y2,w eh a v e/radicalbig
x2+y2=√−λ.N o w/radicalbig
x2+y2is the
12The matrix of coefﬁcients of the equations cannot have an inverse, because this would imply that the
solution is zero. Recall that a matrix that does not have an inverse has determinant zero.

<<<PAGE 223>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 196
196 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
distance from the point ( x,y) to the origin. Therefore, if ( x1,y1) and ( x2,y2) denote
the nontrivial solutions to equation (9) corresponding to t1andt2, and if t1andt2are
positive, we get/radicalbig
x2
2+y2
2=1/√t2and/radicalbig
x2
1+y2
1=1/√t1. Consequently, if t1>t2,
the lengths of the semiminor and semimajor axes are 1 /√t1and 1/√t2, respectively. If
the curve is an ellipse, both t1andt2are, in fact, real and positive. What happens with
a hyperbola or a parabola? ▲
Finally, we discuss an application to economics.
example 10 Suppose that the output of a manufacturing ﬁrm is a quantity Qof a certain product,
where Qis a function f(K,L), where Kis the amount of capital equipment (or invest-
ment) and Lis the amount of labor used. If the price of labor is p, the price of capital
isq, and the ﬁrm can spend no more than Bdollars, how can we ﬁnd the amount of
capital and labor to maximize the output Q?
solution We would expect that if the amount of capital or labor is increased, then the output Q
should also increase; that is,
∂Q
∂K≥0 and∂Q
∂L≥0.
We also expect that as more labor is added to a given amount of capital equipment, we
get less additional output for our effort; that is,
∂2Q
∂L2<0.
Similarly,
∂2Q
∂K2<0.
With these assumptions on Q, it is reasonable to expect the level curves of out-
put (called isoquants) Q(K,L)=cto look something like the curves sketched in
Figure 3.4.5, with c1<c2<c3.
L
K
qp
Q = c 123 Q = c
Q = cB
B
ﬁgure 3.4.5 What is the largest value of Qin the shaded triangle?

<<<PAGE 224>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 197
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 197
We can interpret the convexity of the isoquants as follows: As we move to the right
along a given isoquant, it takes more and more capital to replace a unit of labor and
still produce the same output. The budget constraint means that we must stay inside thetriangle bounded by the axes and the line pL+qK=B. Geometrically, it is clear that
we produce the most by spending all our money in such a way as to pick the isoquantthat just touches, but does not cross, the budget line.
Because the maximum point lies on the boundary of our domain, we apply the
method of Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd the maximum. To maximize Q=f(K,L)
subject to the constraint pL+qK=B, we look for critical points of the auxiliary
function,
h(K,L,λ)=f(K,L)−λ(pL+qK−B).
Thus, we want
∂Q
∂K=λq,∂Q
∂L=λp, and pL+qK=B.
These are the conditions we must meet in order to maximize output. (Y ou are asked towork out a speciﬁc case in Exercise 36.)
▲
In the preceding example, λrepresents something interesting. Let k=qKand
l=pL, so that kis the dollar value of the capital used and lis the dollar value of the
labor used. Then the ﬁrst two equations become
∂Q
∂k=1
q∂Q
∂K=λ=1
p∂Q
∂L=∂Q
∂l.
Thus, at the optimum production point the marginal change in output per dollar’ s worth ofadditional capital investment is equal to the marginal change of output per dollar’ s worthof additional labor, and λis this common value. At the optimum point, the exchange
of a dollar’ s worth of capital for a dollar’ s worth of labor does not change the output.Away from the optimum point the marginal outputs are different, and one exchange orthe other will increase the output.
A Second-Derivative Test for Constrained Extrema
In Section 3.3 we developed a second-derivative test for extrema of functions ofseveral variables by looking at the second-degree term in the Taylor series of f.I f
the Hessian matrix of second partial derivatives is either positive-deﬁnite or negative-deﬁnite at a critical point of f, this point is a relative minimum or maximum,
respectively.
The question naturally arises as to whether there is a second-derivative test for max-
imum and minimum problems in the presence of constraints. The answer is yes and the
test involves a matrix called a bordered Hessian. We will ﬁrst discuss the test and how
to apply it for the case of a function f(x,y) of two variables subject to the constraint
g(x,y)=c.

<<<PAGE 225>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 198
198 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
Theorem 10Let f:U⊂R2→Randg:U⊂R2→Rbe smooth (at
least C2) functions. Let v0∈U,g(v0)=c, and Sbe the level curve for gwith
value c. Assume that ∇g(v0)/negationslash=0and that there is a real number λsuch that
∇f(v0)=λ∇g(v0). Form the auxiliary function h=f−λgand the bordered
Hessian determinant
|H|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −∂g
∂x−∂g
∂y
−∂g
∂x∂2h
∂x2∂2h
∂x∂y
−∂g
∂y∂2h
∂x∂y∂2h
∂y2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleevaluated at v
0.
(i) If|H|>0, then v0is a local maximum point for f|S.
(ii) If |H|<0, then v0is a local minimum point for f|S.
(iii) If |H|=0, the test is inconclusive and v0may be a minimum, a maximum,
or neither.
This theorem is proved in the Internet supplement for this section.
example 11 Find extreme points of f(x,y)=(x−y)nsubject to the constraint x2+y2=1, where
n≥1.
solution We set the ﬁrst derivatives of the auxiliary function hdeﬁned by h(x,y,λ)=
(x−y)n−λ(x2+y2−1) equal to 0:
n(x−y)n−1−2λx=0
−n(x−y)n−1−2λy=0
−(x2+y2−1)=0.
From the ﬁrst two equations we see that λ(x+y)=0. Ifλ=0, then x=y=±√
2/2.
Ifλ/negationslash=0, then x=− y. The four critical points are represented in Figure 3.4.6, and the
corresponding values of f(x,y) are listed below:
(A) x=√
2/2 y=√
2/2 λ=0 f(x,y)=0
xy
A
B CD
ﬁgure 3.4.6 The four critical points in Example 11.

<<<PAGE 226>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 199
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 199
(B) x=√
2/2 y=−√
2/2 λ=n(√
2)n−2f(x,y)=(√
2)n
(C) x=−√
2/2 y=−√
2/2 λ=0 f(x,y)=0
(D) x=−√
2/2 y=√
2/2 λ=(−1)n−2n(√
2)n−2f(x,y)=(−√
2)n.
By inspection, we see that if nis even, then A and C are minimum points and B and
D are maxima. If nis odd, then B is a maximum point, D is a minimum, and A and C
are neither. Let us see whether Theorem 10 is consistent with these observations.
The bordered Hessian determinant is
|H|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −2x −2y
−2xn (n−1)(x−y)
n−2−2λ −n(n−1)(x−y)n−2
−2y−n(n−1)(x−y)n−2n(n−1)(x−y)n−2−2λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=−4n(n−1)(x−y)
n−2(x+y)2+8λ(x2−y2).
Ifn=1o ri fn ≥3,|H|=0a tA ,B ,C ,a n dD .I fn =2, then |H|=0a tBa n dDa n d
−16 at A and C. Thus, the second-derivative test picks up the minima at A and C, but
is inconclusive in testing the maxima at B and D for n=2. It is also inconclusive for
all other values of n.▲
Just as in the unconstrained case, there is also a second-derivative test for functions
of more than two variables. If we are to ﬁnd extreme points for f(x1,...,xn) subject
to a single constraint g(x1,...,xn)=c, we ﬁrst form the bordered Hessian for the
auxiliary function h(x1,...,xn)=f(x1,...,xn)−λ(g(x1,...,xn)−c) as follows:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0−∂g
∂x1−∂g
∂x2···−∂g
∂xn
−∂g
∂x1∂2h
∂x2
1∂2h
∂x1∂x2···∂2h
∂x1∂xn
−∂g
∂x2∂2h
∂x1∂x2∂2h
∂x2
2···∂2h
∂x2∂xn
............
−∂g
∂xn∂2h
∂x1∂xn∂2h
∂x2∂xn···∂2h
∂x2
n/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Second, we examine the determinants of the diagonal submatrices of order ≥3a tt h e
critical points of h. If they are all negative, that is, if
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −∂g
∂x1−∂g
∂x2
−∂g
∂x1∂2h
∂x2
1∂2h
∂x1∂x2
−∂g
∂x2∂2h
∂x1∂x2∂2h
∂x2
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle<0,/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −∂g
∂x1−∂g
∂x2−∂g
∂x3
−∂g
∂x1∂2h
∂x2
1∂2h
∂x1∂x2∂2h
∂x1∂x3
−∂g
∂x2∂2h
∂x1∂x2∂2h
∂x2
2∂2h
∂x2∂x3
−∂g
∂x3∂2h
∂x1∂x3∂2h
∂x2∂x3∂2h
∂x2
3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle<0,...,

<<<PAGE 227>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 200
200 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
then we are at a local minimum of f|S. If they start out with a positive 3 ×3 subde-
terminant and alternate in sign (that is, >0,<0,>0,<0,...), then we are at a local
maximum. If they are all nonzero and do not ﬁt one of these patterns, then the point is
neither a maximum nor a minimum (it is said to be of the saddle type).13
example 12 Study the local extreme points of f(x,y,z)=xyzon the surface of the unit sphere
x2+y2+z2=1 using the second-derivative test.
solution Setting the partial derivatives of the auxiliary function h(x,y,z,λ)=xyz−λ(x2+
y2+z2−1) equal to zero gives
yz=2λx
xz=2λy
xy=2λz
x2+y2+z2=1.
Thus, 3 xyz=2λ(x2+y2+z2)=2λ.I fλ =0, the solutions are ( x,y,z,λ)=
(±1, 0, 0, 0), (0, ±1, 0, 0), and (0, 0, ±1, 0). If λ/negationslash=0, then we have 2λ =3xyz=6λz2,
and so z2=1
3. Similarly, x2=y2=1
3. Thus, the solutions are given by λ=3
2xyz=
±√
3/6. The critical points of hand the corresponding values of fare given in Table 3.1.
From it, we see that points E, F , G, and K are minima. Points D, H, I, and J are maxima.To see whether this is in accord with the second-derivative test, we need to consider twodeterminants. First, we look at the following:
|
H2|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −∂g/∂x−∂g/∂y
−∂g/∂x∂
2h/∂x2∂2/∂x∂y
−∂g/∂y∂2h/∂x∂y∂2h/∂y2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0−2x−2y
−2x−2λ z
−2yz −2λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=8λx
2+8λy2+8xyz=8λ(x2+y2+2z2).
Observe that sign ( |H2|)=signλ=sign ( xyz), where the sign of a number is 1 if that
number is positive, or is −1 if that number is negative. Second, we consider
|H3|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0 −∂g/∂x−∂g/∂y−∂g/∂z
−∂g/∂x∂
2h/∂x2∂2h/∂x∂y∂2h/∂x∂z
−∂g/∂y∂2h/∂x∂y∂2h/∂y2∂2h/∂y∂z
−∂g/∂z∂2h/∂x∂z∂2h/∂y∂z∂2h/∂z2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0−2x−2y−2z
−2x−2λ zy
−2yz −2λ x
−2zy x −2λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
13For a detailed discussion, see C. Caratheodory, Calculus of V ariations and Partial Differential
Equations, Holden-Day, San Francisco, 1965; Y . Murata, Mathematics for Stability and Optimiza-
tion of Economic Systems, Academic Press, New Y ork, 1977, pp. 263–271; or D. Spring, Am. Math.
Mon. 92 (1985): 631–643.

<<<PAGE 228>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 201
3.4 Constrained Extrema and Lagrange Multipliers 201
table 3.1 The critical points A, B, ...,J ,Ko fh and corresponding values of f
xyz λ f(x,y,z)
±A ±100 0 0
±B0 ±10 0 0
±C0 0 ±10 0
D√
3/3√
3/3√
3/3√
3/6√
3/9
E −√
3/3√
3/3√
3/3 −√
3/6 −√
3/9
F√
3/3 −√
3/3√
3/3 −√
3/6 −√
3/9
G√
3/3√
3/3 −√
3/3 −√
3/6 −√
3/9
H√
3/3 −√
3/3 −√
3/3√
3/6√
3/9
I −√
3/3√
3/3 −√
3/3√
3/6√
3/9
J −√
3/3 −√
3/3√
3/3√
3/6√
3/9
K −√
3/3 −√
3/3 −√
3/3 −√
3/6 −√
3/9
which works out to be +4 at points ±A,±B, and ±C and −16
3at the other eight points.
At E, F , G, and K, we have |H2|<0and|H3|<0, and so the test indicates these are
local minima. At D, H, I, and J we have |H2|>0 and |H3|<0, and so the test says
these are local maxima. Finally, the second-derivative test shows that ±A,±B, and ±C
are saddle points. ▲
exercises
1.Letf(x,y)=x2+3y2. Find the maximum and
minimum values of fsubject to the given constraint.
(a)x2+y2=1
(b)x2+y2≤12.Consider all rectangles with ﬁxed perimeter p. Use
Lagrange multipliers to show that the rectangle with
maximal area is a square.
In Exercises 3 to 7, ﬁnd the extrema of f subject to the stated constraints.
3.f(x,y,z)=x−y+z, subject to x2+y2+z2=2
4.f(x,y)=x−y, subject to x2−y2=2
5.f(x,y)=x, subject to x2+2y2=36.f(x,y,z)=x+y+z, subject to
x2−y2=1, 2x+z=1
7.f(x,y)=3x+2y, subject to 2 x2+3y2=3
Find the relative extrema of f |S in Exercises 8 to 11.
8.f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2,S={(x,2 )|x∈R}
9.f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2+y2,S={(x,y)|y≥2}
10. f:R2→R,(x,y)/mapsto→x2−y2,S={(x, cos x)|x∈R}
11. f:R3→R,(x,y,z)/mapsto→x2+y2+z2,S={(x,y,z)|
z≥2+x2+y2}
12. Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd theabsolute maximum and minimum values off(x,y)=x
2+y2−x−y+1 on the unit disc (see
Example 10 of Section 3.3).
13. Consider the function f(x,y)=x2+xy+y2deﬁned
on the unit disc, namely, D={(x,y)|x2+y2≤1}.
Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to locate themaximum and minimum points for fon the unit circle.
Use this to determine the absolute maximum andminimum values for fonD.

<<<PAGE 229>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 202
202 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
14. Find the absolute maximum and minimum values of
f(x,y,z)=2x+y, subject to the constraint
x+y+z=1.
15. Find the extrema of f(x,y)=4x+2y, subject to the
constraint 2 x2+3y2=21.
16. Use Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd the distance from the
point (2, 0, −1) to the plane 3 x−2y+8z+1=0.
Compare your answer to Example 12 in Section 1.3.
17. Find the maximum and minimum values attained by
f(x,y,z)=xyzon the unit ball x2+y2+z2≤1.
18. LetSbe the sphere of radius 1 centered at (1, 2, 3). Find
the distance from Sto the plane x+y+z=0. (H INT:
Use Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd the distance from theplane to the center of the sphere.)
19. (a) Find three numbers whose product is 27 and whose
sum is minimal.
(b) Find three numbers whose sum is 27 and whose
product is maximal.
20. A rectangular box with no top is to have a surface areaof 16 m
2. Find the dimensions that maximize its volume.
21. Design a cylindrical can (with a lid) to contain 1 liter(=1000 cm
3) of water, using the minimum amount of
metal.
22. Show that solutions of equations (4) and (5) are inone-to-one correspondence with the critical points of
h(x
1,...,xn,λ1,...,λk)
=f(x1,...,xn)−λ1[g1(x1,...,xn)−c1]
−···− λk[gk(x1,...,xn)−ck].
23. Find the absolute maximum and minimum for thefunction f(x,y,z)=x+y−zon the ball
B={(x,y,z)|x
2+y2+z2≤1}.
24. Repeat Exercise 23 for f(x,y,z)=x+yz.
25. A rectangular mirror with area Asquare feet is to have
trim along the edges. If the trim along the horizontaledges costs pcents per foot and that for the vertical
edges costs qcents per foot, ﬁnd the dimensions that
will minimize the total cost.
26. An irrigation canal in Arizona has concrete sides andbottom with trapezoidal cross section of area
A=y(x+ytanθ) and wetted perimeter
P=x+2y/cosθ, where x=bottom width, y=water
depth, and θ=side inclination, measured from vertical.The best design for a ﬁxed inclination θis found by
solving P=minimum subject to the condition
A=constant. Show that y
2=(Acosθ)/(2−sinθ).
27. Apply the second-derivative test to study the nature ofthe extrema in Exercises 3 and 7.
28. A light ray travels from point A to point B crossing aboundary between two media (see Figure 3.4.7). In theﬁrst medium its speed is v
1, and in the second it is v2.
Show that the trip is made in minimum time whenSnell’ s law holds:
sinθ
1
sinθ2=v1
v2.
29. A parcel delivery service requires that the dimensions ofa rectangular box be such that the length plus twice thewidth plus twice the height be no more than 108 inches(l+2w+2h≤108). What is the volume of the
largest-volume box the company will deliver?
xy
A
1
2θ
θv1
v2
B
ﬁgure 3.4.7 Snell’s law of refraction.
30. Let P be a point on a surface SinR3deﬁned by the
equation f(x,y,z)=1, where fis of class C1.
Suppose that P is a point where the distance from theorigin to Sis maximized. Show that the vector
emanating from the origin and ending at P isperpendicular to S.
31. LetAbe a nonzero symmetric 3 ×3 matrix. Thus, its
entries satisfy aij=aji. Consider the function
f(x)=1
2(Ax)·x.
(a) What is ∇f?
(b) Consider the restriction of fto the unit sphere
S={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2=1}inR3.B y
Theorem 7 we know that fmust have a maximum

<<<PAGE 230>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 203
3.5 The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional] 203
and a minimum on S. Show that there must be an
x∈Sand aλ/negationslash=0 such that Ax=λx.(The vector x
is called an eigenvector, while the scalar λis called
aneigenvalue.)
(c) What are the maxima and minima for fon
B={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2≤1}?
32. Suppose that Ain the function fdeﬁned in Exercise 31
is not necessarily symmetric.
(a) What is ∇f?
(b) Can we conclude the existence of an eigenvector
and eigenvalues as in Exercise 31?
33. (a)Find the critical points of x+y2, subject to the
constraint 2 x2+y2=1.
(b)Use the bordered Hessian to classify the critical
points.
34. Answer the question posed in the last line of Example 9.
35. Try to ﬁnd the extrema of xy+yzamong points
satisfying xz=1.36. A company’ s production function is Q(x,y)=xy. The
cost of production is C(x,y)=2x+3y. If this
company can spend C(x,y)=10, what is the maximum
quantity that can be produced?
37. Find the point on the curve (cos t, sint, sin( t/2)) that is
farthest from the origin.
38. A ﬁrm uses wool and cotton ﬁber to produce cloth. Theamount of cloth produced is given by Q(x,y)=
xy−x−y+1, where xis the number of pounds of
wool, ythe number of pounds of cotton, x>1, and
y>1. If wool costs pdollars per pound, cotton costs q
dollars per pound, and the ﬁrm can spend Bdollars on
material, what should the ratio of cotton and wool be toproduce the most cloth?
39. Carry out the analysis of Example 10 for the productionfunction Q(K,L)=AK
αL1−α, where Aandαare
positive constants and 0 <α<1. This is called a
Cobb–Douglas production function and is sometimes
used as a simple model for the national economy.
Qis then the aggregate output of the economy for a
given input of capital and labor.
3.5The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional]
In this section we state two versions of the implicit function theorem, arguably the most
important theorem in all of mathematical analysis. The entire theoretical basis of the
idea of a surface as well as the method of Lagrange multipliers depends on it. Moreover,it is a cornerstone of several ﬁelds of mathematics, such as differential topology andgeometry.
The One-Variable Implicit Function Theorem
In one-variable calculus we learn the importance of the inversion process. For example,
x=lnyis the inverse of y=ex, and x=sin−1yis the inverse of y=sinx. The
inversion process is also important for functions of several variables; for example, theswitch between Cartesian and polar coordinates in the plane involves inverting twofunctions of two variables.
Recall from one-variable calculus that if y=f(x)i sa C
1function and f/prime(x0)/negationslash=0,
then locally near x0we can solve for xto give the inverse function: x=f−1(y). W e
learn that ( f−1)/prime(y)=1/f/prime(x); that is, dx/dy=1/(dy/dx). That y=f(x) can be
inverted is plausible because f/prime(x0)/negationslash=0 means that the slope of y=f(x) is nonzero,
so that the graph is rising or falling near x0. Thus, if we reﬂect the graph across the line
y=x, it is still a graph near (x0,y0), where y0=f(x0). For example, in Figure 3.5.1,
we can invert y=f(x) in the shaded box, so in this range, x=f−1(y) is deﬁned.
A Special Result
We next turn to the situation for real-valued functions of variables x1,...,xnandz.

<<<PAGE 231>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 204
204 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
ﬁgure 3.5.1 Iff/prime(x0)/negationslash=0, then
y=f(x) is locally invertible.
xy
y = f  (x) is invertible
near (x , y )0 00
x0y
Theorem 11 Special Implicit Function Theorem Suppose that F:Rn+1→
Rhas continuous partial derivatives. Denoting points in Rn+1by (x,z), where
x∈Rnandz∈R, assume that ( x0,z0) satisﬁes
F(x0,z0)=0 and∂F
∂z(x0,z0)/negationslash=0.
Then there is a ball Ucontaining x0inRnand a neighborhood Vofz0inRsuch
that there is a unique function z=g(x) deﬁned for xinUandzinVthat satisﬁes
F(x,g(x))=0.
Moreover, if xinUandzinVsatisfy F(x,z)=0, then z=g(x). Finally,
z=g(x) is continuously differentiable, with the derivative given by
Dg(x)=−1
∂F
∂z(x,z)DxF(x,z)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
z=g(x),
where DxFdenotes the (partial) derivative of Fwith respect to the variable x—that
is, we have DxF=[∂F/∂x1,...,∂F/∂xn]; in other words,
∂g
∂xi=−∂F/∂xi
∂F/∂z, i=1,...,n. (1)
A proof of this theorem is given in the Internet supplement.
Once it is known that z=g(x) exists and is differentiable, formula (1) may be checked
by implicit differentiation; to see this, note that the chain rule applied to F(x,g(x))=0
gives
DxF(x,g(x))+/bracketleftbigg∂F
∂z(x,g(x))/bracketrightbigg
[Dg(x)]=0,
which is equivalent to formula (1).

<<<PAGE 232>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 205
3.5 The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional] 205
example 1 In the special implicit function theorem, it is important to recognize the necessity of
taking sufﬁciently small neighborhoods UandV. For example, consider the equation
x2+z2−1=0;
that is, F(x,z)=x2+z2−1, with n=1. Here ( ∂F/∂z)(x,z)=2z, and so the special
implicit function theorem applies to a point ( x0,z0), satisfying x2
0+z2
0−1=0 and
z0/negationslash=0. Thus, near such points, zis a unique function of x. This function is z=√
1−x2
ifz0>0 and z=−√
1−x2ifz0<0. Note that zis deﬁned for |x|<1 only ( Umust
not be too big) and zis unique only if it is near z0(Vmust not be too big). These
facts and the nonexistence of ∂z/∂xatz0=0 are, of course, clear from the fact that
x2+z2=1 deﬁnes a circle in the xzplane (Figure 3.5.2).
xz
z =      1 − x2
z = −      1 − x2(x , z )00
does not exist here≤
≤z
x
ﬁgure 3.5.2 It is necessary to take small neighborhoods in
the implicit function theorem. ▲
The Implicit Function Theorem and Surfaces
Let us apply Theorem 11 to the study of surfaces. We are concerned with the levelset of a function g:U⊂R
n→R; that is, with the surface Sconsisting of the set of
xsatisfying g(x)=c0, where c0=g(x0) and where x0is given. Let us take n=3
for concreteness. Thus, we are dealing with the level surface of a function g(x,y,z)
through a given point ( x0,y0,z0). As in the Lagrange multiplier theorem, assume that
∇g(x0,y0,z0)/negationslash=0. This means that at least one of the partial derivatives of gis nonzero.
For deﬁniteness, suppose that ( ∂g/∂z)(x0,y0,z0)/negationslash=0. By applying Theorem 11 to the
function ( x,y,z)/mapsto→g(x,y,z)−c0, we know there is a unique function z=k(x,y)
satisfying g(x,y,k(x,y))=c0for (x,y) near ( x0,y0) and znear z0. Thus, near z0the
surface Sis the graph of the function k. Because kis continuously differentiable, this
surface has a tangent plane at ( x0,y0,z0) given by
z=z0+/bracketleftbigg∂k
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(x−x0)+/bracketleftbigg∂k
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg
(y−y0). (2)
But by formula (1),
∂k
∂x(x0,y0)=−∂g
∂x(x0,y0,z0)
∂g
∂z(x0,y0,z0)and∂k
∂y(x0,y0)=−∂g
∂y(x0,y0,z0)
∂g
∂z(x0,y0,z0).

<<<PAGE 233>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 206
206 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
ﬁgure 3.5.3 The construction of
a path c(t) in the surface S
whose tangent vector is v.
xz
yv
The line ( x0 /H11001 t(x /H11002 x0), y0 /H11001 t(y /H11002 y0))S: z /H11005 k(x, y)The path c(t)
(x0, y0, z0)
Substituting these two equations into the equation for the tangent plane gives this equiv-
alent description:
0=(z−z0)∂g
∂z(x0,y0,z0)+(x−x0)∂g
∂x(x0,y0,z0)+(y−y0)∂g
∂y(x0,y0,z0);
that is,
(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0)·∇g(x0,y0,z0)=0.
Thus, the tangent plane to the level surface of gis the orthogonal complement to
∇g(x0,y0,z0) through the point ( x0,y0,z0). This agrees with our characterization of
tangent planes to level sets from Chapter 2.
We are now ready to complete the proof of the Lagrange multiplier theorem. To do
this, we must show that every vector tangent to Sat (x0,y0,z0) is tangent to a curve in S.
By Theorem 11, we need only show this for a graph of the form z=k(x,y). However,
ifv=(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0) is tangent to the graph [that is, if it satisﬁes equation
(2)], then vis tangent to the path in Sgiven by
c(t)=(x0+t(x−x0),y0+t(y−y0),k(x0+t(x−x0),y0+t(y−y0)))
att=0. This can be checked by using the chain rule. (See Figure 3.5.3.)
example 2 Near what points may the surface
x3+3y2+8xz2−3z3y=1
be represented as a graph of a differentiable function z=k(x,y)?
solution Here we take F(x,y,z)=x3+3y2+8xz2−3z3y−1 and attempt to solve F(x,y,z)=0
forzas a function of ( x,y). By Theorem 11, this may be done near a point ( x0,y0,z0)
if (∂F/∂z)(x0,y0,z0)/negationslash=0, that is, if
z0(16x0−9z0y0)/negationslash=0,
which means, in turn,
z0/negationslash=0 and 16 x0/negationslash=9z0y0. ▲

<<<PAGE 234>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 207
3.5 The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional] 207
General Implicit Function Theorem
Next we shall state, without proof, the general implicit function theorem.14Instead of
attempting to solve one equation for one variable, we attempt to solve mequations for
mvariables z1,...,zm:
F1(x1,...,xn,z1,...,zm)=0
F2(x1,...,xn,z1,...,zm)=0
.........
F
m(x1,...,xn,z1,...,zm)=0.(3)
In Theorem 11 we had the condition ∂F/∂z/negationslash=0. The condition appropriate to the
general implicit function theorem is that /Delta1/negationslash=0,15where /Delta1is the determinant of the
m×mmatrix
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣∂F
1
∂z1···∂F1
∂zm
......
∂F
m
∂z1···∂Fm
∂zm⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
evaluated at the point ( x
0,z0); in the neighborhood of such a point, we can uniquely
solve for zin terms of x.
Theorem 12 General Implicit Function Theorem If/Delta1/negationslash=0, then near
the point ( x0,z0), equation (3) deﬁnes unique (smooth) functions
zi=ki(x1,...,xn)( i=1,...,m).
Their derivatives may be computed by implicit differentiation.
14For three different proofs of the general case, consult:
(a) E. Goursat, A Course in Mathematical Analysis, I, Dover, New Y ork, 1959, p. 45. (This proof
derives the general theorem by successive application of Theorem 11.)
(b) T. M. Apostol, Mathematical Analysis, 2d ed., Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1974.
(c) J. E. Marsden and M. Hoffman, Elementary Classical Analysis, 2d ed., Freeman, New Y ork, 1993.
Of these sources, the last two use more sophisticated ideas that are usually not covered until a junior-
level course in analysis. The ﬁrst, however, is easily understood by the reader who has some knowledgeof linear algebra.
15For students who have had linear algebra: The condition /Delta1/negationslash=0 has a simple interpretation in the
case that F is linear; namely, /Delta1/negationslash=0 is equivalent to the rank of Fbeing equal to m, which in turn is
equivalent to the fact that the solution space of F=0i sm-dimensional.

<<<PAGE 235>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 208
208 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
example 3 To show that near the point ( x,y,u,v)=(1, 1, 1, 1), we can solve
xu+yvu2=2
xu3+y2v4=2
uniquely for uandvas functions of xandy. Compute ∂u/∂xat the point (1, 1).
solution To check solvability, we form the equations
F1(x,y,u,v)=xu+yvu2−2
F2(x,y,u,v)=xu3+y2v4−2
and the determinant
/Delta1=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂F
1
∂u∂F1
∂v
∂F2
∂u∂F2
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea t ( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 )
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex+2yuv yu
2
3u2x 4y2v3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea t ( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 )
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle31
34/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=9.
Because /Delta1/negationslash=0, solvability is assured by the general implicit function theorem. To ﬁnd
∂u/∂x, we implicitly differentiate the given equations in xusing the chain rule:
x∂u
∂x+u+y∂v
∂xu2+2yvu∂u
∂x=0
3xu2∂u
∂x+u3+4y2v3∂v
∂x=0.
Setting ( x,y,u,v)=( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 )g i v e s
3∂u
∂x+∂v
∂x=−1
3∂u
∂x+4∂v
∂x=−1.
Solving for ∂u/∂xby multiplying the ﬁrst equation by 4 and subtracting gives ∂u/∂x=
−1
3.▲
Inverse Function Theorem
A special case of the general implicit function theorem is the inverse function theorem.
Here we attempt to solve the nequations
f1(x1,...,xn)=y1
···
fn(x1,...,xn)=yn⎫
⎪⎬
⎪⎭(4)
forx1,...,xnas functions of y1,..., yn; that is, we are trying to invert the equa-
tions of system (4). This is analogous to forming the inverses of functions like sin
x=yandex=y, with which you should be familiar from elementary calculus.
Now, however, we are concerned with functions of several variables. The question of

<<<PAGE 236>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 209
3.5 The Implicit Function Theorem [Optional] 209
solvability is answered by the general implicit function theorem applied to the func-
tions yi−fi(x1,...,xn) with the unknowns x1,...,xn(called z1,...,znearlier). The
condition for solvability in a neighborhood of a point x0is/Delta1/negationslash=0, where /Delta1is the
determinant of the matrix Df(x0), and f=(f1,..., fn). The quantity /Delta1is denoted by
∂(f1,..., fn)/∂(x1,...,xn), or∂(y1,..., yn)/∂(x1,...,xn)o rJ(f)(x0) and is called
theJacobian determinant off. Explicitly,
∂(f1,..., fn)
∂(x1,...,xn)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
x=x 0=J(f)(x0)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂f
1
∂x1(x0)···∂f1
∂xn(x0)
......
∂f
n
∂x1(x0)···∂fn
∂xn(x0)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (5)
Note that in the case when fis linear—for example f(x)=Ax, where Ais an n×n
matrix—the condition /Delta1/negationslash=0 is equivalent to the fact that the determinant of A, det
A/negationslash=0, and from Section 1.5 we know that A, and therefore f, has an inverse.
The Jacobian determinant will play an important role in our work on integration (see
Chapter 5). The following theorem summarizes this discussion:
Theorem 13 Inverse Function Theorem LetU⊂Rnbe open and let
f1:U→R,..., fn:U→Rhave continuous partial derivatives. Consider equa-
tions (4) near a given solution x0,y0.I fJ(f)(x0) [deﬁned by equation (5)] is
nonzero, then equation (4) can be solved uniquely as x=g(y) for xnear x0and
ynear y0. Moreover, the function ghas continuous partial derivatives.
example 4 Consider the equations
x4+y4
x=u, sin x+cosy=v.
Near which points ( x,y), can we solve for x,yin terms of u,v?
solution Here the functions are u=f1(x,y)=(x4+y4)/xandv=f2(x,y)=sinx+
cosy. We want to know the points near which we can solve for x,yas functions
ofuandv. According to the inverse function theorem, we must ﬁrst compute the
Jacobian determinant ∂(f1,f2)/∂(x,y). We take the domain of f=(f1,f2)t ob e
U={(x,y)∈R2|x/negationslash=0}.N o w
∂(f1,f2)
∂(x,y)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂f
1
∂x∂f1
∂y
∂f2
∂x∂f2
∂y/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle3x
4−y4
x24y3
x
cosx−siny/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=siny
x2(y4−3x4)−4y3
xcosx.
Therefore, at points where this does not vanish we can solve for x,yin terms of u
andv. In other words, we can solve for x,ynear those x,yfor which x/negationslash=0 and
(siny)(y4−3x4)/negationslash=4xy3cosx. Such conditions generally cannot be solved explicitly.
For example, if x0=π/2,y0=π/2, we can solve for x,ynear ( x0,y0) because there,
∂(f1,f2)/∂(x,y)/negationslash=0. ▲

<<<PAGE 237>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 210
210 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
exercises
1.Show that the equation x+y−z+cos(xyz)=0 can be
solved for z=g(x,y) near the origin. Find∂g
∂xand∂g
∂y
at (0, 0).
2.Show that xy+z+3xz5=4 is solvable for zas a
function of ( x,y) near (1, 0, 1). Compute ∂z/∂xand
∂z/∂yat (1, 0).
3.(a) Check directly (i.e., without using Theorem 11)
where we can solve the equation
F(x,y)=y2+y+3x+1=0 for yin terms of x.
(b) Check that your answer in part (a) agrees with the
answer you expect from the implicit function
theorem. Compute dy/dx.
4.Repeat Exercise 3 with
F(x,y)=xy2−2y+x2+2=0.
5.LetF(x,y)=0 deﬁne a curve in the xyplane through
the point ( x0,y0), where FisC1. Assume that ( ∂F/∂y)
(x0,y0)/negationslash=0. Show that this curve can be locally
represented by the graph of a function y=g(x). Show
that (i) the line orthogonal to ∇F(x0,y0) agrees with
(ii) the tangent line to the graph of y=g(x).
6.Consider the surface Sg i v e nb y3 y2z2−3x=0.
(a)Using the implicit function theorem, verify that wecan solve for xas a function of yandznear any
point on S. Explicitly write xas a function of y
andz.
(b) Show that near (1, 1, −1) we can solve for either y
orz, and give explicit expressions for these
variables in terms of the other two.
7.Show that x3z2−z3yx=0 is solvable for zas a
function of ( x,y) near (1, 1, 1), but not near the origin.
Compute ∂z/∂xand∂z/∂yat (1, 1).
8.Discuss the solvability in the system
3x+2y+z2+u+v2=0
4x+3y+z+u2+v+w+2=0
x+z+w+u2+2=0
foru,v,win terms of x,y,znear
x=y=z=0,u=v=0, and w=−2.
9.Discuss the solvability of
y+x+uv=0
uxy+v=0foru,vin terms of x,ynear x=y=u=v=0 and
check directly.
10. Investigate whether or not the system
u(x,y,z)=x+xyz
v(x,y,z)=y+xy
w(x,y,z)=z+2x+3z2
can be solved for x,y,zin terms of u,v,wnear
(x,y,z)=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) .
11. Consider f(x,y)=((x2−y2)/(x2+y2),
xy/(x2+y2)). Does this map of R2\(0, 0) to R2have a
local inverse near ( x,y)=(0, 1)?
12. (a)Deﬁne x:R2→Rbyx(r,θ)=rcosθand deﬁne
y:R2→Rbyy(r,θ)=rsinθ. Show that
∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(r0,θ0)=r0.
(b)When can we form a smooth inverse function
(r(x,y),θ(x,y))? Check directly and with the
inverse function theorem.
(c) Consider the following transformations for
spherical coordinates (see Section 1.4):
x(ρ,φ,θ)=ρsinφcosθ
x(ρ,φ,θ)=ρsinφsinθ
z(ρ,φ,θ)=ρcosφ.
Show that the Jacobian determinant is given by
∂(x,y,z)
∂(ρ,φ,θ)=ρ2sinφ.
(d) When can we solve for ( ρ,φ,θ) in terms of
(x,y,z)?
13. Let ( x0,y0,z0) be a point of the locus deﬁned by
z2+xy−a=0,z2+x2−y2−b=0, where aandb
are constants.
(a) Under what conditions may the part of the locus
near ( x0,y0,z0) be represented in the form
x=f(z),y=g(z)?
(b) Compute f/prime(z) and g/prime(z).
14. Consider the unit sphere Sgiven by x2+y2+z2=1.
Sintersects the xaxis at two points. Which variables can
we solve for at these points? What about the points ofintersection of Swith the yandzaxes?

<<<PAGE 238>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 211
Review Exercises for Chapter 3 211
15. LetF(x,y)=x3−y2and let Cdenote the level curve
given by F(x,y)=0.
(a)Without using the implicit function theorem, show
that we can describe Cas the graph of xas a
function of ynear any point.
(b)Show that Fx(0, 0) =0. Does this contradict the
implicit function theorem?
16. Consider the system of equations
x5v2+2y3u=3
3yu−xuv3=2.
Show that near the point ( x,y,u,v)=(1, 1, 1, 1), this
system deﬁnes uandvimplicitly as functions of xand
y. For such local functions uandv, deﬁne the local
function fbyf(x,y)=(u(x,y),v(x,y)). Find
Df(1, 1).
17. Consider the equations
x2−y2−u3+v2+4=0
2xy+y2−2u2+3v4+8=0.(a) Show that these equations determine functions
u(x,y) andv(x,y) near the point
(x,y,u,v)=(2,−1, 2, 1).
(b) Compute∂u
∂xat (x,y)=(2,−1).
18. Is it possible to solve the system of equations
xy2+xzu+yv2=3
u3yz+2xv−u2v2=2
foru(x,y,z),v(x,y,z) near
(x,y,z)=( 1 ,1 ,1 ) ,( u,v)=(1, 1)? Compute ∂v/∂ yat
(x,y,z)=( 1 ,1 ,1 ) .
19. The problem of factoring a polynomial
xn+an−1xn−1+···+ a0into linear factors is, in a
sense, an “inverse function” problem. The coefﬁcients ai
may be thought of as functions of the nroots rj.W e
would like to ﬁnd the roots as functions of thecoefﬁcients in some region. With n=3, apply the
inverse function theorem to this problem and state whatit tells you about the possibility of doing this.
review exercises for chapter 3
1.Letfbe any differentiable function. Show that
u=f(y−kx) is a solution to the partial differential
equation∂u
∂x+k∂u
∂y=0.
2.Prove that if uandvhave continuous mixed second
partial derivatives and satisfy the Cauchy–Riemannequations
∂u
∂x=∂v
∂y
∂u
∂y=−∂v
∂x,
then both uandvare harmonic.
3.Letf(x,y)=x2−y2−xy+5. Find all critical points
offand determine whether they are local minima, local
maxima, or saddle points.
4.Find the absolute minimum and maximum values of thefunction f(x,y)=x
2+3xy+y2+5 on the unit disc
D={(x,y)|x2+y2≤1}.
5.Find the second-order Taylor polynomial for
f(x,y)=y2e−x2at (1, 1).6.Letf(x,y)=ax2+bxy+cy2.
(a) Find g(x,y), the second-order Taylor approximation
tofat (0, 0).
(b) What is the relationship between gand f?
(c) Prove that R2(x0,h)=0 for all x0,h∈R2.(HINT:
Show that fis equal to its second-order Taylor
approximation at every point.)
7.Analyze the behavior of the following functions at theindicated points. [Y our answer in part (b) may depend onthe constant C.]
(a)z=x
2−y2+3xy,( x,y)=(0, 0)
(b)z=x2−y2+Cxy,( x,y)=(0, 0)
8.Find and classify the extreme values (if any) of thefunctions on R
2deﬁned by the following expressions:
(a)y2−x3
(b) ( x−1)2+(x−y)2
(c)x2+xy2+y4
9.(a) Find the minimum distance from the origin in R3to
the surface z=√
x2−1.
(b) Repeat part (a) for the surface z=6xy+7.

<<<PAGE 239>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 212
212 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
10. Find the ﬁrst few terms in the Taylor expansion of
f(x,y)=exycosxabout x=0,y=0.
11. Prove that
z=3x4−4x3−12x2+18
12(1+4y2)
has one local maximum, one local minimum, and one
saddle point. (The graph is shown in Figure 3.R.1.)
y axis
x axis−2
0
1
2−1
0
1
2−1012
−1
ﬁgure 3.R.1 Graph of
z=(3x4−4x3−12x2+18)/12(1 +4y2).
12. Find the maxima, minima, and saddles of the function
z=(2+cosπx)(sinπy), which is graphed in
Figure 3.R.2.
0−1
10
−2
−1
0
1−3−2−1123
y axis
x axis
ﬁgure 3.R.2 Graph of z=(2+cosπx) ( sin πy).13. Find and describe the critical points of
f(x,y)=ysin (πx) . (See Figure 3.R.3.)
0−2
−1
1
2−1
0
1
2−2−1012
y axis x axis
ﬁgure 3.R.3 Graph of z=ysin (π x).
14. A graph of the function z=sin(πx)/(1+y2) is shown
in Figure 3.R.4. Verify that this function has alternating
maxima and minima on the xaxis, with no other critical
points.
0−2
−1
1−2
−1
0
1
2−0.500.51
y axisx axis
ﬁgure 3.R.4 Graph of z=sin (π x)/(1+y2).
In Exercises 15 to 20, ﬁnd the extrema of the given functions subject to the given constraints.
15. f(x,y)=x2−2xy+2y2, subject to x2+y2=1
16. f(x,y)=xy−y2, subject to x2+y2=1
17. f(x,y)=cos(x2−y2), subject to x2+y2=1
18. f(x,y)=x2−y2
x2+y2, subject to x+y=1
19. z=xy, subject to the condition x+y=120. z=cos2x+cos2y, subject to the condition
x+y=π/4
21. Find the points on the surface z2−xy=1 nearest to the
origin.
22. Use the implicit function theorem to compute dy/dxfor
(a)x/y=10
(b)x3−siny+y4=4
(c)ex+y2+y3=0

<<<PAGE 240>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 213
Review Exercises for Chapter 3 213
23. Find the shortest distance from the point (0, b) to the
parabola x2−4y=0. Solve this problem using the
Lagrange multiplier method and also without using
Lagrange’ s method.
24. Determine all values of kfor which the function
g(x,y,z)=x2+kxy+kxz+ky2+kz2has a local
minimum at (0, 0, 0).
25. Find and classify all critical points of the function
g(x,y)=1
4x4−5
3x3+y3+3x2−3
2y2+20.
26. Solve the following geometric problems by Lagrange’ smethod.
(a) Find the shortest distance from the point ( a
1,a2,a3)
inR3to the plane whose equation is given by
b1x1+b2x2+b3x3+b0=0, where
(b1,b2,b3)/negationslash=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) .
(b) Find the point on the line of intersection of the two
planes a1x1+a2x2+a3x3=0 and
b1x1+b2x2+b3x3+b0=0 that is nearest to the
origin.
(c)Show that the volume of the largest rectangularparallelepiped that can be inscribed in the ellipsoid
x
2
a2+y2
b2+z2
c2=1
is 8abc/3√
3.
27. A particle moves in a potential V(x,y)=
x3−y2+x2+3xy. Determine whether (0, 0) is a stable
equilibrium point; that is, whether or not (0, 0) is a strictlocal minimum of V.
28. Study the nature of the function f(x,y)=x3−3xy2
near (0, 0). Show that the point (0, 0) is a degeneratecritical point; that is, D=0. This surface is called a
monkey saddle.
29. Find the maximum of f(x,y)=xyon the curve
(x+1)2+y2=1.
30. Find the maximum and minimum of
f(x,y)=xy−y+x−1 on the set x2+y2≤2.
31. The Baraboo, Wisconsin, plant of International WidgetCo., Inc., uses aluminium, iron, and magnesium toproduce high-quality widgets. The quantity of widgetsthat may be produced using xtons of aluminum, ytons
of iron, and ztons of magnesium is Q(x,y,z)=xyz.
The cost of raw materials is aluminum, $6 per ton; iron,$4 per ton; and magnesium, $8 per ton. How many tonseach of aluminum, iron, and magnesium should be usedto manufacture 1000 widgets at the lowest possible cost?(H
INT: Find an extreme value for what function subject
to what constraint.)
32. Letf:R→Rbe of class C1and let
u=f(x)
v=− y+xf(x).
Iff/prime(x0)/negationslash=0, show that this transformation of R2toR2
is invertible near ( x0,y0) and its inverse is given by
x=f−1(u)
y=−v+uf−1(u).
33. Show that the pair of equations
x2−y2−u3+v2+4=0
2xy+y2−2u2+3v4+8=0
determine functions u(x,y) andv(x,y) deﬁned for
(x,y) near x=2 and y=−1 such that u(2,−1)=2
andv(2,−1)=1. Compute ∂u/∂xat (2,−1).
34. Show that there are positive numbers pandqand unique
functions uandvfrom the interval ( −1−p,−1+p)
into the interval (1 −q,1+q) satisfying
xeu(x)+u(x)ev(x)=0=xev(x)+v(x)eu(x)
for all xin the interval ( −1−p,−1+p) with
u(−1)=1=v(−1).
35. To work this exercise, you should be familiar withthe technique of diagonalizing a 2 ×2 matrix. Let
a(x),b(x), and c(x) be three continuous functions
deﬁned on U∪∂U, where Uis an open set and ∂U
denotes its set of boundary points (see Section 2.2). Usethe notation of Lemma 2 in Section 3.3, and assume thatfor each x∈U∪∂Uthe quadratic form deﬁned by the
matrix
/bracketleftbigg
ab
bc/bracketrightbigg
is positive-deﬁnite. For a C2function vonU∪∂U,w e
deﬁne a differential operator Lby
Lv=a(∂2v/∂x2)+2b(∂2v/∂x∂y)+c(∂2v/∂y2).
With this positive-deﬁnite condition, such an operator issaid to be elliptic. A function vis said to be strictly
subharmonic relative toLifLv>0. Show that a
strictly subharmonic function cannot have a maximumpoint in U.

<<<PAGE 241>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 214
214 Higher-Order Derivatives: Maxima and Minima
36. A function vis said to be in the kernel of the operator L
described in Exercise 35 if Lv=0o n U∪∂U. Arguing
as in Exercise 47 of Section 3.3, show that if vachieves
its maximum on U, it also achieves it on ∂U. This is
called the weak maximum principle for elliptic
operators.
37. LetLbe an elliptic differential operator as in Exercises
35 and 36.
(a) Deﬁne the notion of a strict superharmonic function.
(b) Show that such functions cannot achieve a minimum
onU.
(c) If vis as in Exercise 36, show that if vachieves its
minimum on U, it also achieves it on ∂U.
38. Consider the surface Sgiven by
x2z+xsiny+yez−1=1.
(a) Find the equation of the tangent plane to Sat the
point (1, 0, 1).
(b) Is it possible to solve the equation deﬁning Sfor the
variable yas a function of the variables xandznear
(1, 0, 1)? Why?
(c) Find∂y
∂xat (1, 0, 1).
39. Consider the system of equations
2xu3v−yv=1
y3v+x5u2=2
Show that near the point ( x,y,u,v)=(1, 1, 1, 1), this
system deﬁnes uandvimplicitly as functions of xandy.
For such local functions uandv, deﬁne the local function
fbyf(x,y)=(u(x,y),v(x,y)). Find Df(1, 1).
The following method of least squares should be applied to
Exercises 40 to 45.
It sometimes happens that the theory behind an
experiment indicates that the experimental data should lieapproximately along a straight line of the form y=mx+b.
The actual results, of course, never match the theory exactly.We are then faced with the problem of ﬁnding the straight linethatbest ﬁts some set of experimental data ( x
1,y1),...,
(xn,yn) as in Figure 3.R.5. If we guess at a straight line
y=mx+bto ﬁt the data, each point will deviate vertically
from the line by an amount di=yi−(mxi+b).
We would like to choose mandbin such a way as to
make the total effect of these deviations as small as possible.However, because some are negative and some positive, wecould get a lot of cancellations and still have a pretty bad ﬁt.This leads us to suspect that a better measure of the total errormight be the sum of the squares of these deviations. Thus, we
are led to the problem of ﬁnding the mandbthat minimizethe function
s=f(m,b)=d
2
1+d2
2+···+ d2
n=n/summationdisplay
i=1(yi−mxi−b)2,
where x1,...,xnandy1,..., ynare the given data.
xy
bd(x , y )1d3
d211
(x , y )2 2(x , y )33
ﬁgure 3.R.5 The method of least squares tries to ﬁnd a
straight line that best approximates a set of data.
40. For each set of three data points, plot the points, writedown the function f(m,b) from the preceding equation,
ﬁndmandbto give the best straight-line ﬁt according to
the method of least squares, and plot the straight line.
(a)(x
1,y1)=(1, 1)
(x2,y2)=(2, 3)
(x3,y3)=(4, 3)
(b) ( x1,y1)=(0, 0)
(x2,y2)=(1, 2)
(x3,y3)=(2, 3)
41. Show that if only two data points ( x1,y1) and ( x2,y2)
are given, this method produces the line through ( x1,y1)
and ( x2,y2).
42. Show that the equations for a critical point, ∂s/∂b=0
and∂s/∂m=0, are equivalent to
m/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
xi/parenrightbigg
+nb=/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
yi/parenrightbigg
and
m/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
x2
i/parenrightbigg
+b/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
xi/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbigg/summationdisplay
xiyi/parenrightbigg
,
where all the sums run from i=1t oi=n.
43. Ify=mx+bis the best-ﬁtting straight line to the data
points ( x1,y1),...,( xn,yn) according to the

<<<PAGE 242>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 9:38 215
Review Exercises for Chapter 3 215
least-square method, show that
n/summationdisplay
i=1(yi−mxi−b)=0;
that is, the positive and negative deviations cancel (see
Exercise 42).
44. Use the second-derivative test to show that the criticalpoint of fis a minimum.
45. Use the method of least squares to ﬁnd the straight linethat best ﬁts the points (0, 1), (1, 3), (2, 2), (3, 4), and(4, 5). Plot the points and line.
16
46. The partial differential equation
∂4u
∂x4=−1
c2∂2u
∂t2,
where cis a constant, comes up in the study of
deﬂections of a thin beam. Show that
u(x,t)=sin(λπx) cos(λ2π2ct)
is a solution for any choice of the parameter λ.47. The Kortweg–DeVries equation
∂u
∂t+u∂u
∂x+∂3u
∂x3=0
arises in modeling shallow water waves (called solitons).
Show that
u(x,t)=12a2sech2(ax−4a3t)
is a solution to the Kortweg–DeVries equation (see theInternet supplement).
48. The heat-conduction equation in two space dimensions is
k(uxx+uyy)=ut.
Assuming that u(x,y,t)=X(x)Y(y)T(t), ﬁnd ordinary
differential equations satisﬁed by X(x),Y(y), and T(t).
49. The heat conduction equation in two space dimensionsmay be expressed in terms of polar coordinates as
k/parenleftBig
urr+1
rur+1
r2uθθ/parenrightBig
=ut.
Assuming that u(r,θ,t)=R(r)/Theta1(θ)T(t), ﬁnd ordinary
differential equations satisﬁed by R(r),/Theta1(θ), and T(t).
16The method of least squares may be varied and generalized in a number of ways. The basic idea can be applied to equations of more
complicated curves than the straight line. For example, this might be done to ﬁnd the parabola that best ﬁts a given set of data points. These
ideas also formed part of the basis for the development of the science of cybernetics by Norbert Wiener. Another version of the data is thefollowing problem of least-square approximation: Given a function fdeﬁned and integrable on an interval [ a,b], ﬁnd a polynomial Pof
degree ≤nsuch that the mean square error
/integraldisplayb
a|f(x)−P(x)|2dx
is as small as possible.

<<<PAGE 243>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 244>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 217
4
Vector-Valued Functions
...who by vigor of mind almost divine, the motions and ﬁgures of the planets, the paths
of comets, and the tides of the seas ﬁrst demonstrated. ---Newton’s Epitaph
Chapters 2 and 3 focused on real-valued functions. This chapter is
largely concerned with vector-valued functions. We begin in the ﬁrst
section of this chapter with a continuation of our study of paths, adding
applications of Newton's second law. Then we study arc length of paths.Following this, we introduce the divergence and curl of a vector ﬁeldwhich, in addition to the gradient, are basic operations in vector dif-
ferential calculus. Then the geometry and calculus of the divergence
and curl are studied. The associated integral calculus will be given in
Chapter 8.
4.1Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law
In Section 2.4 we studied the basic geometry of paths, learning how to sketch curves
(the images of paths) and compute tangent lines. We also learned to think of, as the namesuggests, a path as the trajectory of a particle and to regard the derivative of the path asits velocity vector. In this section we continue our study of paths, including additionaltopics, especially acceleration and Newton’ s second law.
Differentiation of Paths
Recall that a path in Rnis a map cofRor an interval in RtoRn. If the path is differ-
entiable, its derivative at each time tis an n×1 matrix. Speciﬁcally, if x1(t),...,xn(t)
are the component functions of c, the derivative matrix is
c/prime(t)=⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣dx
1/dt
dx2/dt
...
dxn/dt⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦,
which can also be written in vector form as
(dx
1/dt,...,dxn/dt)o r a s( x/prime
1(t),...,x/prime
n(t)).
217

<<<PAGE 245>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 218
218 Vector-Valued Functions
Recall from Section 2.4 that c/prime(t) is the tangent vector to the path at the point c(t).
Also recall that if crepresents the path of a moving particle, then its velocity vector is
v=c/prime(t),
and its speed iss=/bardblv/bardbl.
The differentiation of paths is facilitated by the following rules.
Differentiation Rules Letb(t) and c(t) be differentiable paths in R3andp(t)
andq(t) be differentiable scalar functions:
Sum Rule :d
dt[b(t)+c(t)]=b/prime(t)+c/prime(t)
Scalar Multiplication Rule :d
dt[p(t)c(t)]=p/prime(t)c(t)+p(t)c/prime(t)
Dot Product Rule :d
dt[b(t)·c(t)]=b/prime(t)·c(t)+b(t)·c/prime(t)
Cross Product Rule :d
dt[b(t)×c(t)]=b/prime(t)×c(t)+b(t)×c/prime(t)
Chain Rule :d
dt[c(q(t))]=q/prime(t)c/prime(q(t))
These rules follow by applying the usual differentiation rules to the components.
example 1 Show that if c(t) is a vector function such that /bardblc(t)/bardblis constant, then c/prime(t) is perpen-
dicular to c(t) for all t.
solution Because /bardblc(t)/bardblis constant, so is its square /bardblc(t)/bardbl2=c(t)·c(t). The derivative of this
constant is zero, so by the dot product rule,
0=d
dt[c(t)·c(t)]=c/prime(t)·c(t)+c(t)·c/prime(t)=2c(t)·c/prime(t);
thus, c(t)·c/prime(t)=0; that is, c/prime(t) is perpendicular to c(t). ▲
For a path describing uniform rectilinear motion, the velocity vector is constant. In
general, the velocity vector is a vector function v=c/prime(t) that depends on t. The
derivative a=dv/dt=c/prime/prime(t) is called the acceleration of the curve. If the curve is
(x(t),y(t),z(t)), then the acceleration at time tis given by
a(t)=x/prime/prime(t)i+y/prime/prime(t)j+z/prime/prime(t)k
example 2 A particle moves in such a way that its acceleration is constantly equal to −k. If the
position when t=0 is (0, 0, 1) and the velocity at t=0i si+j, when and where
does the particle fall below the plane z=0? Describe the path traveled by the particle
(assume t≥0).

<<<PAGE 246>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 219
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 219
solution Letc(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t))=x(t)i+y(t)j+z(t)kbe the path traced out by the
particle, so that the velocity vector is c/prime(t)=x/prime(t)i+y/prime(t)j+z/prime(t)k. The acceleration
c/prime/prime(t)i s−k,s ox/prime/prime(t)=0,y/prime/prime(t)=0, and z/prime/prime(t)=−1. It follows that x/prime(t) and y/prime(t) are
constant functions, and z/prime(t) is a linear function with slope −1. Because c/prime(0)=i+j,
we get c/prime(t)=i+j−tk. Integrating again and using the initial position (0, 0, 1), we
ﬁnd that ( x(t),y(t),z(t))=(t,t,1−1
2t2). The particle drops below the plane z=0
when 1 −1
2t2=0; that is, t=√
2 (because t≥0). At that instant, the position is
(√
2,√
2, 0). The path traveled by the particle is a parabola in the plane y=x(see
Figure 4.1.1), because in this plane the equation is described by z=1−1
2x2.▲(0, 0, 1)
v(0)
y
x
2,( 2, 0)
z
ﬁgure 4.1.1 The path of the
particle with initial position
(0, 0, 1), initial velocity i+j, and
constant acceleration −k
is a parabola in the plane y=x.The image of a C1path is not necessarily “very smooth”; indeed, it may have sharp
bends or changes of direction. For instance, the cycloid c(t)=(t−sint,1−cost)
shown in Figure 2.4.6 has cusps at all points where ctouches the xaxis (that is, when
1−cost=0, which happens when t=2πn,n=0,±1,...). Another example is the
hypocycloid of four cusps ,c: [0, 2π]→R2,t/mapsto→( cos3t, sin3t), which has cusps at
four points (Figure 4.1.2). At all such points, however, c/prime(t)=0, and the tangent line is
not well deﬁned. Evidently, the direction of c/prime(t) may change abruptly at points where
it slows to rest.
A differentiable path cis said to be regular att=t0ifc/prime(t0)/negationslash=0.I fc/prime(t)/negationslash=0for all
t, we say that cis a regular path. In this case, the image curve looks smooth.
example 3 A particle moves along a hypocycloid according to the equations
x=cos3t, y=sin3t, a≤t≤b.
What are the velocity and speed of the particle?
solution The velocity vector of the particle is
v=dx
dti+dy
dtj=−(3 sin tcos2t)i+(3 cos tsin2t)j,
and its speed is
s=/bardblv/bardbl=(9 sin2tcos4t+9 cos2tsin4t)1/2=3|sint||cost|.▲
xy
Image of c
c′(t)c(t)ﬁgure 4.1.2 The image of the smooth path
c(t)=( cos3t, sin3t), a hypocycloid, does
not “look smooth.”

<<<PAGE 247>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 220
220 Vector-Valued Functions
Newton’s Second Law
If a particle of mass mmoves in R3, the force Facting on it at the point c(t) is related
to the acceleration a(t)b yNewton’s second law:1
F(c(t ))=ma(t).
In particular, if no forces act on a particle, then a(t)=0,s oc/prime(t) is constant and the
particle follows a straight line.
Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law The acceleration of a path
c(t)i s
a(t)=c/prime/prime(t).
IfFis the force acting and mis the mass of the particle, then
F=ma.
In the problem of determining the path c(t) of a particle under the inﬂuence of a given
force ﬁeld, F, Newton’ s law becomes a differential equation (i.e., an equation involving
derivatives) for c(t).
For example, the motion of a planet moving along a path r(t) around the sun (con-
sidered to be located at the origin in R3) obeys the law
mr/prime/prime=−GmM
r3r,
where Mis the mass of the sun, mthat of the planet, r=/bardblr/bardbl, and Gis the gravita-
tional constant. The relation used in determining the force, F=−GmM r/r3, is called
Newton’s law of gravitation (see Figure 4.1.3). We shall not make a general study
of such equations in this book, but content ourselves with the special case of cir-
cular orbits. (More general orbits—the conic sections—are discussed in the Internetsupplement.)F
Mm
y
xz
ﬁgure 4.1.3 A mass Mattracts a
mass mwith a force Fgiven by
Newton’s law of gravitation:
F=−GmM r/r3.Circular Orbits
Consider a particle of mass mmoving at constant speed sin a circular path of radius
r0. Supposing that it moves in the xyplane, we can suppress the third component and
write its location as
r(t)=/parenleftbigg
r0cosst
r0,r0sinst
r0/parenrightbigg
.
1Most scientists acknowledge that F=mais the single most important equation in all of science and
engineering.

<<<PAGE 248>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 221
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 221
xa(t)r(t)y
r′(t) = v
ﬁgure 4.1.4 The position, velocity, and acceleration
of a particle in circular motion.
Note that this is a circle of radius r0and that its speed is given by /bardblr/prime(t)/bardbl=s . The
quantity s/r0is called the frequency and is denoted ω. Thus,
r(t)=(r0cosωt,r0sinωt).
The acceleration is given by
a(t)=r/prime/prime(t)=/parenleftbigg
−s2
r0cosst
r0,−s2
r0sinst
r0/parenrightbigg
=−s2
r2
0r(t)=−ω2r(t).
Thus, the acceleration is in a direction opposite to r(t); that is, it is directed toward the
center of the circle (see Figure 4.1.4). This acceleration multiplied by the mass of the
particle is called the centripetal force. Even though the speed is constant, the direction
of the velocity is continuously changing and therefore the acceleration, which is a rateof change in either speed or direction or both, is nonzero.
Newton’ s law helps us discover a relationship between the radius of the orbit of a
revolving body and the period; that is, the time it takes for one complete revolution.Consider a satellite of mass mmoving with a speed saround a central body with mass
Min acircular orbit of radius r
0(distance from the center of the spherical central body).
By Newton’ s second law F=ma,w eg e t
−s2m
r2
0r(t)=−GmM
r3
0r(t).
The lengths of the vectors on both sides of this equation must be equal. Hence
s2=GM
r0.
IfTdenotes the period, then s=2πr0/T; substituting this value for sin the preceding
equation and solving for T, we obtain the following:
Kepler’s Law
T2=r3
0(2π)2
GM.
Thus, the square of the period is proportional to the cube of the radius.

<<<PAGE 249>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 222
222 Vector-Valued Functions
We have deﬁned two basic concepts associated with a path: its velocity and its
acceleration. Both involve differential calculus. The basic concept of the length of a
path, which involves integral calculus, will be taken up in the next section.
example 4 Suppose that a satellite is to be in a circular orbit about the earth such that it stays ﬁxed
in the sky over one point on the equator. What is the radius of such a geosynchronous
orbit? (The mass of the earth is 5.98 ×1024kilograms and G=6.67×10−11in the
meter-kilogram-second [kgs] system of units.)
solution The period of the satellite should be 1 day, so T=60×60×24=86,400 seconds.
From the formula T2=r3
0(2π)2/GM ,w eg e t r3
0=T2GM/(2π)2, and so
r3
0=T2GM
(2π)2=(86,400)2×(6.67×10−11)×(5.98×1024)
(2π)2≈7.54×1022m3.
Thus, r0=4.23×107m=42,300 km ≈26,200 mi. ▲
Supplement to Section 4.1: Planetary Orbits, Hamilton’s
Principle, and Spacecraft Trajectories
In this section we have been studying paths in space and Newton’ s second law. Hopefully,
you realize that these ideas apply to the real world—the motion of our earth around thesun, for example, is governed by these laws. But there is more to the story, and we willtry to convey some of it here.
Historical NoteKepler, Newton, Hamilton, Feynman, and Planck
As we discussed in the historical introduction, the law of planetary motion stating
that the square of the period is proportional to the cube of the radius of an orbit isone of the three that Kepler observed before Newton formulated his laws ofmotion, known more generally as Newton's mechanics. These mechanicsenable us to compute the period of a satellite about the earth or a planet aboutthe sun (when the radius of its orbit is given), and, as we will indicate shortly,trajectories of space missions.
Kepler discovered and used results like this not only for circular orbits but more
generally for elliptical orbits. Newton was able to derive Kepler's three celestiallaws from his own law of gravitation. The neat mathematical order of the universethat these laws provided had a great impact on eighteenth-century thought.
Newton never wrote down his laws of mechanics as differential equations.
This was first done by Euler around 1730. Newton made most of his deductions (atleast those in published form) by geometric methods. Euler also showed howNewton’s equations followed from Maupertuis’ action principle. The clearestversion of the action principle in mechanics, now known as Hamilton’s
principle , is due to William Rowan Hamilton around 1830, who, as we all should
now know, happens to also be the father of vector calculus. Hamilton’s version ofMaupertuis’ principle was elegantly presented by Richard Feynman, as wediscuss next.

<<<PAGE 250>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 223
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 223
ﬁgure 4.1.5 Richard P . Feynman
(1918--1988).FEYNMAN AND HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE. In his legendary Caltech Lectures on
Physics , Nobel Prize--winning physicist Richard Phillips Feynman (see Figures 4.1.5
and 4.1.6) included what he called a “Special Lecture” on a topic clearly very
close to his heart---one that he first heard about from his New York high schoolteacher, Mr. Bader. Mr. Bader told his (apparently bored) student Feynman howprinciples of maxima and minima apply to the trajectories of moving objectsand in particular how the action principle of Maupertuis, Leibniz, and Hamilton(discussed in Section 3.3) applies to Newton’s mechanics, governed by F=ma.
Professor Feynman, at the end of his lecture, notes that “a physicist, a student
of Mr. Bader, in 1942 showed how this action principle applied to quantummechanics.” That student was Feynman himself, who received the Nobel Prize forhis insights, which also included the discovery of Feynman integrals . The moral
here is pay attention to your teachers---especially the best ones!
ﬁgure 4.1.6 Feynman lecturing
at Caltech.We include the first part of Feynman’s lecture here and more of it in the
Internet supplement; see Volume II, Lecture 19, of the Feynman Lectures on
Physics for the entire lecture.
The Principle of Least Action, by Richard Feynman
When I was in high school, my physics teacher---whose name was Mr.Bader---called me down one day after physics class and said, “You lookbored; I want to tell you something interesting.” Then he told me somethingwhich I found absolutely fascinating, and have, since then, always foundfascinating. Every time the subject comes up, I work on it. In fact, when Ibegan to prepare this lecture I found myself making more analyses on thething. Instead of worrying about the lecture, I got involved in a newproblem. The subject is this---the principle of least action.
Mr. Bader told me the following: Suppose you have a particle (in a
gravitational field, for instance) which starts somewhere and moves tosome other point by free motion---you throw it, and it goes up and comesdown [see Figure 4.1.7].
HereActual motion
t1t2There
ﬁgure 4.1.7
It goes from the original place to the final place in a certain amount of
time. Now, you try a different motion. Suppose that to get from here tothere, it went like this [see Figure 4.1.8], but got there in just the sameamount of time.
Then he said this: “If you calculate the kinetic energy at every moment
on the path, take away the potential energy, and integrate it over the timeduring the whole path, you’ll find that the number you’ll get is bigger thanthat for the actual motion.”

<<<PAGE 251>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 224
224 Vector-Valued Functions
t1t2
HereImagined
motionThere
ﬁgure 4.1.8
In other words, the laws of Newton could be stated not in the form
F=mabut in the form: The average kinetic energy less the average
potential energy is as little as possible for the path of an object going from
one point to another.
Let me illustrate a little better what this means. If you take the case of the
gravitational field, then if the particle has the path x(t) (let’s just take one
dimension for a moment; we take a trajectory that goes up and downand not sideways), where xis the height above the ground, the kinetic
energy is
1
2m(dx/dt )2, and the potential energy at any time is mgx.N o wI
take the kinetic energy minus the potential energy at every moment alongthe path and integrate that with respect to time from the initial time to thefinal time. Let’s suppose that at the original time t
1we started at some
height and at the end of the time t2we are definitely ending at some other
place [see Figure 4.1.9].
x
tt2 t1
ﬁgure 4.1.9
Then the integral is
/integraldisplayt2
t1/bracketleftBigg
1
2m/parenleftbigg
dx
dt/parenrightbigg2
−mgx/bracketrightBigg
dt.

<<<PAGE 252>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 225
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 225
The actual motion is some kind of curve---it’s a parabola if we plot against
the time---and gives a certain value for the integral. But we could imagine
some other motion that went very high and came up and down in somepeculiar way [see Figure 4.1.10].
x
tt2 t1
ﬁgure 4.1.10
We can calculate the kinetic energy minus the potential energy and
integrate for such a path . . . or for any other path we want. The miracle isthat the true path is the one for which that integral is least.
MAX PLANCK AND THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST ACTION.
Max Planck (see
Figure 4.1.11), one of the greatest scientists of the modern era and the discoverer
of the “quantization” of nature, was also a profound believer in the mathematicaldesign of the universe, and in particular the principle of least action. He arguedthat the universality of this principle was evidence of a divine creator, and thestructure of the universe a result of divine reason. On June 29, 1922, on “LeibnizDay” in Berlin, Germany, just a few years after World War I, with all its terriblecarnage, Planck delivered an address honoring this great scholar and hisdiscovery of the principle of least action.
In the following paragraphs we excerpt some of Planck’s remarks.
ﬁgure 4.1.11 Max Planck
(1858--1947).Modern science, in particular under the influence of the development of the
notion of causality, has moved far away from Leibniz’s teleological point of view.Science has abandoned the assumption of a special, anticipating reason, and itconsiders each event in the natural and spiritual world, at least in principle, asreducible to prior states. But still we notice a fact, particularly in the most exactscience, which, at least in this context, is most surprising. Present-day physics, asfar as it is theoretically organized, is completely governed by a system ofspace--time differential equations which state that each process in nature istotally determined by the events which occur in its immediate temporal andspatial neighborhood.
This entire rich system of differential equations, though they differ in detail,
since they refer to mechanical, electric, magnetic, and thermal processes, isnow completely contained in a single dictum--- the principle of least action . This,
in short, states that, of all possible processes, the only ones that actually occurare those that involve minimum expenditure of action. As we can see, only ashort step is required to recognize in the preference for the smallest quantity of

<<<PAGE 253>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 226
226
Vector-Valued Functions
ﬁgure
4.1.12
Trajectory of the
Genesis
spacecraft from the
earth to a periodic orbit about a
million and a half kilometers from
earth and the interesting return
trajectory to earth.
0
500,000
z
 (km)
−
1
E
 
+ 
06
0
1
E
 
+ 
06
x
 (km)
−
500,000
0
500,000
y
 (km
)
X
Y
Z
Halo
orbit
Transfer
to halo
Earth
Moon's
orbit
Return
trajectory
to earth
Sun
L
1
L
2
action the ruling of divine reason, and thus to discover a part of Leibniz’s
teleological ordering of the universe.
2
In present-day physics the principle of least action plays a relatively minor
role. It does not quite fit into the framework of present theories. Of course,
admittedly it is a correct statement; yet usually it serves not as the foundation of
the theory, but as a true but dispensable appendix, because present theoretical
physics is entirely tailored to the principle of infinitesimal local effects, and sees
extensions to larger spaces and times as an unnecessary and uneconomical
complication of the method of treatment. Hence, physics is inclined to view the
principle of least action more as a formal and accidental curiosity than as a
pillar of physical knowledge.
Real-Life Trajectories
Interesting paths in
R
3
that obey Newton’ s second law occur in our own solar system
and are used by NASA to plan space missions. One such mission, the
Genesis
Discovery
Mission, launched from earth August 8, 2001, has a particularly interesting trajectory,
as shown in Figure 4.1.12. More information about this trajectory and the mission
objectives can be found at http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/.
The points denoted
L
1
and
L
2
in this ﬁgure denote places of balance (discovered
by Euler) between the earth and the sun. A motionless spacecraft positioned there
will remain there. There are periodic orbits about these points that we have (loosely)
called
halo orbits
. The main dynamics of the spacecraft is governed by the pull of both
the earth and the sun (and to a very small extent the moon) on the spacecraft. This
is thus part of the famous
three-body problem
studied and made famous by Poincar´ e
around 1890.
3
2
For more information and history, consult S. Hildebrandt and A. J. Tromba,
The Parsimonious Uni-
verse: Shape and Form in the Natural World
, Springer-Verlag, New Y ork/Berlin, 1995.
3
For more information about Poincar´ e, see F . Diacu and P . Holmes,
Celestial Encounters. The Origins
of Chaos and Stability
, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1996.

<<<PAGE 254>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 227
4.1 Acceleration and Newton’s Second Law 227
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 4, ﬁnd the velocity and acceleration vectors and the equation of the tangent line for each of the following
curves, at the given value of t.
1.r(t)=(cost)i+(sin 2t )j,a t t=0
2.c(t)=(tsint,tcost,√
3t), at t=03.r(t)=√
2ti+etj+e−tk,a t t=0
4.c(t)=ti+tj+2
3t3/2k,a t t=9
In Exercises 5 to 8, let c1(t)=eti+(sint)j+t3kandc2(t)=
e−ti+( cos t)j−2t3k. Find each of the stated derivatives in two
different ways to verify the rules in the box preceding Example 1.
5.d
dt[c1(t)+c2(t)]
6.d
dt[c1(t)·c2(t)]
7.d
dt[c1(t)×c2(t)]
8.d
dt{c1(t)·[2c2(t)+c1(t)]}
9.Consider the helix given by c(t)=(acost,asint,bt).
Show that the acceleration vector is always parallel tothexyplane.
10. Prove the dot product rule.
11. Determine which of the following paths are regular:
(a)c(t)=(cost, sint,t)
(b)c(t)=(t3,t5, cos t)
(c)c(t)=(t2,et,3t+1)
12. Letvandadenote the velocity and acceleration vectors
of a particle moving on a path c. Suppose the initial
position of the particle is c(0)=(3, 4, 0), the initial
velocity is v(0)=(1, 1,−2), and the acceleration
function is a(t)=( 0 ,0 ,6 ) .F i n d v(t) and c(t).
13. The acceleration, initial velocity, and initial position of aparticle traveling through space are given by
a(t)=(2,−6,−4), v(0)=(−5, 1, 3), r(0)=(6,−2, 1) .
The particle’ s trajectory intersects the yzplane exactly
twice. Find these two intersection points.
14. The acceleration, initial velocity, and initial position of aparticle traveling through space are given by
a(t)=(−6, 2, 4), v(0)=(2,−5, 1), r(0)=(−3, 6, 2) .The particle’ s trajectory intersects the yzplane exactly
twice. Find these two intersection points.
15. Ifr(t)=6ti+3t2j+t3k, what force acts on a particle
of mass mmoving along ratt=0?
16. Let a particle of mass 1 gram (g) follow the path in
Exercise 1, with units in seconds and centimeters. Whatforce acts on it at t=0? (Give the units in your answer.)
17. A body of mass 2 kilograms moves on a circle of radius3 meters, making one revolution every 5 seconds. Findthe centripetal force acting on the body.
18. Find the centripetal force acting on a body of mass4 kilograms (kg), moving on a circle of radius 10 meters(m) with a frequency of 2 revolutions per second (rps).
19. Show that if the acceleration of an object is alwaysperpendicular to the velocity, then the speed of theobject is constant. (H
INT: See Example 1.)
20. Show that, at a local maximum or minimum of /bardblr(t)/bardbl,
the vector r/prime(t) is perpendicular to r(t).
21. A satellite is in a circular orbit 500 miles above thesurface of the earth. What is the period of the orbit?(Y ou may take the radius of the earth to be 4000 miles,or 6.436 ×10
6meters.)
22. What is the acceleration of the satellite in Exercise 21?The centripetal force?
23. Find the path csuch that c(0)=(0,−5, 1) and
c/prime(t)=(t,et,t2).
24. Letcbe a path in R3with zero acceleration. Prove that c
is a straight line or a point.
25. Find paths c(t) that represent the following curves or

<<<PAGE 255>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 228
228 Vector-Valued Functions
trajectories.
(a){(x,y)|y=ex}
(b){(x,y)|4x2+y2=1}
(c) A straight line in R3passing through the origin and
the point ( a,b,c)
(d){(x,y)|9x2+16y2=4}
26. Letc(t) be a path, v(t) its velocity, and a(t) the
acceleration. Suppose Fis aC1mapping of R3toR3,
m>0, and F(c(t))=ma(t) (Newton’ s second law).Prove that
d
dt[mc(t)×v(t)]=c(t)×F(c(t))
(i.e., “rate of change of angular momentum = torque”).
What can you conclude if F(c(t)) is parallel to c(t)? Is
this the case in planetary motion?
27. Continue the investigations in Exercise 26 to proveKepler’ s law that a planet moving under the inﬂuence ofgravity about the sun does so in a ﬁxed plane.
4.2Arc Length
Deﬁnition of Arc Length
What is the length of a path c(t)? Because the speed /bardblc/prime(t)/bardblis the rate of change of
distance traveled with respect to time, the distance traveled by a point moving along the
curve should be the integral of speed with respect to the time over the interval [t 0,t1]o f
travel time; that is, the length of the path, also called its arc length,i s
L(c)=/integraldisplayt1
t0/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
There is the question as to whether or not this formula actually corresponds to the
true arc length. For example, suppose we take a curve in space and glue a string tightly toit, cutting the string so it exactly ﬁts the curve. If we then remove the string, straighten itout, and measure it with a straight edge, we surely should obtain the length of the curve.That our formula for arc length agrees with such a process is justiﬁed in the supplementat the end of this section.
Arc Length The length of the path c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)) for t0≤t≤t1,i s
L(c)=/integraldisplayt1
t0/radicalbig
[x/prime(t)]2+[y/prime(t)]2+[z/prime(t)]2dt.
example 1 The arc length of the path c(t)=(rcost,rsint), for tlying in the interval [0, 2π ];
that is, for 0 ≤t≤2π,i s
L(c)=/integraldisplay2π
0/radicalbig
(−rsint)2+(rcost)2dt=2πr,
which is the circumference of a circle of radius r. If we had allowed 0 ≤t≤
4π, we would have obtained 4π r, because the path traverses the same circle twice
(Figure 4.2.1).

<<<PAGE 256>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 229
4.2 Arc Length 229
r
ﬁgure 4.2.1 The arc length of a circle traversed
twice is 4π r.
▲
For planar curves, we omit the z/prime(t) term, as in Example 1. Here is an example
inR3.
example 2 Consider the point with position function
c(t)=(t−sint,1−cost),
which traces out the cycloid discussed in Section 2.4 (see Figure 2.4.6). Find the velocity,
the speed, and the length of one arch.
solution The velocity vector is c/prime(t)=(1−cost, sin t), so the speed of the point c(t)i s
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=/radicalBig
(1−cost)2+sin2t=√
2−2 cos t.
Hence, c(t) moves at variable speed although the circle rolls at constant speed. Further-
more, the speed of c(t) is zero when tis an integral multiple of 2π . At these values of
t, the ycoordinate of the point c(t) is zero, and so the point lies on the xaxis. The arc
length of one cycle is
L(c)=/integraldisplay2π
0√
2−2 cos td t=2/integraldisplay2π
0/radicalbigg
1−cost
2dt
=2/integraldisplay2π
0sint
2dt/parenleftbigg
because 1 −cost=2 sin2t
2and sint
2≥0 on [0, 2π ]/parenrightbigg
=4/parenleftbigg
−cost
2/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2π
0=8.
▲
If a curve is made up of a ﬁnite number of pieces, each of which is C1(with bounded
derivative), we compute the arc length by adding the lengths of the component pieces.
Such curves are called piecewise C1. Sometimes we just say “piecewise smooth.”
example 3 A billiard ball on a pool table follows the path c:[−1, 1] →R2, deﬁned by c(t)=
(x(t),y(t),z(t))=(|t|,|t−1
2|). Find the distance traveled by the ball.
solution This path is not smooth, because x(t)=|t|is not differentiable at 0, nor is y(t)=
|t−1
2|differentiable at1
2. However, if we divide the interval [−1, 1] into the pieces
[−1, 0], [0,1
2], and [1
2, 1], we see that x(t) and y(t) have continuous derivatives on each
of the intervals [−1, 0], [0,1
2], and [1
2, 1]. (See Figure 4.2.2.)

<<<PAGE 257>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 230
230 Vector-Valued Functions
c(0) c(1)
2 12
1
1
23
2
xy
c(1/2)ﬁgure 4.2.2 A piecewise smooth path.
On [−1, 0], x(t)=− t,y(t)=− t+1
2,s o/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=√
2. Hence, the arc length of
cbetween −1a n d0i s/integraltext0
−1√
2dt=√
2. Similarly, on [0,1
2],x(t)=t,y(t)=−t+1
2,
and again /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=√
2, so that the arc length of cbetween 0 and1
2is1
2√
2. Finally, on
[1
2,1 ]w eh a v e x(t)=t,y(t)=t−1
2, and the arc length of cbetween1
2and 1 is1
2√
2.
Thus, the total arc length of cis 2√
2. Of course, we can also compute the answer as the
sum of the distances from c(−1) to c(0) to c(1
2)t oc(1). ▲
example 4 Find the arc length of (cos t, sin t,t2), 0≤t≤π.
solution The path c(t)=(cost, sin t,t2) has the velocity vector given by v=(−sin t, cos t,2t).
Because
/bardblv/bardbl=/radicalbig
sin2t+cos2t+4t2=/radicalbig
1+4t2=2/radicalbigg
t2+/parenleftBig1
2/parenrightBig2
,
the arc length is
L(c)=/integraldisplayπ
02/radicalBigg
t2+/parenleftbigg1
2/parenrightbigg2
dt.
This integral may be evaluated using the following formula from the table of integrals:
/integraldisplay/radicalbig
x2+a2dx=1
2/bracketleftbig
x/radicalbig
x2+a2+a2log (x+/radicalbig
x2+a2)/bracketrightbig
+C.
Thus,
L(c)=2·1
2⎡
⎣t/radicalBigg
t2+/parenleftbigg1
2/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg1
2/parenrightbigg2
log⎛⎝t+/radicalBigg
t2+/parenleftbigg1
2/parenrightbigg2⎞⎠⎤⎦/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
π
t=0
=π/radicalbigg
π2+1
4+1
4log/parenleftbigg
π+/radicalbigg
π2+1
4/parenrightbigg
−1
4log/parenleftbigg/radicalbigg
1
4/parenrightbigg
=π
2/radicalbig
1+4π2+1
4log (2π +/radicalbig
1+4π2)≈10.63.
As a check on our answer, we may note that the path cconnects the points (1, 0, 0) and
(−1, 0, π2). The distance between these points is√
4+π2≈3.72, which is less than
10.63, as it should be. ▲
The Differential of Arc Length
The arc-length formula suggests that we introduce the following notation, which will
be useful in Chapter 7 in our discussion of line integrals.

<<<PAGE 258>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 231
4.2 Arc Length 231
ﬁgure 4.2.3 Differential of arc
length. xzz
yy
xd
ddx2 + dy2 + dz2
dd dd s
s= =s || ||
Arc-Length Differential Aninﬁnitesimal displacement of a particle follow-
ing a path c(t)=x(t)i+y(t)j+z(t)kis
ds=dxi+dyj+dzk=/parenleftbiggdx
dti+dy
dtj+dz
dtk/parenrightbigg
dt,
and its length
ds=/radicalbig
dx2+dy2+dz2=/radicalBigg/parenleftbiggdx
dt/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbiggdy
dt/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbiggdz
dt/parenrightbigg2
dt
is the differential of arc length. See Figure 4.2.3.
These formulas help us remember the arc-length formula as
arc length =/integraldisplayt1
t0ds.
As we have done before with such geometric concepts as length and angle, we can
extend the notion of arc length to paths in n-dimensional space.
Arc Length in RnLetc:[t0,t1]→Rnbe a piecewise C1path. Its length is
deﬁned to be
L(c)=/integraldisplayt1
t0/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
The integrand is the square root of the sum of the squares of the coordinatefunctions of c
/prime(t): If
c(t)=(x1(t),x2(t),...,xn(t)),
then
L(c)=/integraldisplayt1
t0/radicalBig
(x/prime
1(t))2+(x/prime
2(t))2+···+ (x/prime
n(t))2dt.

<<<PAGE 259>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 232
232 Vector-Valued Functions
example 5 Find the length of the path c(t)=( cos t, sin t, cos 2t , sin 2t )i nR4, deﬁned on the
interval from 0 to π.
solution We have c/prime(t)=(−sin t, cos t,−2 sin 2t , 2 cos 2t ), and so
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=/radicalbig
sin2t+cos2t+4 sin22t+4 cos22t=√
1+4=√
5,
a constant, so the length of the path is
/integraldisplayπ
0√
5dt=√
5π.
▲
It is common to introduce the arc-length function s(t) associated to a path c(t)
given by
s(t)=/integraldisplayt
a/bardblc/prime(u)/bardbldu,
so that (by the fundamental theorem of calculus)
s/prime(t)=/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl
and
/integraldisplayb
as/prime(t)dt=s(b)−s(a)=s(b).
example 6 Consider the graph of a function of one variable y=f(x) for xin the interval [ a,b].
We can consider it to be a curve parametrized by t=x, namely, c(x)=(x,f(x)) for
xranging from atob. The arc-length formula gives
L(c)=/integraldisplayb
a/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(x)]2dx,
which agrees with the formula for the length of a graph from one-variable calculus. ▲
Justiﬁcation for the Arc-Length Formula
The following discussion assumes an acquaintance with the deﬁnite integral deﬁned
in terms of Riemann sums. If your background in this topic needs reinforcement, thematerial may be postponed until after Chapter 5.
InR
3there is another way to justify the arc-length formula based on polygonal
approximations. We partition the interval [ a,b] into Nsubintervals of equal length:
a=t0<t1<···<tN=b;
ti+1−ti=b−a
Nfor 0 ≤i≤N−1.
We then consider the polygonal line obtained by joining the successive pairs of
points c(ti),c(ti+1) for 0 ≤i≤N−1. This yields a polygonal approximation to cas
in Figure 4.2.4. By the formula for distance in R3, it follows that the line segment from

<<<PAGE 260>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 233
4.2 Arc Length 233
ﬁgure 4.2.4 A path cmay be
approximated by a polygonal
path obtained by joining eachc(t
i)t oc(t i+1) by a straight line.
a = t t 01 2 3 N tt t  = bc
3
1t2N
t0 ( c() =     ac)c()tc()tc()tc( )tc()N ( =     bc)
xyz
c(ti)t oc(ti+1) has length
/bardblc(ti+1)−c(ti)/bardbl=/radicalbig
[x(ti+1)−x(ti)]2+[y(ti+1)−y(ti)]2+[z(ti+1)−z(ti)]2,
where c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)). Applying the mean-value theorem to x(t),y(t), and
z(t)o n[ ti,ti+1], we obtain three points t∗
i,t∗∗
i, and t∗∗∗
isuch that
x(ti+1)−x(ti)=x/prime(t∗
i)(ti+1−ti),
y(ti+1)−y(ti)=y/prime(t∗∗
i)(ti+1−ti),
and
z(ti+1)−z(ti)=z/prime(t∗∗∗
i)(ti+1−ti).
Thus, the line segment from c(ti)t oc(ti+1) has length
/radicalbig
[x/prime(t∗
i)]2+[y/prime(t∗∗
i)]2+[z/prime(t∗∗∗
i)]2(ti+1−ti).
Therefore, the length of our approximating polygonal line is
SN=N−1/summationdisplay
i=0/radicalbig
[x/prime(t∗
i)]2+[y/prime(t∗∗
i)]2+[z/prime(t∗∗∗
i)]2(ti+1−ti).
AsN→∞ , this polygonal line approximates the image of cmore closely. Therefore,
we deﬁne the arc length of cas the limit, if it exists, of the sequence SNasN→∞ .
Because the derivatives x/prime,y/prime, and z/primeare all assumed to be continuous on [ a,b], we can
conclude that, in fact, the limit does exist and is given by
limit
N→∞SN=/integraldisplayb
a/radicalbig
[x/prime(t)]2+[y/prime(t)]2+[z/prime(t)]2dt.
(The theory of integration relates the integral to sums by the formula
/integraldisplayb
af(t)dt=limit
N→∞N−1/summationdisplay
i=0f(t∗
i)(ti+1−ti),

<<<PAGE 261>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 234
234 Vector-Valued Functions
where t0,...,tNis a partition of [ a,b],t∗
i∈[ti,ti+1] is arbitrary, and fis a continuous
function. Here we have possibly different points t∗
i,t∗∗
i, and t∗∗∗
i, and so this formula
must be extended slightly.)
exercises
Find the arc length of the given curve on the speciﬁed interval in Exercises 1 to 6.4
1.(2 cos t, 2 sin t,t), for 0 ≤t≤2π
2.(1, 3t2,t3), for 0 ≤t≤1
3.(sin 3t , cos 3t ,2t3/2), for 0 ≤t≤1
4./parenleftbigg
t+1,2√
2
3t3/2+7,1
2t2/parenrightbigg
, for 1 ≤t≤2
5.(t,t,t2), for 1 ≤t≤2
6.(t,tsint,tcost), for 0 ≤t≤π
7.Find the arc length of c(t)=(t,|t|) for−1≤t≤1.
8.Recall from Section 2.4 that a rolling circle of radius R
traces out a cycloid, which can be parametrized by
c(t)=(Rt−Rsint,R−Rcost). One arch of the
cycloid is completed from t=0t ot=2π. Show that
the length of this arch is always 4 times the diameter ofthe rolling circle.
9.LetCbe the line segment connecting the point
p=(1, 2, 0) to the point q=(0, 1,−1).
(a)Find a curve c(t): [a,b]→R3that traces out C.
(b)Find the arc length of c(t).
(c) Find ||p−q||.
10. Compute the length of the curvec(t)=(log(√
t),√
3t,3
2t2) for 1 ≤t≤2.
11. Find the length of the path c(t), deﬁned by
c(t)=(2 cos t, 2 sin t,t), if 0 ≤t≤2πand
c(t)=(2,t−2π,t), if 2π ≤t≤4π.12. Letcbe the path c(t)=(t,tsint,tcost). Find the
arc length of cbetween the two points (0, 0, 0) and
(π,0 ,−π ).
13. Letcbe the path c(t)=(2t,t2,l o g t), deﬁned for t>0.
Find the arc length of cbetween the points (2, 1, 0) and
( 4 ,4 ,l o g2 ) .
14. The arc-length function s(t) for a given path c(t),
deﬁned by s(t)=/integraltextt
a/bardblc/prime(τ)/bardbldτ, represents the distance
a particle traversing the trajectory of cwill have traveled
by time tif it starts out at time a; that is, it gives the
length of cbetween c(a) and c(t). Find the arc-length
functions for the curves α(t)=(cosh t, sinh t,t) and
β(t)=(cost, sin t,t), with a=0.
15. Letc(t) be a given path, a≤t≤b. Let s=α(t)b ea
new variable, where αis a strictly increasing C1
function given on [ a,b]. For each sin [α(a),α(b)]
there is a unique twithα(t)=s. Deﬁne the function
d:[α (a),α(b)]→R3byd(s)=c(t).
(a) Argue that the image curves of canddare the
same.
(b) Show that canddhave the same arc length.
(c) Let s=α(t)=/integraltextt
a/bardblc/prime(τ)/bardbldτ. Deﬁne das above
byd(s)=c(t). Show that
/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubled
dsd(s)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
=1.
The path s/mapsto→d(s) is said to be an arc-length
reparametrization ofc(see also Exercise 17).
4Several of these problems make use of the formula/integraldisplay/radicalbig
x2+a2dx=1
2/bracketleftbig
x/radicalbig
x2+a2+a2log (x+/radicalbig
x2+a2)/bracketrightbig
+C
from the table of integrals in the back of the book.

<<<PAGE 262>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 235
4.2 Arc Length 235
Exercises 16, 17, and 20–23 develop some of the classic differential geometry of curves.
16. Letc:[a,b]→R3be an inﬁnitely differentiable path
(derivatives of all orders exist). Assume c/prime(t)/negationslash=0for
anyt. The vector c/prime(t)//bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=T( t) is tangent to cat
c(t), and, because /bardblT(t)/bardbl=1, Tis called the unit
tangent toc.
(a)Show that T/prime(t)·T(t)=0.[HINT: Differentiate
T(t)·T(t)=1.]
(b)Write down a formula for T/prime(t) in terms of c.
17. (a) A path c(s) is said to be parametrized by arc length
or, what is the same thing, to have unit speed if
/bardblc/prime(s)/bardbl=1. For a path parametrized by arc length
on [a,b], show that l(c)=b−a.
(b) The curvature at a point c(s) on a path is deﬁned by
k=/bardblT/prime(s)/bardblwhen the path is parametrized by arc
length. Show that k=/bardblc/prime/prime(s)/bardbl.
(c) If cis given in terms of some other parameter tand
c/prime(t)i sn e v e r 0, show that
k=/bardblc/prime(t)×c/prime/prime(t)/bardbl//bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl3.
(d) Calculate the curvature of the helix
c(t)=(1/√
2)(cos t, sin t,t). (This cis a scalar
multiple of the right-circular helix.)
18. Show that any line l(t)=x0+tv, where vis a unit
vector, has zero curvature.
19. Consider the parametrization of the unit circle given by
c(t)=(cost, sint).
(a) Verify that cis parametrized by arc length.
(b) Show that the curvature kofcis constant.
20. IfT/prime(t)/negationslash=0, it follows from Exercise 16 that
N(t)=T/prime(t)//bardblT/prime(t)/bardblis normal (i.e., perpendicular) to
T(t);Nis called the principal normal vector. Let a third
unit vector that is perpendicular to both TandNbe
deﬁned by B=T×N;Bis called the binormal vector.
Together, T,N, and Bform a right-handed system of
mutually orthogonal vectors that may be thought of asmoving along the path (Figure 4.2.5). Show that
(a)dB
dt·B=0.
(b)dB
dt·T=0.
(c)dB/dt is a scalar multiple of N.
21. Ifc(s) is parametrized by arc length, we use the result of
Exercise 20(c) to deﬁne a scalar-valued function τ,
called the torsion,b y
dB
ds=−τN.xyz c(t)
NB
T
ﬁgure 4.2.5 The tangent T, principal normal
N, and binormal B.
(a) Show that τ=[c/prime(s)×c/prime/prime(s)]·c/prime/prime/prime(s)//bardblc/prime/prime(s)/bardbl2.
(b) Show that if cis given in terms of some other
parameter t,
τ=[c/prime(t)×c/prime/prime(t)]·c/prime/prime/prime(t)
/bardblc/prime(t)×c/prime/prime(t)/bardbl2.
Compare with Exercise 17(c).
(c) Compute the torsion of the helix
c(t)=(1/√
2)(cos t, sint,t).
22. Show that if a path lies in a plane, then the torsion iszero. Do this by demonstrating that Bis constant and is a
normal vector to the plane in which clies. (If the torsion
is not zero, it gives a measure of how fast the curve istwisting out of the plane of TandN.)
23. (a)Use the results of Exercises 17, 20, and 21 to provethe following Frenet formulas for a unit-speed
curve:
dT
ds=kN;dN
ds=−kT+τB;dB
ds=−τN.
(b)Reexpress the results of part (a) as
d
ds/parenleftBiggT
N
B/parenrightBigg
=ω×/parenleftBiggT
N
B/parenrightBigg
for a suitable vector ω.
24. In special relativity, the proper time of a path
c:[a,b]→R4with components given by
c(λ)=(x(λ),y(λ),z(λ),t(λ)) is deﬁned to be the
quantity
/integraldisplayb
a/radicalbig
−[x/prime(λ)]2−[y/prime(λ)]2−[z/prime(λ)]2+c2[t/prime(λ)]2dλ,

<<<PAGE 263>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 236
236 Vector-Valued Functions
where cis the velocity of light, a constant. In
Figure 4.2.6, show that, using self-explanatory notation,
the “twin paradox inequality” holds:
proper time (AB) + proper time (BC) < proper time (AC).
xt
ABC
x = ct
ﬁgure 4.2.6 The relativistic triangle inequality.25. The early Greeks knew that a straight line was the
shortest possible path between two points. Euclid, in hisbook Optics, stated the “principle of the reﬂection of
light”—that is, light traveling in a plane travels in astraight line, and when it is reﬂected across a mirror, theangle of incidence equals the angle of reﬂection.
The Greeks could not have had a proof that straight
lines provided the shortest path between two pointsbecause they, in the ﬁrst place, had no deﬁnition of thelength of a path. They saw this property of straight linesas more or less “obvious.”
Using the justiﬁcation of arc length in this section
and the triangle inequality of Section 1.5, argue that if c
0
is the straight-line path c0(t)=tP+(1−t)Q between P
a n dQi nR3, then
L(c0)≤L(c)
for any other path cjoining P and Q.
4.3Vector Fields
The Concept of a Vector Field
In Chapter 2 we introduced a particular kind of vector ﬁeld, the gradient. In this section
we study general vector ﬁelds, discussing their geometric and physical signiﬁcance.
Vector Fields Avector ﬁeld inRnis a map F:A⊂Rn→Rnthat assigns to
each point xin its domain Aa vector F(x). If n=2,Fis called a vector ﬁeld in
the plane, and if n=3,Fis avector ﬁeld in space.
Picture Fas attaching an arrow to each point (Figure 4.3.1). By contrast, a map
f:A⊂Rn→Rthat assigns a number to each point is a scalar ﬁeld. A vector ﬁeld
xyz
xF(x)
ﬁgure 4.3.1 A vector ﬁeld Fassigns a vector
F(x) to each point xof its domain.

<<<PAGE 264>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 237
4.3 Vector Fields 237
F(x,y,z)o nR3has three component scalar ﬁelds F1,F2, and F3, so that
F(x,y,z)=(F1(x,y,z),F2(x,y,z),F3(x,y,z)).
Similarly, a vector ﬁeld on Rnhasncomponents F1,..., Fn. If each component is a
Ckfunction, we say the vector ﬁeld Fis of class Ck. Vector ﬁelds will be assumed to
be at least of class C1unless otherwise noted. In many applications, F(x) represents a
physical vector quantity (force, velocity, etc.) associated with the position x,a si nt h e
following examples.
example 1 The ﬂow of water through a pipe is said to be steady if, at each point inside the pipe, the
velocity of the ﬂuid passing through that point does not change with time. (Note that
this is quite different from saying that the water in the pipe is not moving.) Attaching toeach point the ﬂuid velocity at that point, we obtain the velocity ﬁeld Vof the ﬂuid (see
Figure 4.3.2). Notice that the length of the arrows (the speed), as well as the directionof ﬂow, may change from point to point.
ﬁgure 4.3.2 A vector ﬁeld describing
the velocity of ﬂow in a pipe. ▲
example 2 Some forms of rotary motion (such as the motion of particles on a turntable) can bedescribed by the vector ﬁeld
V(x,y)=− yi+xj.
See Figure 4.3.3, in which we have shown instead of Vthe shorter vector ﬁeld
1
4Vso
that the arrows do not overlap. This is a common convention in drawing pictures ofvector ﬁelds.
y
x
ﬁgure 4.3.3 A rotary vector ﬁeld. ▲
example 3 In the plane, R2, let the vector ﬁeld xbe deﬁned by
V(x,y)=yi
x2+y2−xj
x2+y2=/parenleftbiggy
x2+y2,−x
x2+y2/parenrightbigg

<<<PAGE 265>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 238
238 Vector-Valued Functions
(except at the origin, where Vis not deﬁned). This vector ﬁeld is a good approximation
to the planar part of the velocity of water ﬂowing toward a hole in the bottom of a tub
(Figure 4.3.4). Notice that the velocity becomes larger as you approach the hole. ▲
ﬁgure 4.3.4 The vector ﬁeld
describing circular ﬂow in a tub.Gradient Vector Fields
In Section 2.6 we introduced the gradient of a function by
∇f(x,y,z)=∂f
∂x(x,y,z)i+∂f
∂y(x,y,z)j+∂f
∂z(x,y,z)k.
Now we want to think of this as an example of a vector ﬁeld—it assigns a vector to eachpoint ( x,y,z). As such, we refer to ∇fas agradient vector ﬁeld. Gradient ﬁelds come
up in a variety of situations, as the next two examples show.
example
4 A piece of material is heated on one side and cooled on another. The temperature at eachpoint within the body is described at a given moment by a scalar ﬁeld T(x,y,z). The
ﬂow of heat may be marked by a ﬁeld of arrows indicating the direction and magnitudeof the ﬂow (Figure 4.3.5). This energy orheat ﬂux vector ﬁeld is given by J=−k∇T,
where k>0 is a constant called the conductivity and∇Tis the gradient of the real-
valued function T. Level sets of Tare called isotherms. Note that the heat ﬂows from
hot regions toward cold ones, since −∇Tpoints in the direction of decreasing T.
coolerHeat flux vector
hotterﬁgure 4.3.5 A vector ﬁeld describing
the direction and magnitude of heat
ﬂow.
▲
example 5 The force of attraction of the earth on a mass mcan be described by a vector ﬁeld called
thegravitational force ﬁeld. Place the origin of a coordinate system at the center of the
earth (assumed spherical). According to Newton’ s law of gravity, this ﬁeld is given by
F=−mMG
r3r,
where r(x,y,z)=(x,y,z), and r=/bardblr/bardbl(see Figure 4.3.6). The domain of this vector
ﬁeld consists of those rfor which /bardblr/bardblis greater than the radius of the earth. As we saw
in Example 6, Section 2.6, Fis a gradient ﬁeld, F=− ∇ V, where
V=−mMG
r
is the gravitational potential. Note again that Fpoints in the direction of decreasing V .
Writing Fin terms of components, we see that
F(x,y,z)=/parenleftbigg−mMG
r3x,−mMG
r3y,−mMG
r3z/parenrightbigg
.

<<<PAGE 266>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 239
4.3 Vector Fields 239
xm
FFz
M
yﬁgure 4.3.6 The vector ﬁeld Fgiven by
Newton’s law of gravitation.
▲
example 6 According to Coulomb’s law, the force acting on a charge eat position rdue to a charge
Qat the origin is
F=εQe
r3r=− ∇ V,
where V=εQe/randεis a constant that depends on the units used. For Qe>0
(like charges) the force is repulsive [Figure 4.3.7(a)], and for Qe<0 (unlike charges)
the force is attractive [Figure 4.3.7(b)]. Because the potential Vis constant on the
level surfaces of V, they are called equipotential surfaces. Note that the force ﬁeld is
orthogonal to the equipotential surfaces (the force ﬁeld is radial and the equipotential
surfaces are concentric spheres).
(a) (b)
ﬁgure 4.3.7 The vector ﬁelds associated with (a) like charges
(Qe>0), and (b) unlike charges (Qe <0). ▲
The next example shows that not every vector ﬁeld is a gradient.
example 7 Show that the vector ﬁeld VonR2deﬁned by V(x,y)=yi−xjis not a gradient vector
ﬁeld; that is, there is no C1function fsuch that
V(x,y)=∇ f(x,y)=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj.

<<<PAGE 267>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 240
240 Vector-Valued Functions
solution Suppose that such an fexists. Then ∂f/∂x=yand∂f/∂y=−x. Because these are C1
functions, fitself must have continuous ﬁrst- andsecond-order partial derivatives. But,
∂2f/∂x∂y=− 1, and ∂2f/∂y∂x=1, which violates the equality of mixed partials.
Thus, Vcannot be a gradient vector ﬁeld. ▲
Conservation of Energy and Escaping the Earth’s
Gravitational Field
Consider a particle of mass mmoving in a force ﬁeld Fthat is a potential ﬁeld. That is,
assume F=− ∇ Vfor a real-valued function V, and that the particle moves according
toF=ma. Thus, if the path is r(t), then
m¨r(t)=− ∇ V(r(t)). (1)
A basic fact about such motion is the conservation of energy. The energy Eof the
particle is deﬁned to be the sum of the kinetic and potential energies, deﬁned as
E=1
2m/bardbl˙r(t)/bardbl2+V(r(t)). (2)
The principle of conservation of energy states that if Newton’ s second law holds, then E
is independent of time; that is, dE/dt =0. The proof of this fact is a simple calculation;
we use equation (2), the chain rule, and equation (1):
dE
dt=m˙r·¨r+(∇V)·˙r
=˙r·(−∇V+∇V)=0.
Escape Velocity
As an application of conservation of energy, we compute the velocity required for a
rocket to escape the earth’ s gravitational inﬂuence. Assume the rocket has mass mand
is at a distance R0from the center of the earth (or another planet) when its escape
velocity vehas been reached, and that it will coast thereafter. The energy at this time is
E0=1
2mv2
e−mMG
R0. (3)
By conservation of energy, E0will equal the energy at a later time, which we write as
E0=E=1
2mv2−mMG
R, (4)
where vis the velocity and Ris the distance from the center of the earth (or the other
planet). What we mean by the term escape velocity is that veis chosen such that the
rocket gets to great distances, at which time it is barely moving. That is, vis close to
zero and Ris very large. Thus, from equation (4), we see that E=0 and hence E0=0;
solving E0=0 forveusing equation (3) gives:
ve=/radicalBigg
2MG
R0.

<<<PAGE 268>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 241
4.3 Vector Fields 241
Now GM/ R2
0is exactly g, the acceleration due to gravity at the distance R0from the
center of the planet. Thus, we can write:
ve=/radicalbig
2gR0.
For the earth, if the escape velocity were to be achieved at the surface of the earth (of
course, this is a bit unrealistic), this would give
ve=/radicalBig
2·9.8 m/s2·6,371,000 m =11,127 m/s.
However, this is a good approximation to the velocity that a satellite in low earth orbitneeds in order to escape the earth’ s gravitational ﬁeld.
Flow Lines
An important concept related to general (not necessarily gradient) vector ﬁelds is thatof a ﬂow line, deﬁned as follows.
Flow Lines IfFis a vector ﬁeld, a ﬂow line forFis a path c(t) such that
c/prime(t)=F(c(t)).
In the context of Example 1, a ﬂow line is the path followed by a small particle suspendedin the ﬂuid (Figure 4.3.8). Flow lines are also appropriately called streamlines orintegral
curves.
Geometrically, a ﬂow line for a given vector ﬁled Fis a curve that threads its way
through the domain of the vector ﬁeld in such a way that the tangent vector of the curvecoincides with the vector ﬁeld, as in Figure 4.3.9.
Velocity vector Flow line
ﬁgure 4.3.8 The velocity vector of
a ﬂuid is tangent to a ﬂow line.
x0ﬁgure 4.3.9 A ﬂow line threading its way
through a vector ﬁeld in the plane.

<<<PAGE 269>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 242
242 Vector-Valued Functions
A ﬂow line may be viewed as a solution of a system of differential equations. Indeed,
we can write the deﬁnition c/prime(t)=F(c(t)) as
x/prime(t)=P(x(t),y(t),z(t)),
y/prime(t)=Q(x(t),y(t),z(t)),
z/prime(t)=R(x(t),y(t),z(t)),
where c(t)=x(t)i+y(t)j+z(t)k, and where
F=Pi+Qj+Rk.
Y ou probably learned about such systems in courses on differential equations, but we
are not presuming such a course has been taken.
example 8 Show that the path c(t)=(cost, sin t) is a ﬂow line of the vector ﬁeld F(x,y)=
−yi+xj. Can you ﬁnd others?
solution We must verify that c/prime(t)=F(c(t)). The left side is ( −sint)i+(cost)j, while the right
side is F(cost, sin t)=(−sint)i+(cost)j, so we have a ﬂow line. As suggested by
Figure 4.3.3, the other ﬂow lines are also circles. They have the form
c(t)=(rcos (t−t0),rsin (t−t0))
for constants randt0.▲
In many cases, explicit formulas for ﬂow lines are not available, so we must resort
to numerical methods. Figure 4.3.10 shows some output from a program that computes
ﬂow lines numerically and plots them on the screen.
xy
ﬁgure 4.3.10 Computer-generated
integral curves of the vector ﬁeld
F(x,y)=( siny)i+(x2−y)j. This ﬁgure was
created using 3D-XplorMath , available
from Richard Palais' Web site at
http://3D-XplorMath.org.
Historical NoteThe Field Concept
The concept of a “field,” such as a vector field, has had an enormous impact on
the development of conceptual frameworks for physics and engineering. It is
truly one of the great breakthrough ideas in the history of human thought. It is the
notion that allows us to describe, in a systematic way, influences on objects and
between objects that are spatially separated.

<<<PAGE 270>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 243
4.3 Vector Fields 243
The idea of a field began with Newton’s concept of the gravitational field. In
this case, the gravitational field describes the attractive influence of a group of
bodies on each other. Similarly, the electric field produced by a charged objector group of objects creates, according to Coulomb’s law, a force on anothercharged object. Using vector fields to describe these sorts of forces has led to adeeper understanding of attractive and repulsive forces in nature.
However, it was the mon umental discovery of the Maxwell field equations,
which describe the propagation of electromagnetic energy, that cemented the
concept of “field” in scientific thought. This example is particularly interestingbecause these fields can propagate. The contrast between the electromagnetic
field that can propagate and the gravitational field that involves instantaneous
action at a distance has caused great interest among philosophers of science.
Einstein’s idea is that gravitation can be described in terms of the metric
properties of space--time and that in this theory the associated field can alsopropagate, just like the electromagnetic field, thus providing profoundphilosophical evidence that Einstein’s version of gravity may be correct. Theseideas have also led to modern efforts to detect gravitational waves. For a furtherdiscussion of Einstein’s work, see Section 7.7.
The idea of a field is also used in engineering to describe elastic systems and
interesting microstructural properties of materials. In modern theoretical physics,the field concept is used to describe elementary particles and is central toattempts by modern theoretical physicists to unify gravity with the quantummechanical physics of elementary particles. It is impossible to imagine amodern theoretical framework that does not incorporate some sort of fieldconcept as a central ingredient.
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 8, sketch the given vector ﬁeld or a small multiple of it.
1.F(x,y)=(2, 2)
2.F(x,y)=(4, 0)
3.F(x,y)=(x,y)
4.F(x,y)=(−x,y)
5.F(x,y)=(2y,x)6.F(x,y)=(y,−2x)
7.F(x,y)=/parenleftbigg
x/radicalbig
x2+y2,y/radicalbig
x2+y2/parenrightbigg
8.F(x,y)=/parenleftbigg
y/radicalbig
x2+y2,x/radicalbig
x2+y2/parenrightbigg
In the following two exercises, match the given vector ﬁeld with its pictorial description (see Figures 4.3.11 and 4.3.12).
9.(a)V(x,y)=xi+yj
(b)V(x,y)=yi−xj
10. (a)V(x,y)=y/radicalbig
x2+y2i−x/radicalbig
x2+y2j(b)V(x,y)=x/radicalbig
x2+y2i+y/radicalbig
x2+y2j
Where are these vector ﬁelds notdeﬁned? How are these
vector ﬁelds related to those in Problem 9?
In Exercises 11 to 14, sketch a few ﬂow lines of the given vector ﬁeld.
11. F(x,y)=(y,−x)
12. F(x,y)=(x,−y)13. F(x,y)=(x,x2)
14. F(x,y,z)=(y,−x,0 )

<<<PAGE 271>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 244
244 Vector-Valued Functions
ﬁgure 4.3.11 Exercise 9. xy
xy
(i) (ii)
ﬁgure 4.3.12 Exercise 10. xy
xy
(i) (ii)
In Exercises 15 to 18, show that the given curve c(t)is a ﬂow line of the given velocity vector ﬁeld F(x,y,z).
15. c(t)=(e2t,l o g|t|,1/t),t/negationslash=0;F(x,y,z)=
(2x,z,−z2)
16. c(t)=(t2,2t−1,√t),t>0;F(x,y,z)=
(y+1, 2, 1/2 z)
17. c(t)=(sint, cos t,et);F(x,y,z)=(y,−x,z)
18. c(t)=(1
t3,et,1
t);F(x,y,z)=(−3z4,y,−z2)
19. LetF(x,y,z)=(x2,yx2,z+zx) and
c(t)=(1
1−t,0 ,et
1−t). Show c(t) is a ﬂow line for F.
20. Show that c(t)=(acost−bsint,asint+bcost)i sa
ﬂow line for F(x,y)=(−y,x) for all real values of a
andb.
21. (a) Let F(x,y,z)=(yz,xz,xy). Find a function
f:R3→Rsuch that F=∇ f.
(b) Let F(x,y,z)=(x,y,z). Find a function
f:R3→Rsuch that F=∇ f.22. Letf(x,y)=x2+y2. Sketch the gradient vector ﬁeld
∇ftogether with some level sets of f. How are they
related?
23. Show that it takes half as much energy to launch a
satellite into an orbit just above the earth as it does toescape the earth. (Ignore the rotation of the earth.)
24. Letc(t) be a ﬂow line of a gradient ﬁeld F=− ∇ V.
Prove that V(c(t)) is a decreasing function of t.
25. Suppose that the isotherms in a region are all concentricspheres centered at the origin. Prove that the energy ﬂuxvector ﬁeld points either toward or away from the origin.
26. Sketch the gradient ﬁeld −∇Vfor
V(x,y)=(x+y)/(x2+y2) and the equipotential
surface V=1.
27. LetF(x,y,z)=(xey,y2z2,xyz) and suppose
c(t)=/parenleftbig
x(t),y(t),z(t)/parenrightbig
is a ﬂow line for F. Find the
system of differential equations that the functions
x(t),y(t), and z(t) must satisfy.

<<<PAGE 272>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 245
4.4 Divergence and Curl 245
4.4Divergence and Curl
For each of the divergence and curl operations, we will make use of the del operator,
deﬁned by
∇= i∂
∂x+j∂
∂y+k∂
∂z.
Inn-space
∇=/parenleftbigg∂
∂x1,∂
∂x2,···,∂
∂xn/parenrightbigg
.
For functions of one variable, taking a derivative can be thought of as an operation
or process; that is, given a function y=f(x), its derivative is the result of operating
onyby the derivative operator d /dx. Similarly, we can write the gradient as
∇f=/parenleftbigg
i∂
∂x+j∂
∂y/parenrightbigg
f=i∂f
∂x+j∂f
∂y
for functions of two variables, and
∇f=/parenleftbigg
i∂
∂x+j∂
∂y+k∂
∂z/parenrightbigg
f=i∂f
∂x+j∂f
∂y+k∂f
∂z
for three variables. In operational terms, the gradient of fis obtained by taking the ∇
operator and applying it to f.
Deﬁnition of Divergence
We deﬁne the divergence of a vector ﬁeld Fby taking the dot product of∇with F.
Divergence IfF=F1i+F2j+F3k, the divergence ofFis the scalar ﬁeld
divF=∇·F=∂F1
∂x+∂F2
∂y+∂F3
∂z.
Similarly, if F=(F1,..., Fn) is a vector ﬁeld on Rn, its divergence is
divF=n/summationdisplay
i=1∂Fi
∂xi=∂F1
∂x1+∂F2
∂x2+···+∂Fn
∂xn.
example 1 Compute the divergence of
F=x2yi+zj+xyzk.
solution
divF=∂
∂x(x2y)+∂
∂y(z)+∂
∂z(xyz)=2xy+0+xy=3xy
▲

<<<PAGE 273>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 246
246 Vector-Valued Functions
ﬁgure 4.4.1 Flowing a region W
along the ﬂow lines of a vector
ﬁeld.y
zxx
x0x (t)
W
Interpretation
The divergence has an important physical interpretation. If we imagine Fto be the
velocity ﬁeld of a gas (or a ﬂuid), then div Frepresents the rate of expansion per unit
volume under the ﬂow of the gas (or ﬂuid).I fd i vF <0, the gas (or ﬂuid) is compressing.
For a vector ﬁeld F(x,y)=F1i+F2jon the plane, the divergence
∇·F=∂F1
∂x+∂F2
∂y
measures the rate of expansion of area.
This interpretation is explained graphically, as follows. Choose a small region W
about a point x0. For each point xinW, let x(t) be the ﬂow line emanating from x.
The set of points x(t) describe how the set Wﬂows after time t(see Figure 4.4.1).
Call the region that results after time thas elapsed W(t), and let V(t) be its volume
(or area in two dimensions). Then the relative rate of change of volume is the divergence;
more precisely,
1
V(0)d
dtV(t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
t=0≈divF(x0),
with the approximation being more exact as Wshrinks to x0. A direct proof of this is
given in the Internet supplement, but a more natural argument is given in Chapter 8, in
the context of the integral theorems of vector calculus.
example 2 Consider the vector ﬁeld in the plane given by V(x,y)=xi. Relate the sign of the
divergence of Vwith the rate of change of areas under the ﬂow.
solution We think of Vas the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid in the plane. The vector ﬁeld Vpoints to
the right for x>0 and to the left if x<0, as we see in Figure 4.4.2. The length of V
gets shorter toward the origin. As the ﬂuid moves, it expands (the area of the shadedrectangle increases), so we expect div V>0. Indeed, div V=1.

<<<PAGE 274>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 247
4.4 Divergence and Curl 247
y
xﬁgure 4.4.2 This ﬂuid is expanding.
▲
example 3 The ﬂow lines of the vector ﬁeld F=xi+yjare straight lines directed away from the
origin (Figure 4.4.3).
y
x
ﬁgure 4.4.3 The vector ﬁeld F(x,y)=xi+yj.
If these ﬂow lines are those of a ﬂuid, the ﬂuid is expanding as it moves out from the
origin, so div Fshould be positive. In fact,
∇·F=∂
∂xx+∂
∂yy=2>0.
▲
example 4 Consider the vector ﬁeld F=− xi−yj. Here the ﬂow lines point toward the origin
instead of away from it (see Figure 4.4.4). Therefore, the ﬂuid is compressing, so weexpect (div F)<0. Calculating, we see that
∇·F=∂
∂x(−x)+∂
∂y(−y)=−1−1=−2<0.
▲
example 5 As we saw in the last section, the ﬂow lines of F=− yi+xjare concentric circles about
the origin, moving counterclockwise (see Figure 4.4.5). From this ﬁgure, it appears thatthe ﬂuid is neither compressing nor expanding. This is conﬁrmed by calculating
∇·F=∂
∂x(−y)+∂
∂y(x)=0+0=0.
▲

<<<PAGE 275>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 248
248 Vector-Valued Functions
y
xﬁgure 4.4.4 The vector ﬁeld
F(x,y)=−xi−yj.
ﬁgure 4.4.5 The vector ﬁeld
F(x,y)=−yi+xjhas zero
divergence.y
x
example 6 Some ﬂow lines of F=xi−yjare shown in Figure 4.4.6. Here our intuition about
expansion or compression is less clear. However, it is true that the shaded regions shown
have the same area, and we calculate that
∇·F=∂
∂xx+∂
∂y(−y)=1+(−1)=0.
xFluid particles move from
shaded region to shadedregion after a fixed timeinterval.  The two areas are the same.y
ﬁgure 4.4.6 The vector ﬁeld F(x,y)=xi−yj. ▲

<<<PAGE 276>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 249
4.4 Divergence and Curl 249
Curl
To calculate the curl, the second basic operation performed on vector ﬁelds, we take the
cross product of∇with F.
Curl of a Vector Field IfF=F1i+F2j+F3k, the curl ofFis the vector
ﬁeld
curlF=∇× F=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
F1F2F3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/parenleftbigg∂F
3
∂y−∂F2
∂z/parenrightbigg
i+/parenleftbigg∂F1
∂z−∂F3
∂x/parenrightbigg
j+/parenleftbigg∂F2
∂x−∂F1
∂y/parenrightbigg
k.
If we write F=Pi+Qj+Rk, which is alternative notation, the same formula for
the curl reads
curlF=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
PQR/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/parenleftbigg∂R
∂y−∂Q
∂z/parenrightbigg
i−/parenleftbigg∂R
∂x−∂P
∂z/parenrightbigg
j+/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
k.
example 7 LetF(x,y,z)=xi+xyj+k. Find ∇× F.
solution We use the preceding formula:
∇× F=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
xx y 1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=(0−0)i−(0−0)j+(y−0)k.
Thus, ∇× F=yk.
▲
example 8 Find the curl of xyi−sinzj+k.
solution Letting F=xyi−sinzj+k,
∇× F=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
xy−sin z1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂
∂y∂
∂z
−sin z1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglei−/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂
∂x∂
∂z
xy1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglej+/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂
∂x∂
∂y
xy−sin z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglek
=coszi−xk.
▲

<<<PAGE 277>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 250
250 Vector-Valued Functions
Unlike the divergence, which can be deﬁned in Rnfor any n, we deﬁne the curl only
in three-dimensional space (or for planar vector ﬁelds, regarding their third component
as zero).
The Curl and Rotations
The physical signiﬁcance of the curl will be discussed in Chapter 8, when we study
Stokes’ theorem. However, we can now consider a speciﬁc situation, in which the curl
is associated with rotations.
example 9 Consider a solid rigid body Brotating about an axis L. The rotational motion of the body
can be described by a vector ωalong the axis of rotation, the direction being chosen so
that the body rotates about ω, as in Figure 4.4.7. We call ωtheangular velocity vector .
The length ω=/bardblω/bardblis taken to be the angular speed of the body B; that is, the speed of
any point in Bdivided by its distance from the axis Lof rotation. The motion of points in
the rotating body is described by the vector ﬁeld vwhose value at each point is the veloc-
ity at that point. To ﬁnd v, let Q be any point in Band let αbe the distance from Q to L.
Figure 4.4.7 shows that α=/bardblr/bardblsinθ, where ris the vector whose initial point is
the origin and whose terminal point is Q and θis the angle between rand the axis Lof
rotation. The tangential velocity vof Q is directed counterclockwise along the tangent
to a circle parallel to the xyplane with radius αand has magnitude
/bardblv/bardbl=ωα=ω/bardblr/bardblsinθ=/bardblω/bardbl/bardblr/bardblsinθ.
The direction and magnitude of vimply that v=ω×r. Selecting a coordinate system
in which Lis the zaxis, we can write ω=ωkandr=xi+yj+zk. Thus,
v=ω×r=−ωyi+ωxj,
and so
curlv=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
−ωyωx0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=2ωk=2ω.
Hence, for the rotation of a rigid body, the curl of the velocity vector ﬁeld is a vector
ﬁeld whose value is the same at each point. It is directed along the axis of rotation with
magnitude twice the angular speed.
Q
xy
vauz
L
/H9275
B
r
ﬁgure 4.4.7 The velocity vand angular velocity
ωof a rotating body are related by v=ω×r.
▲

<<<PAGE 278>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 251
4.4 Divergence and Curl 251
ﬁgure 4.4.8 Looking at a
paddle wheel from above a
moving ﬂuid. The velocity ﬁeldV(x,y,z)=(yi−xj)/(x
2+y2)i s
irrotational; the paddle wheeldoes not rotate around its axis ω.ω
The Curl and Rotational Flow
If a vector ﬁeld represents the ﬂow of a ﬂuid, then the value of ∇× Fat a point is
twice the angular velocity vector of a rigid body that rotates as the ﬂuid does near that
point. In particular, ∇× F=0at a point Pmeans that the ﬂuid is free from rigid
rotations at P; that is, it has no whirlpools. Another justiﬁcation of this idea depends
on Stokes’ theorem from Chapter 8. However, we can say informally that curl F=0
means that if a small rigid paddle wheel is placed in the ﬂuid, it will move with the
ﬂuid but will not rotate around its own axis. Such a vector ﬁeld is called irrotational.
For example, it has been determined from experiments that ﬂuid draining from a tub is
usually irrotational except right at the center, even though the ﬂuid is “rotating” aroundthe drain (see Figure 4.4.8). In Example 10, the ﬂow lines of the vector ﬁeld Vare circles
about the origin, yet we show that the ﬂow is irrotational. Thus, the reader should bewarned of the possible confusion the word “irrotational” can cause.
example
10 Verify that the vector ﬁeld
V(x,y,z)=yi−xj
x2+y2
is irrotational when ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0) (i.e., except where Vis not deﬁned).
solution The curl is
∇× V=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
y
x2+y2−x
x2+y20/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=0i+0j+/bracketleftbigg∂
∂x/parenleftbigg−x
x2+y2/parenrightbigg
−∂
∂y/parenleftbiggy
x2+y2/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
k
=/bracketleftbigg−(x2+y2)+2x2
(x2+y2)2+−(x2+y2)+2y2
(x2+y2)2/bracketrightbigg
k=0.▲

<<<PAGE 279>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 252
252 Vector-Valued Functions
Gradients Are Curl Free
The following identity is a basic relation between the gradient and curl, which should
be compared with the fact that for any vector v,w eh a v ev ×v=0.
Theorem 1 Curl of a Gradient For any C2function f,
∇× (∇f)=0.
That is, the curl of any gradient is the zero vector.
proof Because ∇f=(∂f/∂x,∂f/∂y,∂f/∂z) we have, by deﬁnition,
∇×∇ f=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
∂f
∂x∂f
∂y∂f
∂z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/parenleftbigg∂
2f
∂y∂z−∂2f
∂z∂y/parenrightbigg
i+/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂z∂x−∂2f
∂x∂z/parenrightbigg
j+/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂x∂y−∂2f
∂y∂x/parenrightbigg
k.
Each component is zero because of the equality of mixed partial derivatives. ■
The converse to this theorem (a vector ﬁeld with zero curl is a gradient, under suitable
hypotheses) will be discussed in Chapter 8.
example 11 LetV(x,y,z)=yi−xj. Show that Vis not a gradient ﬁeld.
solution IfVwere a gradient ﬁeld, then it would satisfy curl V=0by Theorem 1. But
curlV=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
y−x0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−2k/negationslash=0,
soVcannot be a gradient.
▲
Scalar Curl
There is an operation on vector ﬁelds in the plane that is closely related to the curl.
IfF=P(x,y)i+Q(x,y)jis a vector ﬁeld in the plane, it can also be regarded as a
vector ﬁeld in space for which the kcomponent is zero and the other two components

<<<PAGE 280>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 253
4.4 Divergence and Curl 253
are independent of z. The curl of Fthen reduces to
∇× F=/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
k
and always points in the kdirection. The function
∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y
ofxandyis called the scalar curl ofF.
example 12 Find the scalar curl of V(x,y)=− y2i+xj.
solution The curl is
∇× V=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
−y2x0/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=(1+2y)k,
so the scalar curl, which is the coefﬁcient of k,i s1 +2y.
▲
Curls Are Divergence Free
A basic relation between the divergence and curl operations is given next.
Theorem 2 Divergence of a Curl For any C2vector ﬁeld F,
div curl F=∇·(∇× F)=0.
That is, the divergence of any curl is zero.
As with the curl of a gradient, the proof rests on the equality of the mixed partial
derivatives. Y ou should write out the details. A converse will be discussed in Chapter 8.
example 13 Show that the vector ﬁeld V(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zkcannot be the curl of some vector
ﬁeld F; that is, there is no Fwith V=curlF.
solution If this were so, then div Vwould be zero by Theorem 2. But
divV=∂x
∂x+∂y
∂y+∂z
∂z=3/negationslash=0,
soVcannot be curl Ffor any F. ▲

<<<PAGE 281>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 254
254 Vector-Valued Functions
Laplacian
TheLaplace operator ∇2, which operates on functions f, is deﬁned to be the divergence
of the gradient:
∇2f=∇·(∇f)=∂2f
∂x2+∂2f
∂y2+∂2f
∂z2.
This operator plays an important role in many physical laws, as we have mentioned in
Section 3.1.
The next example is important in mathematical physics.
example 14 Show that ∇2f=0 for
f(x,y,z)=1/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2=1
rand ( x,y,z)/negationslash=(0, 0, 0),
where r=xi+yj+zkandr=/bardblr/bardbl.
solution The ﬁrst derivatives are
∂f
∂x=−x
(x2+y2+z2)3/2,∂f
∂y=−y
(x2+y2+z2)3/2,∂f
∂z=−z
(x2+y2+z2)3/2.
Computing the second derivatives, we ﬁnd that
∂2f
∂x2=3x2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2−1
(x2+y2+z2)3/2,
∂2f
∂y2=3y2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2−1
(x2+y2+z2)3/2,
∂2f
∂z2=3z2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2−1
(x2+y2+z2)3/2.
Thus,
∂2f
∂x2+∂2f
∂y2+∂2f
∂z2=3(x2+y2+z2)
(x2+y2+z2)5/2−3
(x2+y2+z2)3/2
=3
(x2+y2+z2)3/2−3
(x2+y2+z2)3/2=0.▲
Vector Identities
We now have these basic operations on hand: gradient, divergence, curl, and the Laplaceoperator. The following box contains some basic general formulas that are useful whencomputing with vector ﬁelds.

<<<PAGE 282>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 255
4.4 Divergence and Curl 255
Basic Identities of Vector Analysis
1.∇(f+g)=∇ f+∇g
2.∇(cf)=c∇f, for a constant c
3.∇(fg)=f∇g+g∇f
4.∇(f/g)=(g∇f−f∇g)/g2, at points xwhere g(x)/negationslash=0
5. div ( F+G)=divF+divG
6. curl ( F+G)=curlF+curlG
7. div ( fF)=fdivF+F·∇f
8. div ( F×G)=G·curlF−F·curlG
9. div curl F=0
10. curl ( fF)=fcurlF+∇ f×F
11. curl ∇f=0
12.∇2(fg)=f∇2g+g∇2f+2(∇f·∇g)
13. div ( ∇f×∇g)=0
14. div ( f∇g−g∇f)=f∇2g−g∇2f
example 15 Prove identity 7 in the preceding box.
solution The vector ﬁeld fFhas components fFi, for i=1, 2, 3, and so
div ( fF)=∂
∂x(fF1)+∂
∂y(fF2)+∂
∂z(fF3).
However, ( ∂/∂x)(fF1)=f∂F1/∂x+F1∂f/∂xby the product rule, with similar ex-
pressions for the other terms. Therefore,
div ( fF)=f/parenleftbigg∂F1
∂x+∂F2
∂y+∂F3
∂z/parenrightbigg
+F1∂f
∂x+F2∂f
∂y+F3∂f
∂z
=f(∇·F)+F·∇f.▲
Let us use these identities to redo Example 14.

<<<PAGE 283>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 256
256 Vector-Valued Functions
example 16 Show that for r/negationslash=0,∇2(1/r)=0.
solution As in the case of the gravitational potential, ∇(1/r)=− r/r3. In general, ∇(rn)=
nrn−2r(see Exercise 38). By the identity ∇·(fF)=f∇·F+∇ f·F,w eg e t
∇·/parenleftbiggr
r3/parenrightbigg
=1
r3∇·r+r·∇/parenleftbigg1
r3/parenrightbigg
=3
r3+r·/parenleftbigg−3r
r5/parenrightbigg
=3
r3−3
r3=0.▲
Historical NoteDivergence and Curl
William Rowan Hamilton, in his investigation of quaternions (discussed in
Section 1.3), introduced the del operator , defined formally as
∇=∂
∂xi+∂
∂yj+∂
∂zk.
Hamilton firmly believed in the significance of this operator. If f(x,y,z)is a
scalar function on R3, then “multiplication” by ∇gives the gradient of f:
∇f=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj+∂f
∂zk,
which, of course, gives the direction of steepest ascent (see Section 2.6). If
V(x,y,z)=V1(x,y,z)i+V2(x,y,z)j+V3(x,y,z)k
is a vector field, then the “quaternionic multiplication” of ∇withVyields
∇V=−divV+curlV.
Thus, what we now call the divergence of Vis the negative of the scalar part of
this product, and curl Vis the vector part (c.f. the quaternion discussion in
Section 1.3).
As far as we are aware, Hamilton never gave a physical interpretation of
divergence and curl, but he surely believed that, as a consequence of his faith inthem, they must have an important physical interpretation. His faith in hismathematical formalism was justified, but a physical explanation of divergenceand curl had to wait for James Clerk Maxwell’s Treatise on Electricity and
Magnetism . Here, Maxwell used both the divergence and the curl in his
equations for the interaction of electric and magnetic fields (the Maxwellequations are discussed in Chapter 8).
Curiously, Maxwell referred to divergence as convergence and to curl as
rotation , a term still used in scientific research. It was Josiah Gibbs (Figure 4.4.9)
who renamed convergence and rotation as the more familiar terms we usetoday---divergence and curl.
ﬁgure 4.4.9 Josiah Willard Gibbs
(1839--1903).Maxwell gave a physical interpretation of the divergence using the Gauss
divergence theorem, as we do in Section 8.4. His physical interpretation of thecurl as a rotation was rather brief. Gibbs provided a more elementaryinterpretation of divergence, as we do in this section. In the spirit of Leibniz (whobelieved in infinitesimal quantities dx,dy,dz), Gibbs imagined placing a small
cube of dimensions dxbydybydzin a fluid. The faces of this cube have areas
dx dy, dy dz, and dx dz.

<<<PAGE 284>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 257
4.4 Divergence and Curl 257
At this point, you may be interested to hear Gibbs through the words of his student
E. B. Wilson:
Consider the amount of fluid which passes through those faces of the cube
which are parallel to the yzplane, i.e., perpendicular to the xaxis [see
Figure 4.4.10].
The normal to the face whose xcoordinate is the lesser, that is, the
normal to the left-hand face of the cube is -- i. The flux of substance through
this face is
−i·V(x,y,z)dy dz.
y
x
(x, y, z) (x + dx, y, z)
z−i dy dz i dy dz
ﬁgure 4.4.10 Cube with faces
parallel to the yzplane.
The normal to the opposite face, the face whose xcoordinate is greater
by the amount dx,i s+i, and the flux through it is therefore
i·V(x+dx,y,z)dy dz =i·/bracketleftbigg
V(x,y,z)+∂V
∂xdx/bracketrightbigg
dy dz
=i·V(x,y,z)dy dz +i·∂V
∂xdx dy dz.
The total flux outward from the cube through these two faces is thereforethe algebraic sum of these quantities. This is simply
i·∂V
∂xdx dy dz =∂V1
∂xdx dy dz.
In like manner the fluxes through the other pairs of faces of the cube are
j·∂V
∂ydx dy dz and k·∂V
∂zdx dy dz.
The total flux out from the cube is therefore
/parenleftbigg
i·∂V
∂x+j·∂V
∂y+k·∂V
∂z/parenrightbigg
dx dy dz.
This is the net quantity of fluid that leaves the cube per unit time. Thequotient of this by the volume dx dy dz of the cube gives the rate of
diminution of density. This is
∇·V=i·∂V
∂x+j·∂V
∂y+k·∂V
∂z=∂V1
∂x+∂V2
∂y+∂V3
∂z.

<<<PAGE 285>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 258
258 Vector-Valued Functions
Because ∇·Vthus represents the diminution of density or the rate at which
matter is leaving a point per unit volume per unit time, it is called the
divergence . Maxwell employed the term convergence to denote the rate
at which fluid approaches a point per unit volume per unit time. This is thenegative of the divergence. In the case that the fluid is incompressible,a s
much matter must leave the cube as enters it. The total change of contentsmust therefore be zero. For this reason, the characteristic differentialequation that any incompressible fluid must satisfy is
∇·V=0,
where Vis the velocity of the fluid. This equation is often known as the
hydrodynamic equation. It is satisfied by any flow of water, since water ispractically incompressible. The great importance of the equation for workin electricity is due to the fact that according to Maxwell’s hypothesis,electric displacement obeys the same laws as an incompressible fluid. If,then, Dis the electric displacement,
divD=∇·D=0.
Gibbs’ interpretation of curl was much like the one we gave in Example 9 for the
rotation of a rigid body. Wilson remarks that an analysis of the meaning of curl forfluid motion was “rather difficult.” It remains a bit elusive, even today, as can beseen from our discussion following Example 9. We provide another interpretationin Chapter 8.
exercises
Find the divergence of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 1 to 4.
1.V(x,y,z)=exyi−exyj+eyzk
2.V(x,y,z)=yzi+xzj+xyk
3.V(x,y,z)=xi+(y+cosx)j+(z+exy)k
4.V(x,y,z)=x2i+(x+y)2j+(x+y+z)2k
5.Figure 4.4.11 shows some ﬂow lines and moving regions
for a ﬂuid moving in the plane-ﬁeld velocity ﬁeld V.
Where is div V>0, and also where is div V<0?
6.LetV(x,y,z)=xibe the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid in
space. Relate the sign of the divergence with the rate ofchange of volume under the ﬂow.
7.Sketch a few ﬂow lines for F(x,y)=yi. Calculate ∇·F
and explain why your answer is consistent with yoursketch.
8.Sketch a few ﬂow lines for F(x,y)=−3xi−yj.
Calculate ∇·Fand explain why your answer is
consistent with your sketch.xy
ﬁgure 4.4.11 The ﬂow lines of a ﬂuid moving in the plane.

<<<PAGE 286>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 259
4.4 Divergence and Curl 259
Calculate the divergence of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 9 to 12.
9.F(x,y)=x3i−xsin (xy)j
10. F(x,y)=yi−xj11. F(x,y)=sin (xy)i−cos ( x2y)j
12. F(x,y)=xeyi−[y/(x+y)]j
Compute the curl, ∇× F, of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 13 to 16.
13. F(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk
14. F(x,y,z)=yzi+xzj+xyk15. F(x,y,z)=(x2+y2+z2)(3i+4j+5k)
16. F(x,y,z)=yzi−xzj+xyk
x2+y2+z2
Calculate the scalar curl of each of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 17 to 20.
17. F(x,y)=sinxi+cosxj
18. F(x,y)=yi−xj
19. F(x,y)=xyi+(x2−y2)j
20. F(x,y)=xi+yj
21. LetF(x,y,z)=(x2,x2y,z+zx).
(a)Verify that ∇·(∇× F)=0.
(b)Can there exist a function f:R3→Rsuch that
F=∇ f? Explain.
22. (a) Which of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 13–16 could
be gradient ﬁelds?
(b) Which of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 9–12 could
be the curl of some vector ﬁeld V:R3→R3?
23. LetF(x,y,z)=(exz, sin( xy),x5y3z2).
(a) Find the divergence of F.
(b) Find the curl of F.
24. Suppose f:R3→Ris aC2scalar function. Which of
the following expressions are meaningful, and which are
nonsense? For those which are meaningful, decidewhether the expression deﬁnes a scalar function or avector ﬁeld.
(a)curl(grad f)
(b)grad(curl f))
(c) div(grad f)(d) grad(div f)
(e) curl (div f)
(f) div(curl f)25. Suppose F:R3→R3is aC2vector ﬁeld. Which of the
following expressions are meaningful, and which arenonsense? For those which are meaningful, decidewhether the expression deﬁnes a scalar function or avector ﬁeld.
(a) curl(grad F)
(b) grad(curl F))
(c) div(grad F)
(d) grad(div F)
(e) curl (div F)
(f) div(curl F)
26. Suppose f,g,h:R→Rare differentiable. Show that
the vector ﬁeld F(x,y,z)=/parenleftbig
f(x),g(y),h(z)/parenrightbig
is
irrotational.
27. Suppose f,g,h:R2→Rare differentiable. Show that
the vector ﬁeld F(x,y,z)=/parenleftbig
f(y,z),g(x,z),h(x,y)/parenrightbig
has zero divergence.
28. Prove identity 13 in the list of vector identities.
V erify that ∇× (∇f)=0for the functions in Exercises 29 to 32.
29. f(x,y,z)=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2
30. f(x,y,z)=xy+yz+xz
31. f(x,y,z)=1/(x2+y2+z2)32. f(x,y,z)=x2y2+y2z2
33. Show that F=y(cos x)i+x(siny)jisnota gradient
vector ﬁeld.
34. Show that F=(x2+y2)i−2xyjisnota gradient ﬁeld.

<<<PAGE 287>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 260
260 Vector-Valued Functions
35. Prove identity 10 in the list of vector identities.
36. Suppose that ∇·F=0 and∇·G=0. Which of the
following necessarily have zero divergence?
(a)F+G
(b)F×G
37. LetF=2xz2i+j+y3zxkand f=x2y. Compute the
following quantities.
(a)∇f
(b)∇× F
(c)F×∇ f
(d)F·(∇f)
38. Letr(x,y,z)=(x,y,z) and
r=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2=/bardblr/bardbl. Prove the following
identities.
(a)∇(1/r)=−r/r3,r/negationslash=0; and, in general,
∇(rn)=nrn−2rand∇(logr)=r/r2.
(b)∇2(1/r)=0,r/negationslash=0; and, in general,
∇2rn=n(n+1)rn−2.(c)∇·(r/r3)=0; and, in general,
∇·(rnr)=(n+3)rn.
(d)∇× r=0; and, in general, ∇× (rnr)=0.
39. Does∇× Fhave to be perpendicular to F?
40. LetF(x,y,z)=3x2yi+(x3+y3)j.
(a)Verify that curl F=0.
(b)Find a function fsuch that F=∇ f. (Techniques
for constructing fin general are given in Chapter 8.
The one in this problem should be sought by trial
and error.)
41. Show that the real and imaginary parts of each of thefollowing complex functions form the components of anirrotational and incompressible vector ﬁeld in the plane;here i=√
−1.
(a) ( x−iy)2
(b) ( x−iy)3
(c)ex−iy=ex(cos y−isiny)
review exercises for chapter 4
For Exercises 1 to 4, at the indicated point, compute the velocity vector, the acceleration vector, the speed, and the equation ofthe tangent line.
1.c(t)=(t3+1,e−t, cos (πt/2)), at t=1
2.c(t)=(t2−1, cos ( t2),t4), att=√π
3.c(t)=(et, sint, cos t), att=0
4.c(t)=t2
1+t2i+tj+k,a t t=2
5.Calculate the tangent and acceleration vectors for thehelix c(t)=(cost, sint,t)a tt=π/4.
6.Calculate the tangent and acceleration vector for thecycloid c(t)=(t−sint,1−cost)a tt=π/4 and sketch.
7.Let a particle of mass mmove on the path
c(t)=(t2, sint, cos t).Compute the force acting on the
particle at t=0.
8.(a) Let c(t) be a path with /bardblc(t)/bardbl=constant; that is, the
curve lies on a sphere. Show that c/prime(t) is orthogonal
toc(t).(b) Let cbe a path whose speed is never zero. Show
thatchas constant speed if and only if the
acceleration vector c/prime/primeis always perpendicular to the
velocity vector c/prime.
9.Letc(t)=(cost, sint,√
3t) be a path in R3.
(a) Find the velocity and acceleration of this path.
(b) Find a parametrization for the tangent line to this
path at t=0.
(c) Find the arc length of this path for t∈[0, 2π ].
10. LetF(x,y,z)=(sin( xz),exy,x2y3z5).
(a) Find the divergence of F.
(b) Find the curl of F.
11. Verify that the gravitational force ﬁeld
F(x,y,z)=− A(x,y,z)
(x2+y2+z2)3/2, where Ais some
constant, is curl free away from the origin.

<<<PAGE 288>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 261
Review Exercises for Chapter 4 261
12. Show that the vector ﬁeld V(x,y,z)=2xi−3yj+4zk
is not the curl of any vector ﬁeld.
13. Express the arc length of the curve x2=y3=z5
between x=1 and x=4 as an integral, using a suitable
parametrization.
14. Find the arc length of c(t)=ti+(logt)j+2√
2tkfor
1≤t≤2.
15. A particle is constrained to move around the unit circle
in the xyplane according to the formula
(x,y,z)=(cos ( t2), sin ( t2), 0), t≥0.
(a) What are the velocity vector and speed of the
particle as functions of t?
(b) At what point on the circle should the particle be
released to hit a target at (2, 0, 0)? (Be careful aboutwhich direction the particle is moving around thecircle.)
(c) At what time tshould the release take place? (Use
the smallest t>0 that will work.)
(d) What are the velocity and speed at the time of
release?(e) At what time is the target hit?
16. A particle of mass mmoves under the inﬂuence of a
force F=−kr, where kis a constant and r(t) is the
position of the particle at time t.
(a) Write down differential equations for the
components of r(t).
(b) Solve the equations in part (a) subject to the initial
conditions r(0)=0,r/prime(0)=2j+k.
17. Write the curve described by the equations
x−1=2y+1=3z+2 in parametric form.
18. Write the curve x=y3=z2+1 in parametric form.
19. Show that c(t)=(1/(1−t), 0,et/(1−t)) is a ﬂow line
of the vector ﬁeld deﬁned by F(x,y,z)=(x2,0 ,
z(1+x)).
20. LetF(x,y)=f(x2+y2)[−yi+xj] for a function fof
one variable. What equation must g(t) satisfy for
c(t)=[cosg(t)]i+[sing(t)]j
to be a ﬂow line for F?
Compute ∇·Fand∇× Ffor the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 21 to 24.
21. F=2xi+3yj+4zk
22. F=x2i+y2j+z2k23. F=(x+y)i+(y+z)j+(z+x)k
24. F=xi+3xyj+zk
Compute the divergence and curl of the vector ﬁelds in Exercises 25 and 26 at the points indicated.
25. F(x,y,z)=yi+zj+xk, at the point (1, 1, 1) 26. F(x,y,z)=(x+y)3i+(sinxy)j+(cos xyz)k,a tt h e
point (2, 0, 1)
Calculate the gradients of the functions in Exercises 27 to 30, and verify that ∇×∇ f=0.
27. f(x,y)=exy+cos ( xy)
28. f(x,y)=x2−y2
x2+y2
29. f(x,y)=ex2−cos ( xy2)
30. f(x,y)=tan−1(x2+y2)
31. (a) Let f(x,y,z)=xyz2; compute ∇f.
(b) Let F(x,y,z)=xyi+yzj+zyk; compute ∇× F.
(c) Compute ∇× (fF) using identity 10 of the list of
vector identities. Compare with a direct computation.
32. (a) Let F=2xyezi+ezx2j+(x2yez+z2)k. Compute
∇·Fand∇× F.(b)Find a function f(x,y,z) such that F=∇ f.
33. LetF(x,y)=f(x2+y2)[−yi+xj], as in Exercise 20.
Calculate div Fand curl Fand discuss your answers in
view of the results of Exercise 20.
34. Let a particle of mass mmove along the elliptical helix
c(t)=(4 cos t, sint,t).
(a) Find the equation of the tangent line to the helix at
t=π/4.
(b) Find the force acting on the particle at time t=π/4.
(c) Write an expression (in terms of an integral) for the
arc length of the curve c(t) between t=0 and
t=π/4.

<<<PAGE 289>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:5 262
262 Vector-Valued Functions
35. (a) Let g(x,y,z)=x3+5yz+z2and let h(u)b ea
function of one variable such that h/prime(1)=1/2. Let
f=h◦g. Starting at (1, 0, 0), in what directions is
fchanging at 50% of its maximum rate?
(b) For g(x,y,z)=x3+5yz+z2, calculate F=∇g,
the gradient of g, and verify directly that ∇× F=0
at each point ( x,y,z).
36. (a)Write in parametric form the curve that is the
intersection of the surfaces x2+y2+z2=3 and
y=1.
(b)Find the equation of the line tangent to this curve at(1, 1, 1).
(c)Write an integral expression for the arc length ofthis curve. What is the value of this integral?
37. In meteorology, the negative pressure gradient Gis a
vector quantity that points from regions of high pressureto regions of low pressure, normal to the lines ofconstant pressure (isobars).
(a) In an xycoordinate system,
G=−∂P
∂xi−∂P
∂yj.
Write a formula for the magnitude of the negativepressure gradient.
(b) If the horizontal pressure gradient provided the only
horizontal force acting on the air, the wind wouldblow directly across the isobars in the direction ofG, and for a given air mass, with accelerationproportional to the magnitude of G. Explain, using
Newton’ s second law.
(c) Because of the rotation of the earth, the wind does
not blow in the direction that part(b) would suggest. Instead, it obeys Buys–Ballot’s
law, which states: “If in the Northern Hemisphere,you stand with your back to the wind, the highpressure is on your right and the low pressure is onyour left.” Draw a ﬁgure and introduce xy
coordinates so that Gpoints in the proper direction.
(d) State and graphically illustrate Buys–Ballot’ s law for
the Southern Hemisphere, in which the orientationof high and low pressure is reversed.
38. A sphere of mass m, radius a, and uniform density has
potential uand gravitational force F, at a distance rfrom
the center (0, 0, 0), given by
u=3m
2a−mr2
2a3, F=−m
a3r (r≤a);
u=m
r, F=−m
r3r (r>a).Here, r=/bardblr/bardbl,r=xi+yj+zk.
(a) Verify that F=∇uon the inside and outside of the
sphere.
(b) Check that usatisﬁes Poisson’ s equation:
∂2u/∂x2+∂2u/∂y2+∂2u/∂z2=constant inside
the sphere.
(c) Show that usatisﬁes Laplace’ s equation:
∂2u/∂x2+∂2u/∂y2+∂2u/∂z2=0 outside the
sphere.
39. A circular helix that lies on the cylinder x2+y2=R2
with pitch ρmay be described parametrically by
x=Rcosθ, y=Rsinθ, z=ρθ,θ≥0.
A particle slides under the action of gravity (which actsparallel to the zaxis) without friction along the helix.
If the particle starts out at the height z
0>0, then when
it reaches the height zalong the helix, its speed is
given by
ds
dt=/radicalbig
(z0−z)2g,
where sis arc length along the helix, gis the constant of
gravity, tis time, and 0 ≤z≤z0.
(a) Find the length of the part of the helix between the
planes z=z0andz=z1,0≤z1<z0.
(b) Compute the time T0it takes the particle to reach the
plane z=0.
40. A sphere of radius 10 centimeters (cm) with center at(0, 0, 0) rotates about the zaxis with angular velocity 4
in such a direction that the rotation lookscounterclockwise from the positive zaxis.
(a)Find the rotation vector ω(see Example 9, in
Section 4.4).
(b)Find the velocity v=ω×rwhen r=5√
2(i−j)i s
on the “equator.”
(c)Find the velocity of the point (0, 5√
3, 5) on the
sphere.
41. Find the speed of the students in a classroom located at alatitude 49
◦N due to the rotation of the earth. (Ignore the
motion of the earth about the sun, the sun in the galaxy,etc.; the radius of the earth is 3960 miles.)

<<<PAGE 290>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 263
5
Double and Triple Integrals
It is to Archimedes himself (c. 225 B.C.) that we owe the nearest approach to actual inte-
gration to be found among the Greeks. His ﬁrst noteworthy advance in this direction was
concerned with his proof that the area of a parabolic segment is four thirds of the trianglewith the same base and vertex, or two thirds of the circumscribed parallelogram.
---D. E. Smith,
History of Mathematics
In this chapter and the next we study the integration of real-valued
functions of several variables; this chapter treats integrals of functions
of two and three variables, or double and triple integrals. The double
integral has a basic geometric interpretation as volume, and can bedeﬁned rigorously as a limit of approximating sums. We shall present sev-eral techniques for evaluating double and triple integrals and considersome applications.
5.1Introduction
This section discusses some geometric aspects of the double integral, deferring a more
rigorous discussion in terms of Riemann sums until Section 5.2.
Double Integrals as Volumes
Consider a continuous function of two variables f:R⊂R2→Rwhose domain Ris a
rectangle with sides parallel to the coordinate axes. The rectangle Rcan be described in
terms of the two closed intervals [ a,b] and [c ,d], representing the sides of Ralong the
xandyaxes, respectively, as in Figure 5.1.1. In this case, we say that Ris the Cartesian
product of [a,b] and [c ,d] and write R=[a,b]×[c,d].
Assume that f(x,y)≥0o n R, so that the graph of z=f(x,y) is a surface
lying above the rectangle R. This surface, the rectangle R, and the four planes x=a,
x=b,y=c, and y=dform the boundary of a region Vin space (see Figure 5.1.1).
The problem of how to rigorously deﬁne the volume of Vhas to be faced, and we
shall solve it in Section 5.2 by the classic method of exhaustion, or rather, in more
263

<<<PAGE 291>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 264
264 Double and Triple Integrals
y
x
z
Graph of
z = f(x, y)
c
ba
R
dRegion Vﬁgure 5.1.1 The region Vin space is
bounded by the graph of f, the rectangle
R, and the four vertical sides indicated.
modern terms, the method of Riemann sums. To gain an intuitive grasp of the double
integral, we provisionally assume that the volume of a region has been deﬁned.
Double Integrals The volume of the region above Rand under the graph of a
nonnegative function fis called the (double) integral offover Rand is denoted
by
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA,o r/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dx dy.
example 1 (a) If fis deﬁned by f(x,y)=k, where kis a positive constant, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA=k(b−a)(d−c),
because the integral is equal to the volume of a rectangular box with base Rand height k.
(b) If f(x,y)=1−xandR=[0, 1]×[0, 1], then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA=1
2,
because the integral is equal to the volume of the triangular solid shown in Figure 5 .1.2.
y
xz
(1, 0, 0) 
(1, 1, 0) (0, 1, 0) z = 1 − x
Rﬁgure 5.1.2 Volume under the graph z=1−x
and over R=[0,1]×[0,1].
▲

<<<PAGE 292>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 265
5.1 Introduction 265
example 2 Suppose z=f(x,y)=x2+y2and R=[−1, 1]×[0, 1]. Then the integral/integraltext/integraltext
R(x2+y2)dx dy is equal to the volume of the solid sketched in Figure 5.1.3. We
shall compute this integral in Example 3.
z = f(x, y) = x2 + y2
xy
R
(1, 0, 0) 
(1, 1, 0) (−1, 1, 0) z
ﬁgure 5.1.3 Volume under z=x2+y2and over
R=[−1,1]×[0,1].
▲
These ideas are similar to those for a single integral/integraltextb
af(x)dx, which represents
the area under the graph of fiff≥0; see Figure 5.1.4.1
xy
x= a
aby= f(x)x= b
ﬁgure 5.1.4 Area under the
graph of a nonnegative
continuous function ffrom x=a
tox=bis/integraltextb
af(x)dx.Single integrals/integraltextb
af(x)dxcan be rigorously deﬁned, without recourse to the area
concept, as a limit of Riemann sums. The idea is to approximate/integraltextb
af(x)dxby choosing
a partition a=x0<x1<···<xn=bof [a,b], selecting points ci∈[xi,xi+1], and
forming the Riemann sum
n−1/summationdisplay
i=0f(ci)(xi+1−xi)≈/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx
(see Figure 5.1.5). We examine the analogous process for double integrals in the next
section.
ﬁgure 5.1.5 The sum of the
areas of the shaded rectangles is
a Riemann sum, which
approximates the area under f
from x=atox=b.y
a x0c0 c1 c2 c3 x1 x2 x3 x4x
b= =y f=()
x
Cavalieri’s Principle
There is a useful method for computing volumes, known as Cavalieri’ s principle. Sup-
pose we have a solid body and we let A(x) denote its cross-sectional area in a plane Px
measured at a distance xfrom a reference plane (Figure 5.1.6).
1Readers not already familiar with this idea should review the appropriate sections of their introductory
calculus text.

<<<PAGE 293>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 266
266 Double and Triple Integrals
ﬁgure 5.1.6 A solid body with
cross-sectional area A(x)a t
distance xfrom a reference
plane.
axb
Reference planeA(x) = area of
cross section
Px
According to Cavalieri’ s principle, the volume of the body is given by
volume =/integraldisplayb
aA(x)dx,
where aandbare the minimum and maximum distances from the reference plane.
This can be made intuitively clear as follows. If we partition [ a,b] into n-equal parts
by taking a=x0<x1<···<xn=b, then if /Delta1x=xi+1−xian approximating
Riemann sum for the preceding integral is
n−1/summationdisplay
i=0A(ci)(xi+1−xi)=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0A(ci)/Delta1x.
But this sum also approximates the volume of the body, because A(x)/Delta1xis the volume
of a slab with cross-sectional area A(x) and thickness /Delta1x(Figure 5.1.7). Therefore, it is
reasonable to accept the preceding formula for the volume. A more careful justiﬁcation
of this method is given in the Internet supplement for Chapter 5.Δx
A(x)
ﬁgure 5.1.7 Volume of a slab
with cross-sectional area A(x)
and thickness /Delta1xequals A(x)/Delta1x.
The total volume of the body is/integraltextb
aA(x)dx.
The Slice Method---Cavalieri’s Principle LetSbe a solid and, for x
satisfying a≤x≤b, letPxbe a family of parallel planes such that:
1.Slies between PaandPb;
2. The area of the slice of Scut by PxisA(x).
Then the volume of Sis equal to
/integraldisplayb
aA(x)dx.
Historical NoteBonaventura Cavalieri (1598--1647) was a pupil of Galileo and a professor in
Bologna. His investigations into area and volume were important building blocksof the foundations of calculus. Although his methods were criticized by hiscontemporaries, similar ideas had been used by Archimedes in antiquity andwere later taken up by the “fathers” of calculus, Newton and Leibniz.

<<<PAGE 294>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 267
5.1 Introduction 267
y
xz
z = f(x, y)
a
Rbx0
c
dy0
ﬁgure 5.1.8 Two different cross sections
sweeping out the volume under
z=f(x,y).
Reduction to Iterated Integrals
We now use Cavalieri’ s principle to evaluate double integrals. Consider the solid region
under a graph z=f(x,y) deﬁned on the region [ a,b]×[c,d], where fis continuous
and greater than zero. There are two natural cross-sectional area functions: one obtained
by using cutting planes perpendicular to the xaxis, and the other obtained by using
cutting planes perpendicular to the yaxis. The cross section determined by a cutting
plane x=x0, of the ﬁrst sort, is the plane region under the graph of z=f(x0,y) from
y=ctoy=d(Figure 5.1.8).
When we ﬁx x=x0, we obtain the function y/mapsto→f(x0,y), which is continuous on
[c,d]. The cross-sectional area A(x0) is, therefore, equal to the integral/integraltextd
cf(x0,y)dy.
Thus, the cross-sectional area function Ahas domain [ a,b], and is given by the rule
A:x/mapsto→/integraltextd
cf(x,y)dy. By Cavalieri’ s principle, the volume Vof the region under
z=f(x,y) must be equal to
V=/integraldisplayb
aA(x)dx=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx.
The integral/integraltextb
a/bracketleftbig/integraltextd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbig
dxis known as an iterated integral because it is obtained
by integrating with respect to yand then integrating the result with respect to x. Because/integraltext/integraltext
Rf(x,y)dAis equal to the volume V, we get the following result.
Double and Iterated Integrals
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx (1)
If we use cutting planes perpendicular to the yaxis, we obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayd
c/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy (2)
The expression on the right of formula (2) is the iterated integral obtained by
integrating with respect to xand then integrating the result with respect to y.

<<<PAGE 295>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 268
268 Double and Triple Integrals
Thus, if our intuition about volumes is correct, formulas (1) and (2) ought to be valid.
This is in fact true when the concepts we are discussing are deﬁned rigorously, and is
known as Fubini’ s theorem. We give a proof of this theorem in the next section.
As the following examples illustrate, the notion of the iterated integral and equations
(1) and (2) provide a powerful method for computing the double integral of a function
of two variables.
example 3 Evaluate the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+y2)dx dy,
where R=[−1, 1] ×[0, 1].
solution By equation (2),
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+y2)dx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
−1(x2+y2)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy.
To ﬁnd/integraltext1
−1(x2+y2)dx, we treat yas a constant and integrate with respect to x. Because
x3/3+y2xis an antiderivative of x2+y2with respect to x, we can integrate, using the
fundamental theorem of calculus, to obtain
/integraldisplay1
−1(x2+y2)dx=/bracketleftbiggx3
3+y2x/bracketrightbigg1
x=−1=2
3+2y2.
Next, we integrate2
3+2y2with respect to yfrom 0 to 1 to obtain
/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg2
3+2y2/parenrightbigg
dy=/bracketleftbigg2
3y+2
3y3/bracketrightbigg1
y=0=4
3.
Hence, the volume of the solid we saw in Figure 5.1.3 is 4/3.
For completeness, let us evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
R(x2+y2)dx dy using equation (1)—that is,
integrating with respect to yﬁrst and then with respect to x.W eh a v e
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+y2)dx dy=/integraldisplay1
−1/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y2)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx.
Treating xas a constant in the yintegration, we obtain
/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y2)dy=/bracketleftbigg
x2y+y3
3/bracketrightbigg1
y=0=x2+1
3.
Next, we evaluate/integraltext1
−1/parenleftbig
x2+1
3/parenrightbig
dxto obtain
/integraldisplay1
−1/parenleftbigg
x2+1
3/parenrightbigg
dx=/bracketleftbiggx3
3+x
3/bracketrightbigg1
x=−1=4
3,
which agrees with our previous answer. ▲

<<<PAGE 296>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 269
5.1 Introduction 269
example 4 Compute the double integral/integraltext/integraltext
Scosxsinyd xd y , where Sis the square [0, π/2]×
[0,π/2] (see Figure 5.1.9).
z
z = cos x sin y
x
y
π
2(    ,    , 0)π
2π
2(    , 0, 0)(0,    , 1)π
2 ﬁgure 5.1.9 Volume under z=cosxsiny
and over the rectangle [0 ,π/2]×[0,π/2].
solution By equation (2),
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Scosxsinyd xd y =/integraldisplayπ/2
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayπ/2
0cosxsinyd x/bracketrightbigg
dy
=/integraldisplayπ/2
0siny/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayπ/2
0cosxd x/bracketrightbigg
dy=/integraldisplayπ/2
0sinyd y=1.▲
In the next section, we shall use Riemann sums to rigorously deﬁne the double integral
for a large class of functions of two variables without recourse to the notion of volume.
Although we shall drop the requirement that f(x,y)≥0, equations (1) and (2) will
remain valid. Therefore, the iterated integral will again provide the key to computing
the double integral. In Section 5.3, we treat double integrals over regions more general
than rectangles.
Finally, we remark that it is common to delete the brackets in iterated integrals such
as equations (1) and (2) and to write
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx in place of/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx
and
/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx dy in place of/integraldisplayd
c/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy.
exercises
1.Evaluate the following iterated integrals:
(a)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(1−x3+xy)dx dy
(b)/integraldisplayπ/2
0/integraldisplayπ/2
−π/2cosxsinyd xd y(c)/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay4
2/parenleftbigg
x
y+y
x/parenrightbigg
dx dy
(d)/integraldisplayπ/4
0/integraldisplayπ/4
0tanxsec2yd xd y

<<<PAGE 297>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 270
270 Double and Triple Integrals
2.Evaluate the integrals in Exercise 1 by integrating ﬁrst
with respect to yand then with respect to x.
3.Evaluate the following iterated integrals:
(a)/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
0(x4y+y2)dy dx
(b)/integraldisplayπ/2
0/integraldisplay1
0(ycosx+2)dy dx
(c)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(xyex+y)dy dx
(d)/integraldisplay0
−1/integraldisplay2
1(−xlogy)dy dx
4.Evaluate the integrals in Exercise 3 by integrating with
respect to xand then with respect to y. [The solution to
part (b) only is in the Study Guide to this text.]
5.Use Cavalieri’ s principle to show that the volumes of two
cylinders with the same base and height are equal (see
Figure 5.1.10).
r
 r
h
ﬁgure 5.1.10 Two cylinders with the same base and
height have the same volume.
6.Using Cavalieri’ s principle, compute the volume of the
structure shown in Figure 5.1.11; each cross section is a
rectangle of length 5 and width 3.
5 37
ﬁgure 5.1.11 Compute this volume.7.A lumberjack cuts out a wedge-shaped piece Wof a
cylindrical tree of radius robtained by making two saw
cuts to the tree’ s center, one horizontally and one at an
angleθ. Compute the volume of the wedge Wusing
Cavalieri’ s principle. (See Figure 5.1.12.)
x
h
yx
rb
υ
W
ﬁgure 5.1.12 Find the volume of W.
8.(a) Show that the volume of the solid of revolution
shown in Figure 5.1.13(a) is
π/integraldisplayb
a[f(x)]2dx.
(b) Show that the volume of the region obtained by
rotating the region under the graph of the parabola
y=−x2+2x+3,−1≤x≤3, about the xaxis is
512π/15 [see Figure 5.1.13(b)].
y /H11005 f(x, y)y = /H11002x2 + 2x + 3y
x
 ab 33
/H110021
 x
y
(a) (b)
ﬁgure 5.1.13 The solid of revolution (a) has volume π/integraltextb
a[f(x)]2dx.
Part (b) shows the region between the graph of y=−x2+2x+3
and the xaxis rotated about the xaxis.

<<<PAGE 298>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 271
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 271
Evaluate the double integrals in Exercises 9 to 11, where R is the rectangle [0, 2]×[−1, 0].
9./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2y2+x)dy dx
10./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R/parenleftbigg
|y|cos1
4πx/parenrightbigg
dy dx
11./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R/parenleftbigg
−xexsin1
2πy/parenrightbigg
dy dx
12. Evaluate the iterated integral:
/integraldisplay3
1/integraldisplay2
1xy/parenleftbig
x2+y2/parenrightbig3/2dx dy.13. Evaluate the iterated integral:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(3x+2y)7dx dy.
14. Find the volume bounded by the graph of
f(x,y)=1+2x+3y, the rectangle [1, 2] ×[0, 1],
and the four vertical sides of the rectangle R,a si n
Figure 5.1.1.
15. Repeat Exercise 14 for the function f(x,y)=x4+y2
and the rectangle [−1, 1] ×[−3,−2].
5.2The Double Integral Over a Rectangle
We are ready to give a rigorous deﬁnition of the double integral as the limit of a sequence
of sums. This will then be used to deﬁne the volume of the region under the graph of a
function f(x,y). We shall not require that f(x,y)≥0; but if f(x,y) assumes negative
values, we shall interpret the integral as a signed volume, just as for the area under thegraph of a function of one variable. In addition, we shall discuss some of the fundamentalalgebraic properties of the double integral and prove Fubini’ s theorem, which states thatthe double integral can be calculated as an iterated integral. To begin, let us establishsome notation for partitions and sums.
Deﬁnition of the Integral
Consider a closed rectangle R⊂R2; that is, Ris a Cartesian product of two inter-
vals: R=[a,b]×[c,d]. By a regular partition ofRof order nwe mean the two
ordered collections of n+1 equally spaced points {xj}n
j=0and{yk}n
k=0; that is, the
points satisfying
a=x0<x1<···<xn=b, c=y0<y1<···<yn=d
and
xj+1−xj=b−a
n, yk+1−yk=d−c
n
(see Figure 5.2.1).
A function f(x,y) is said to be bounded if there is a number M>0 such that
−M≤f(x,y)≤Mfor all ( x,y) in the domain of f. A continuous function on a
closed rectangle is always bounded, but, for example, f(x,y)=1/xon (0, 1] ×[0, 1]
is continuous but is not bounded, because 1/ xbecomes arbitrarily large for xnear 0.
The rectangle (0, 1] ×[0, 1] is not closed, because the endpoint 0 is missing in the ﬁrst
factor.

<<<PAGE 299>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 272
272 Double and Triple Integrals
ﬁgure 5.2.1 A regular partition
of a rectangle R, with n=4.dy4
c
a x1 b x0 x2 x3 x4y3
y2
y1
y0
=x
==
=y
R
LetRjkbe the rectangle [ xj,xj+1]×[yk,yk+1], and let cjkbeanypoint in Rjk.
Suppose f:R→Ris a bounded real-valued function. Form the sum
Sn=n−1/summationdisplay
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1y=n−1/summationdisplay
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1A, (1)
where
/Delta1x=xj+1−xj=b−a
n,/Delta1y=yk+1−yk=d−c
n,
and
/Delta1A=/Delta1x/Delta1y.
This sum is taken over all j’ s and k’ s from 0 to n−1, and so there are n2terms. A sum
of this type is called a Riemann sum forf.
Deﬁnition Double Integral If the sequence {Sn}converges to a limit Sas
n→∞ and if the limit Sis the same for any choice of points cjkin the rectangles
Rjk, then we say that fisintegrable over Rand we write
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA,/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dx dy,o r/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rfd x d y
for the limit S.
Thus, we can rewrite integrability in the following way:
limit
n→∞n−1/summationdisplay
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rfd xd y
for any choice of cjk∈Rjk.
Properties of the Integral
The proof of the following basic theorem is presented in the Internet supplement for
Chapter 5.

<<<PAGE 300>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 273
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 273
Theorem 1Any continuous function deﬁned on a closed rectangle Ris
integrable.
Iff(x,y)≥0, the existence of limit n→∞Snhas a straightforward geometric mean-
ing. Consider the graph of z=f(x,y) as the top of a solid whose base is the rectangle
R. If we take each cjkto be a point where f(x,y) has its minimum value2onRjk,
then f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1yrepresents the volume of a rectangular box with base Rjk. The sum/summationtextn−1
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1yequals the volume of an inscribed solid, part of which is shown in
Figure 5.2.2.
Similarly, if cjkis a point where f(x,y) has its maximum on Rjk, then the sum/summationtextn−1
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1yis equal to the volume of a circumscribed solid (see Figure 5.2.3).
ﬁgure 5.2.2 The sum of inscribed
boxes approximates the volume
under the graph of z=f(x,y).
y
xz
a
bd
R cjk
c
Rij
f(cjk)
ﬁgure 5.2.3 The volume of
circumscribed boxes also
approximates the volume under
z=f(x,y).
y
xz
a
bd
R
c
Rij
f(cjk)
cjk
2Such cjkexist by virtue of the continuity of fonR; see Theorem 7 in Section 3.3.

<<<PAGE 301>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 274
274 Double and Triple Integrals
xz
yA“broken surface”
z = f  (x, y)
R
Set of discontinuities of f
Set of discontinuities of fRBreak in the
surfacez = f (x, y)
xz
y
ﬁgure 5.2.4 What the graphs of discontinuous functions of two variables might look like.
ﬁgure 5.2.5 Curves in the plane
represented as graphs.
xy
y=  (x)12y
xy=  (x)
x=   (y)1
2 x=   (y)
a bcd
Therefore, if limit n→∞Snexists and is independent of cjk∈Rjk, it follows that the
volumes of the inscribed and circumscribed solids approach the same limit as n→∞ .I t
is therefore reasonable to call this limit the exact volume of the solid under the graph of
f. Thus, the method of Riemann sums supports the concepts introduced on an intuitive
basis in Section 5.1.
There is a theorem guaranteeing the existence of the integral of certain discontinuous
functions as well. We shall need this result in the next section in order to discuss the
integrals of functions over regions more general than rectangles. We shall be speciﬁcallyinterested in functions whose discontinuities lie on curves in the xyplane. Figure 5.2.4
shows two functions deﬁned on a rectangle Rwhose discontinuities lie along curves. In
other words, fis continuous at each point that is in R, but not necessarily on the curve.
Useful curves are graphs of functions such as y=φ(x),a≤x≤b,o rx=ψ(y),
c≤y≤d, or ﬁnite unions of such graphs. Some examples are shown in Figure 5.2.5.
The next theorem provides an important criterion for determining whether a function
is integrable. The proof is discussed in the Internet supplement.
Theorem 2 Integrability of Bounded Functions Let f:R→Rbe a
bounded real-valued function on the rectangle R, and suppose that the set of
points where fis discontinuous lies on a ﬁnite union of graphs of continuous
functions. Then fis integrable over R.

<<<PAGE 302>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 275
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 275
Using Theorem 2 and the remarks preceding it, we see that the functions sketched in
Figure 5.2.4 are integrable over R, because these functions are bounded and continuous
except on graphs of continuous functions.
From the deﬁnition of the integral as a limit of sums and the limit theorems, we can
deduce some fundamental properties of the integral/integraltext/integraltext
Rf(x,y)dA; these properties
are essentially the same as for the integral of a real-valued function of a single variable.
Letfandgbe integrable functions on the rectangle R, and let cbe a constant. Then
f+gandcfare integrable, and
(i) Linearity
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R[f(x,y)+g(x,y)]dA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rg(x,y)dA.
(ii) Homogeneity
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rcf(x,y)dA=c/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
(iii) Monotonicity Iff(x,y)≥g(x,y), then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA≥/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rg(x,y)dA.
(iv) Additivity IfRi,i=1,...,m, are pairwise disjoint rectangles such that fis
bounded and integrable over each Riand if Q=R1∪R2∪···∪ Rmis a rectangle,
then f:Q→Ris integrable over Qand
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Qf(x,y)dA=m/summationdisplay
i=1/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rif(x,y)dA.
Properties (i) and (ii) are a consequence of the deﬁnition of the integral as a limit of
a sum and the following facts for convergent sequences {Sn}and{Tn}, which are proved
as with the limit theorems in Chapter 2:
limit
n→∞(Tn+Sn)=limit
n→∞Tn+limit
n→∞Sn
limit
n→∞(cSn)=climit
n→∞Sn.
To demonstrate monotonicity, we ﬁrst observe that if h(x,y)≥0 and {Sn}is a
sequence of Riemann sums that converges to/integraltext/integraltext
Rh(x,y)dA, then Sn≥0 for all n,s o
that/integraltext/integraltext
Rh(x,y)dA=limit n→∞Sn≥0. If f(x,y)≥g(x,y) for all ( x,y)∈R, then
(f−g)(x,y)≥0 for all ( x,y), and, using properties (i) and (ii), we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rg(x,y)dA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R[f(x,y)−g(x,y)]dA≥0.
This proves property (iii). The proof of property (iv) is more technical, and a special
case is proved in the Internet supplement. It should be intuitively obvious.
Another important result is the inequality
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rfd A/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R|f|dA. (2)

<<<PAGE 303>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 276
276 Double and Triple Integrals
To see why formula (2) is true, note that, by the deﬁnition of absolute value,
−|f|≤f≤|f|;
therefore, from the monotonicity and homogeneity of integration (with c=−1),
−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R|f|dA≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rfd A≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R|f|dA,
which is equivalent to formula (2).
Fubini’s Theorem
Although we have noted the integrability of a variety of functions, we have not yet
established rigorously a general method of computing integrals. In the case of one
variable, we avoid computing/integraltextb
af(x)dxfrom its deﬁnition as a limit of a sum by using
thefundamental theorem of integral calculus. This important theorem tells us that if f
is continuous, then
/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx=F(b)−F(a),
where F is an antiderivative of f ; that is, F/prime=f.
This technique will not work as stated for functions f(x,y) of two variables. How-
ever, as we indicate in Section 5.1, we can often reduce a double integral over a rectangle
to iterated single integrals; the fundamental theorem then applies to each of these sin-gle integrals. Fubini’ s theorem, which was mentioned in the last section, establishesthis reduction to iterated integrals rigorously, by using Riemann sums. As we saw inSection 5.1, the reduction,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx=/integraldisplayd
c/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy,
is a consequence of Cavalieri’ s principle, at least if f(x,y)≥0. In terms of Riemann
sums, it corresponds to the following equality:
n−1/summationdisplay
j,k=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1y=n−1/summationdisplay
j=0/parenleftBiggn−1/summationdisplay
k=0f(cjk)/Delta1y/parenrightBigg
/Delta1x=n−1/summationdisplay
k=0/parenleftBiggn−1/summationdisplay
j=0f(cjk)/Delta1x/parenrightBigg
/Delta1y,
which may be proved more generally as follows: Let[ajk]be an n ×n matrix, where
0≤j≤n−1and0≤k≤n−1. Let/summationtextn−1
j,k=0ajkbe the sum of the n2matrix entries.
Then
n−1/summationdisplay
j,k=0ajk=n−1/summationdisplay
j=0/parenleftBiggn−1/summationdisplay
k=0ajk/parenrightBigg
=n−1/summationdisplay
k=0/parenleftBiggn−1/summationdisplay
j=0ajk/parenrightBigg
. (3)

<<<PAGE 304>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 277
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 277
In the ﬁrst equality, the right-hand side represents summing the matrix entries ﬁrst
by rows and then adding the results:
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣a
00 a01 a02···−−−−−−−−−−−−−− →a0k··· a0(n−1)
......
a
j0 aj1 ···−−−−−−−−−−−−−− →ajk··· aj(n−1)
......
a
(n−1)0 a(n−1)1 ···−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− →a(n−1)k··· a(n−1)( n−1)⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦n−1/summationdisplay
k=0a0k
...
n−1/summationdisplay
k=0ajk
...
n−1/summationdisplay
k=0a(n−1)k↓
n−1/summationdisplay
j=0/parenleftBiggn−1/summationdisplay
k=0ajk/parenrightBigg
.
Clearly, this is equal to/summationtextn−1
j,k=0ajk; that is, the sum of all the ajk. Similarly, the sum/summationtextn−1
k=0 /parenleftbig/summationtextn−1
j=0ajk/parenrightbig
represents a summing of the matrix entries by columns. This establishes
equation (3) and makes the reduction to iterated integrals quite plausible if we remember
that integrals can be approximated by the corresponding Riemann sums. The actual proofof Fubini’ s theorem exploits this idea.
Theorem 3 Fubini’s Theorem Letfbe a continuous function with a rect-
angular domain R=[a,b]×[c,d]. Then
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA. (4)
proof We shall ﬁrst show that
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
Letc=y0<y1<···<yn=dbe a partition of [c ,d] into nequal parts. Deﬁne
F(x)=/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy.
Then
F(x)=n−1/summationdisplay
k=0/integraldisplayyk+1
ykf(x,y)dy.
Using the integral version of the mean-value theorem,3for each ﬁxed xand for each k
we have/integraldisplayyk+1
ykf(x,y)dy=f(x,Yk(x))(yk+1−yk)
3This states that if g(x) is continuous on [ a,b], then/integraltextb
ag(x)dx=g(c)(b−a) for some point c∈[a,b].
The more general second mean-value theorem was proved in Section 3.2.

<<<PAGE 305>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 278
278 Double and Triple Integrals
ﬁgure 5.2.6 The notation
needed in the proof of Fubini’s
theorem: n=8.
z /H11005 f(x, y)
c = y0a = x0
d = y8z
b = x8x1x2x3x4
x6x7y7y6y5y4y3
P4y1
f(cij)
y3(x)
y
x
y2
x5cij
(see Figure 5.2.6), where the point Yk(x) belongs to [ yk,yk+1] and may depend on x,k,
andn.
We have thus shown that
F(x)=n−1/summationdisplay
k=0f(x,Yk(x))(yk+1−yk). (5)
By the deﬁnition of the integral in one variable as a limit of Riemann sums,
/integraldisplayb
aF(x)dx=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx=limit
n→∞n−1/summationdisplay
j=0F(pj)(xj+1−xj),
where a=x0<x1<···<xn=bis a partition of the interval [ a,b] into nequal parts
andpjis any point in [ xj,xj+1]. Setting cjk=(pj,Yk(pj))∈Rjk, we have [substituting
pjforxin equation (5)]
F(pj)=n−1/summationdisplay
k=0f(cjk)(yk+1−yk).
Therefore,
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplayb
aF(x)dx=limit
n→∞n−1/summationdisplay
j=0F(pj)(xj+1−xj)
=limit
n→∞n−1/summationdisplay
j=0n−1/summationdisplay
k=0f(cjk)(yk+1−yk)(xj+1−xj)
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
Thus, we have proved that
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.

<<<PAGE 306>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 279
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 279
By the same reasoning we can show that
/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
These two conclusions are exactly what we wanted to prove. ■
Fubini’ s theorem can be generalized to the case where fis not necessarily continuous.
Although we shall not present a proof, we state here this more general version.
Theorem 3/primeFubini’s Theorem Letfbe a bounded function with domain a
rectangle R=[a,b]×[c,d], and suppose the discontinuities of flie on a ﬁnite
union of graphs of continuous functions. If the integral/integraltextd
cf(x,y)dyexists for
each x∈[a,b], then
/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx
exists and
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
Similarly, if/integraltextb
af(x,y)dxexists for each y∈[c,d], then
/integraldisplayd
c/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy
exists and
/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
Thus, if all these conditions hold simultaneously,
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y)dA.
The assumptions made for this version of Fubini’ s theorem are more complicated
than those we made in Theorem 3. They are necessary because if fis not continuous
everywhere, for example, there is no guarantee that/integraltextd
cf(x,y)dywill exist for each x.
example 1 Compute/integraltext/integraltext
R(x2+y)dA, where Ris the square [0, 1] ×[0, 1].
solution By Fubini’ s theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+y)dA=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y)dx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy.

<<<PAGE 307>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 280
280 Double and Triple Integrals
By the fundamental theorem of calculus, the xintegration may be performed:
/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y)dx=/bracketleftbiggx3
3+yx/bracketrightbigg1
x=0=1
3+y.
Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+y)dA=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg1
3+y/bracketrightbigg
dy=/bracketleftbigg1
3y+y2
2/bracketrightbigg1
0=5
6.
What we have done is hold yﬁxed, integrate with respect to x, and then evaluate the
result between the given limits for the xvariable. Next, we integrated the remaining
function (of yalone) with respect to yto obtain the ﬁnal answer. ▲
example 2 A consequence of Fubini’ s theorem is that interchanging the order of integration in the
iterated integrals does not change the answer. Verify this for Example 1.
solution We carry out the integration in the other order:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(x2+y)dy dx=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg
x2y+y2
2/bracketrightbigg1
y=0dx=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg
x2+1
2/bracketrightbigg
dx
=/bracketleftbiggx3
3+x
2/bracketrightbigg1
0=5
6.▲
We have seen that when f(x,y)≥0o nR=[a,b]×[c ,d], the integral/integraltext/integraltext
Rf(x,y)dA
can be interpreted as a volume. If the function also takes on negative values, then the
double integral can be thought of as the sum of all volumes lying between the surface
z=f(x,y) and the plane z=0, bounded by the planes x=a,x=b,y=c, and
y=d; here the volumes above z=0 are counted as positive and those below as
negative. However, Fubini’ s theorem as stated remains valid in the case where f(x,y)
is negative or changes sign on R; that is, there is no restriction on the sign of fin the
hypotheses of the theorem.
example 3 Let Rbe the rectangle [−2, 1] ×[0, 1] and let fbe deﬁned by f(x,y)=
y(x3−12x);f(x,y) takes on both positive and negative values on R. Evaluate the
integral/integraltext/integraltext
Rf(x,y)dx dy=/integraltext/integraltext
Ry(x3−12x)dx dy.
solution By Fubini’ s theorem, we can write
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ry(x3−12x)dx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
−2y(x3−12x)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy=57
4/integraldisplay1
0yd y=57
8.
Alternatively, integrating ﬁrst with respect to y,w eﬁ n d
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ry(x3−12x)dy dx=/integraldisplay1
−2/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
0(x3−12x)yd y/bracketrightbigg
dx
=1
2/integraldisplay1
−2(x3−12x)dx=1
2/bracketleftbiggx4
4−6x2/bracketrightbigg1
−2=57
8.▲

<<<PAGE 308>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 281
5.2 The Double Integral Over a Rectangle 281
Historical NoteThe Riemann Integral
The first time most mathematics students encounter the name of Bernhard
Riemann is in their calculus courses, where they read about the Riemannintegral. Leibniz had thought of the integral of a function of one variable as aninfinite sum (the
/integraltext
standing for a sum) of infinitesimal areas f(x)dx, where dxis
an “infinitesimal width” and f(x) is the height of the corresponding “infinitesimally
thin” rectangle. This intuitive approach sufficed for most purposes because thefundamental theorem
/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx=F(b)−F(a)
showed how to evaluate this (nebulously defined) integral when one knows theantiderivative Foff.
However, Riemann was interested in applying integration to functions of one
variable where the antiderivative was not known, and to functions in numbertheory or in general to those functions that “one need not find in nature.”
Cauchy had already known that all continuous functions could be integrated
and that the fundamental theorem was valid---that is, every continuous functionhad an antiderivative. However, his proofs were not entirely rigorous. Forapplications to number theory and to certain series (called Fourier series),
Riemann needed a clear, precise definition of the integral, which he presented in
a paper in 1854. In this paper he defines his integral and gives necessary andsufficient conditions for a bounded function fto be integrable over an interval
[a,b].
In 1876, the German mathematician Karl J. Thomae generalized Riemann’s
integral to apply to functions of several variables, as we do in this chapter. We
further develop this approach in the Internet supplement.
In the first half of the nineteenth century, Cauchy had observed that for
continuous function of two variables, Fubini’s theorem was valid. But Cauchy alsogave an example of an unbounded function of two variables for which theiterated integrals were not equal. In 1878, Thomae gave the first example of abounded function of two variables where one iterated integral exists and theother does not. In these examples, the functions were not “Riemann integrable”in the sense described in this section. Cauchy and Thomae’s examplesdemonstrated that one must apply caution and not necessarily assume thatiterated integrals are always equal.
In 1902, the French mathematician Henri Lebesgue developed a truly
sweeping generalization of the Riemann integral. Lebesgue’s theory allowedintegration of vastly more functions than did Riemann’s approach. Perhaps,unforeseen by Lebesgue, his theory was to have a profound impact on thedevelopment of many areas of mathematics in the twentieth century---inparticular the theory of partial differential equations and probability theory.Mathematics students go into more depth about the Lebesgue integral in theirfirst year of graduate study.
In 1907, the Italian mathematician Guido Fubini used the Lebesgue integral to
state the most general form of the theorem on the equality of iterated integrals,the form that is studied today and used by working mathematicians andscientists in their research.

<<<PAGE 309>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 282
282 Double and Triple Integrals
exercises
1.Evaluate each of the following integrals if
R=[0, 1]×[0, 1].
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x3+y2)dA
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
RyexydA
(c)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(xy)2cosx3dA
(d)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rln [(x+1)(y+1)]dA
2.Evaluate each of the following integrals if
R=[0, 1]×[0, 1].
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(xmyn)dx dy, where m,n>0
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(ax+by+c)dx dy
(c)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rsin (x+y)dx dy
(d)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x2+2xy+y√x)dx dy
3.Evaluate over the region R:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ryx3
y2+2dy dx, R: [0, 2] ×[−1, 1].
4.Evaluate over the region R:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ry
1+x2dx dy, R: [0, 1] ×[−2, 2].
5.Sketch the solid whose volume is given by:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(5−x−y)dy dx.
6.Sketch the solid whose volume is given by:
/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplay2
0(9+x2+y2)dx dy.
7.Compute the volume of the region over the rectangle
[0, 1]×[0, 1] and under the graph of z=xy.
8.Compute the volume of the solid bounded by the xz
plane, the yzplane, the xyplane, the planes x=1 and
y=1, and the surface z=x2+y4.9.Letfbe continuous on [ a,b] and gcontinuous on
[c,d]. Show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R[f(x)g(y)]dx dy=/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cg(y)dy/bracketrightbigg
,
where R=[a,b]×[c,d].
10. Compute the volume of the solid bounded by the surface
z=siny, the planes x=1,x=0,y=0, and y=π/2,
and the xyplane.
11. Compute the volume of the solid bounded by the graph
z=x2+y, the rectangle R=[0, 1]×[1, 2], and the
“vertical sides” of R.
12. Letfbe continuous on R=[a,b]×[c,d]; for
a<x<b,c<y<d, deﬁne
F(x,y)=/integraldisplayx
a/integraldisplayy
cf(u,v)dvdu.
Show that ∂2F/∂x∂y=∂2F/∂y∂x=f(x,y). Use
this example to discuss the relationship between Fubini’ stheorem and the equality of mixed partial derivatives.
13. Consider the integral in 2(a) as a function of mandn;
that is,
f(m,n):=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rxmyndx dy.
Evaluate lim m,n→∞ f(m,n).
14. Let:
f(m,n):=/integraldisplayπ
−π/integraldisplayπ
−πcosnxsinmy dx dy.
Show that lim m,n→∞ f(m,n)=0.
15. Letf: [0, 1] ×[0, 1]→Rbe deﬁned by
f(x,y)=/braceleftbigg1 xrational
2yx irrational.
Show that the iterated integral/integraltext1
0/bracketleftbig/integraltext1
0f(x,y)dy/bracketrightbig
dx
exists but that fis not integrable.
16. Express/integraltext/integraltext
Rcosh xy dx dy as a convergent sequence,
where R=[0, 1]×[0, 1].

<<<PAGE 310>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 283
5.3 The Double Integral Over More General Regions 283
17. Although Fubini’ s theorem holds for most functions met
in practice, we must still exercise some caution. Thisexercise gives a function for which it fails. By using asubstitution involving the tangent function, show that
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0x2−y2
(x2+y2)2dy dx=π
4,yet
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0x2−y2
(x2+y2)2dx dy=−π
4.
Why does this not contradict Theorem 3 or 3/prime?
18. Letfbe continuous, f≥0, on the rectangle R.I f/integraltext/integraltext
Rfd A=0, prove that f=0o n R.
5.3The Double Integral Over More General Regions
Our goal in this section is twofold: First, we wish to deﬁne the double integral of a
function f(x,y) over regions Dmore general than rectangles; second, we want to
develop a technique for evaluating this type of integral. To accomplish this, we shalldeﬁne three special types of subsets of the xyplane, and then extend the notion of the
double integral to them.
Elementary Regions
Suppose we are given two continuous real-valued functions φ1:[a,b]→R
andφ2:[a,b]→Rthat satisfy φ1(x)≤φ2(x) for all x∈[a,b]. Let Dbe the set
of all points ( x,y) such that x∈[a,b] andφ1(x)≤y≤φ2(x). This region Dis said
to be y-simple. Figure 5.3.1 shows various examples of y-simple regions. The curves
and straight-line segments that bound the region together constitute the boundary ofD,
denoted ∂D. We use the phrase “ y-simple” because the region is described in a relatively
simple way, using yas a function of x.
We say that a region Disx-simple if there are continuous functions ψ1andψ2deﬁned
on [c ,d] such that Dis the set of points ( x,y) satisfying
y∈[c,d] and ψ1(y)≤x≤ψ2(y),
where ψ1(y)≤ψ2(y) for all y∈[c,d]. Again, the curves that bound the region Dcon-
stitute its boundary ∂D. Some examples of x-simple regions are shown in Figure 5.3.2.
In this situation, xis the distinguished variable, given as a function of y. Thus, the
phrase x-simple is appropriate.
Finally, a simple region is one that is both x- and y-simple; that is, a simple region
can be described as both an x-simple region and a y-simple region. An example of a
simple region is a unit disk (see Figure 5.3.3).
ﬁgure 5.3.1 Some y-simple
regions.yy y
xx xy =   (x)1
y =   (x) 1y =   (x) 12y =   (x)
2 y =   (x)
a b a a b b2 y =   (x)
DD
D

<<<PAGE 311>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 284
284 Double and Triple Integrals
ﬁgure 5.3.2 Some x-simple
regions.y
x x xyy
x =x =    (y)   (y)
12
x =    (y)11 x =    (y)
x =    (y)2x =    (y)2 DD D
cd dd
cc
ﬁgure 5.3.3 The unit disk, a
simple region: (a) as a y-simple
region, and (b) as an x-simple
region.
y = 1 (x)1 − x21 − y2
− 1 − x21 − y2 −= =x =  1(y)x =  2(y)=
xy y
xy = 2(x)=
−1 1
(a) (b)−11
Sometimes we will refer to any of the regions as elementary regions. Note that the
boundary ∂Dof an elementary region is the type of set of discontinuities of a function
allowed in Theorem 2.
The Integral over an Elementary Region
We can now use an interesting “trick” to extend the deﬁnition of the integral from
rectangles to elementary regions.
Deﬁnition Integral over an Elementary Region IfDis an elementary
region in the plane, choose a rectangle Rthat contains D.G i v e n f:D→R,
where fis continuous (and hence bounded), deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA, the integral
offover the set D, as follows: Extend fto a function f∗deﬁned on all of Rby
f∗(x,y)=/braceleftbiggf(x,y)i f ( x,y)∈D
0i f ( x,y)/negationslash∈Dand ( x,y)∈R.
Note that f∗is bounded (because fis) and continuous except possibly on the
boundary of D(see Figure 5.3.4). The boundary of Dconsists of graphs of con-
tinuous functions, and so f∗is integrable over Rby Theorem 2, Section 5.2.
Therefore, we can deﬁne
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf∗(x,y)dA.
When f(x,y)≥0o n D, we can interpret the integral/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dAas the volume
of the three-dimensional region between the graph of fand D, as is evident from
Figure 5.3.4.

<<<PAGE 312>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 285
5.3 The Double Integral Over More General Regions 285
ﬁgure 5.3.4 (a) Graph of
z=f(x,y) over an elementary
region D. (b) Shaded region
shows graph of z=f∗(x,y)o n
some rectangle Rcontaining D.
From this picture we see that
boundary points of Dmay be
points of discontinuity of f∗,
because the graph of
z=f∗(x,y) can be broken at
these points. xyz
xyz
D
Rc dd c
DGraph of f ∗Graph of z = f(x,y)
(a) (b)Elementary region
We have deﬁned/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dx dy by choosing a rectangle Rthat encloses D.I t
should be intuitively clear that the value of/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dx dy does not depend on the
particular Rwe select; we shall demonstrate this fact at the end of this section.
Reduction to Iterated Integrals
IfR=[a,b]×[c,d] is a rectangle containing D, we can use the results on iterated
integrals in Section 5.2 to obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf∗(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf∗(x,y)dy dx
=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af∗(x,y)dx dy,
where f∗equals finDand zero outside D, as before. Assume that Dis ay-simple
region determined by functions φ1:[a,b]→Randφ2:[a,b]→R. Consider the
iterated integral
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf∗(x,y)dy dx
and, in particular, the inner integral/integraltextd
cf∗(x,y)dyfor some ﬁxed x(Figure 5.3.5). By
deﬁnition, f∗(x,y)=0i fy<φ 1(x)o ry>φ 2(x), so we obtain
/integraldisplayd
cf∗(x,y)dy=/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f∗(x,y)dy=/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy.
xy
cd
a bR
y= (x)
y =  (x)12
xDﬁgure 5.3.5 The region between two graphs—a
y-simple region.

<<<PAGE 313>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 286
286 Double and Triple Integrals
We summarize what we have obtained in the following.
Theorem 4 Reduction to Iterated Integrals IfDis ay-simple region,
as shown in Figure 5.3.5, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx. (1)
In the case f(x,y)=1 for all ( x,y)∈D,/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dAis the area of D.O nt h e
other hand, in this case, the right-hand side of formula (1) becomes:
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplayb
a[φ2(x)−φ1(x)]dx=A(D),
which is the formula for the area of Dlearned in one-variable calculus. Thus, formula
(1) checks in this case.
xy
f (x) = 01  2f (x) = x
π_
20(),π_
2(,)π_
2
T
ﬁgure 5.3.6 A triangle T
represented as a y-simple
region.example 1 Find/integraltext/integraltext
T(x3y+cosx)dA, where Tis the triangle consisting of all points ( x,y) such
that 0 ≤x≤π/2, 0≤y≤x.
solution Referring to Figure 5.3.6 and formula (1), we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
T(x3y+cosx)dA=/integraldisplayπ/2
0/integraldisplayx
0(x3y+cosx)dy dx
=/integraldisplayπ/2
0/bracketleftbiggx3y2
2+ycosx/bracketrightbiggx
y=0dx=/integraldisplayπ/2
0/parenleftbiggx5
2+xcosx/parenrightbigg
dx
=/bracketleftbiggx6
12/bracketrightbiggπ/2
0+/integraldisplayπ/2
0(xcosx)dx=π6
(12)(64)+[xsinx+cosx]π/2
0
=π6
768+π
2−1.▲
In the next example, we use formula (1) to ﬁnd the volume of a solid whose base is
a nonrectangular region D.
example 2 Find the volume of the tetrahedron bounded by the planes y=0,z=0,x=0, and
y−x+z=1 (Figure 5 .3.7).
(0, 1, 0)(0, 1, 0) y /H11002 x + z = 1
(−1, 0, 0)
yxz
ﬁgure 5.3.7 A tetrahedron bounded by the planes
y=0,z=0,x=0, and y−x+z=1.

<<<PAGE 314>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 287
5.3 The Double Integral Over More General Regions 287
solution We ﬁrst note that the given tetrahedron has a triangular base Dwhose points ( x,y)
satisfy −1≤x≤0 and 0 ≤y≤1+x; hence, Dis ay-simple region. In fact, Dis a
simple region; see Figure 5.3.8.
(0, 1)
(0, 0) (−1, 0)  (x) = x + 1
12
 (x) = 0xy
Dﬁgure 5.3.8 The base of the tetrahedron in
Figure 5.3.7 represented as a y-simple region.
For any point ( x,y)i nD, the height of the surface zabove ( x,y)i s1−y+x. Thus,
the volume we seek is given by the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(1−y+x)dA.
Using formula (1) with φ1(x)=0 andφ2(x)=x+1, we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(1−y+x)dA=/integraldisplay0
−1/integraldisplay1+x
0(1−y+x)dy dx=/integraldisplay0
−1/bracketleftbigg
(1+x)y−y2
2/bracketrightbigg1+x
y=0dx
=/integraldisplay0
−1/bracketleftbigg(1+x)2
2/bracketrightbigg
dx=/bracketleftbigg(1+x)3
6/bracketrightbigg0
−1=1
6.▲
example 3 LetDbe a y-simple region. Describe its area A(D) as a limit of Riemann sums.
solution If we recall the deﬁnition, A(D)=/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy is the integral over a containing rect-
angle Rof the function f=1. A Riemann sum Snfor this integral is obtained by
dividing Rinto subrectangles and forming the sum Sn=/summationtextn−1
j,k=0f∗(cjk)/Delta1x/Delta1y,a s
in formula (1) of Section 5.2. Now f∗(cjk) is 1 or 0, depending on whether or not
cjkis in D. Consider those subrectangles Rjkthat have nonvoid intersection with D,
and choose cjkinD∩Rjk. Thus, Snis the sum of the areas of the subrectangles that
meet Dand A(D) is the limit of these as n→∞ . Thus, A(D) is the limit of the
areas of the rectangles “circumscribing” D. Y ou should draw a ﬁgure to accompany this
discussion. ▲
The methods for treating x-simple regions are entirely analogous. Speciﬁcally, we
have the following.
Theorem 4/primeIterated Integrals for x-Simple Regions Suppose that Dis
the set of points ( x,y) such that y∈[c,d] andψ1(y)≤x≤ψ2(y). If fis
continuous on D, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayd
c/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)f(x,y)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy. (2)

<<<PAGE 315>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 288
288 Double and Triple Integrals
To ﬁnd the area of D, we substitute f=1 in formula (2); this yields
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdA=/integraldisplayd
c(ψ2(y)−ψ1(y))dy.
Again, this result for area agrees with the results of single-variable calculus for the area
of a region between two curves.
Either the method for y-simple or the method for x-simple regions can be used for
integrals over simple regions.
It follows from formulas (1) and (2) that/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A is independent of the choice of the
rectangle Renclosing Dused in the deﬁnition of/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A, because, if we had picked
another rectangle enclosing D, we would have arrived at the same formula (1).
exercises
1.In parts (a) through (d) below, each iterated integral is an
integral over a region D. Match the integral with the
correct region of integration.
(a)/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplayex
lnxdy dx
(b)/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplayx1/3
(1/8)xdy dx(c)/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay0
−√
9−y2dx dy
(d)/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplay0
arccos y/3dx dy
xy
(ii) (i)
224
xy−3−2
xy
12
1
(iv) (iii)π
2
y
x
2 132.Sketch the region DinR2that represents the region of
integration:
(a)/integraldisplay2
−2/integraldisplay4−y2
0(4−x)dx dy
(b)/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplayx
−x(6+y−2x)dy dx
3.Evaluate the following iterated integrals and draw the
regions Ddetermined by the limits. State whether the
regions are x-simple, y-simple, or simple.
(a)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx2
0dy dx
(b)/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay3x+1
2xdy dx(c)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayex
1(x+y)dy dx
(d)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx2
x3yd yd x
4.Evaluate the following integrals and sketch thecorresponding regions.
(a)/integraldisplay2
−3/integraldisplayy2
0(x2+y)dx dy
(b)/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay|x|
−2|x|ex+ydy dx
(c)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay(1−x2)1/2
0dy dx
(d)/integraldisplayπ/2
0/integraldisplaycosx
0ysinxdydx
(e)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayy
y2(xn+ym)dx dy, m,n>0
(f)/integraldisplay0
−1/integraldisplay2(1− x2)1/2
0xdydx

<<<PAGE 316>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 289
5.4 Changing the Order of Integration 289
5.Use double integrals to compute the area of a circle of
radius r.
6.Using double integrals, determine the area of an ellipsewith semiaxes of length aandb.
7.What is the volume of a barn that has a rectangular base20 ft by 40 ft, vertical walls 30 ft high at the front (whichwe assume is on the 20-ft side of the barn), and 40 fthigh at the rear? The barn has a ﬂat roof. Use doubleintegrals to compute the volume.
8.LetDbe the region bounded by the positive xand
yaxes and the line 3 x+4y=10. Compute/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x2+y2)dA.
9.LetDbe the region bounded by the yaxis and the
parabola x=−4y2+3. Compute/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dx3yd xd y .
10. Evaluate/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx2
0(x2+xy−y2)dy dx. Describe this
iterated integral as an integral over a certain region Din
thexyplane.
11. LetDbe the region given as the set of ( x,y), where
1≤x2+y2≤2 and y≥0. Is Dan elementary region?
Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA, where f(x,y)=1+xy.
12. Evaluate the following double integral:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dcosyd xd y ,
where the region Dis bounded by y=2x,y=x,
x=π, and x=2π.
13. Evaluate the following double integral:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DxydA ,where the region Dis the triangular region whose
vertices are (0, 0), (0, 2), (2, 0).
14. Use the formula A(D)=/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy to ﬁnd the area
enclosed by one period of the sine function sin x, for
0≤x≤2π, and the xaxis.
15. Find the volume of the region inside the surface
z=x2+y2and between z=0 and z=10.
16. Set up the integral required to calculate the volume of acone of base radius rand height h.
17. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Dyd A, where Dis the set of points ( x,y)
such that 0 ≤2x/π≤y,y≤sinx.
18. From Exercise 9, Section 5.2,/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x)g(y)dy dx=/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/parenrightbigg
/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayd
cg(y)dy/parenrightbigg
. Is it true that/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x)g(y)dx dy=
/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayφ2(b)
φ1(a)g(y)dy/parenrightbigg
fory-simple
regions?
19. LetDbe a region given as the set of ( x,y) with
−φ(x)≤y≤φ(x) and a≤x≤b, where φis a
nonnegative continuous function on the interval [ a,b].
Letf(x,y) be a function on Dsuch that
f(x,y)=− f(x,−y) for all ( x,y)∈D. Argue that/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA=0.
20. Use the methods of this section to show that the area ofthe parallelogram Ddetermined by two planar vectors a
andbis|a
1b2−a2b1|, where a=a1i+a2jand
b=b1i+b2j.
21. Describe the area A(D) of a region as a limit of areas of
inscribed rectangles, as in Example 3.
5.4Changing the Order of Integration
Suppose that Dis a simple region—that is, it is both x-simple and y-simple. Thus, it
can be given as the set of points ( x,y) such that
a≤x≤b,φ1(x)≤y≤φ2(x),
and also as the set of points ( x,y) such that
c≤y≤d,ψ1(y)≤x≤ψ2(y).

<<<PAGE 317>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 290
290 Double and Triple Integrals
Hence, we have the formulas
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)f(x,y)dx dy.
If we are required to compute one of the preceding iterated integrals, we may do so
by evaluating the other iterated integral; this technique is called changing the order of
integration. It can be useful to make such a change when evaluating iterated integrals,
because one of the iterated integrals may be more difﬁcult to compute than the other.
example 1 By changing the order of integration, evaluate
/integraldisplaya
0/integraldisplay(a2−x2)1/2
0(a2−y2)1/2dy dx.
solution Note that xvaries between 0 and a, and for each such ﬁxed x,w eh a v e0 ≤y≤
(a2−x2)1/2. Thus, the iterated integral is equivalent to the double integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(a2−y2)1/2dy dx,
where Dis the set of points ( x,y) such that 0 ≤x≤aand 0≤y≤(a2−x2)1/2. But
this is the representation of one-quarter (the positive quadrant portion) of the disk ofradius a; hence, Dcan also be described as the set of points ( x,y) satisfying
0≤y≤a,0 ≤x≤(a
2−y2)1/2
(see Figure 5.4.1). Thus,
/integraldisplaya
0/integraldisplay(a2−x2)1/2
0(a2−y2)1/2dy dx=/integraldisplaya
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay(a2−y2)1/2
0(a2−y2)1/2dx/bracketrightbigg
dy
=/integraldisplaya
0/bracketleftbig
x(a2−y2)1/2/bracketrightbig(a2−y2)1/2
x=0dy
=/integraldisplaya
0(a2−y2)dy=/bracketleftbigg
a2y−y3
3/bracketrightbigga
0=2a3
3.
xy
x=    a − y
y=    a − x
(a, 0)(0,a) 2
or2
2 2 ﬁgure 5.4.1 The positive-quadrant portion of a
disk of radius a.
▲
We could have evaluated the initial iterated integral directly, but, as you can easily
verify, changing the order of integration makes the problem simpler. The next exampleshows that it may not be obvious how to evaluate an iterated integral, and yet it maybe relatively simple to evaluate the iterated integral obtained by changing the order ofintegration.

<<<PAGE 318>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 291
5.4 Changing the Order of Integration 291
xy
(2, log 2)y= log x
D
1 2
ﬁgure 5.4.2 Dis the region of
integration for Example 2.example 2 Evaluate
/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplaylogx
0(x−1)/radicalbig
1+e2ydy dx.
solution It will simplify matters if we ﬁrst interchange the order of integration. First, notice that
the integral is equal to/integraltext/integraltext
D(x−1)√
1+e2ydA, where Dis the set of ( x,y) such that
1≤x≤2 and 0 ≤y≤logx.
The region Dis simple (see Figure 5.4.2) and can also be described by
0≤y≤log 2 and ey≤x≤2.
Thus, the given iterated integral is equal to
/integraldisplaylog 2
0/integraldisplay2
ey(x−1)/radicalbig
1+e2ydx dy=/integraldisplaylog 2
0/radicalbig
1+e2y/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay2
ey(x−1)dx/bracketrightbigg
dy
=/integraldisplaylog 2
0/radicalbig
1+e2y/bracketleftbiggx2
2−x/bracketrightbigg2
eydy
=−/integraldisplaylog 2
0/parenleftbigge2y
2−ey/parenrightbigg/radicalbig
1+e2ydy
=−1
2/integraldisplaylog 2
0e2y/radicalbig
1+e2ydy+/integraldisplaylog 2
0ey/radicalbig
1+e2ydy. (1)
In the ﬁrst integral in expression (1), we substitute u=e2y, and in the second, v=ey.
Hence, we obtain
−1
4/integraldisplay4
1√
1+ud u+/integraldisplay2
1/radicalbig
1+v2dv. (2)
Both integrals in expression (2) are easily found with techniques of one-variable calculus
(or by consulting the table of integrals at the back of the book). For the ﬁrst integral,we get
1
4/integraldisplay4
1√
1+ud u=/bracketleftbigg1
6(1+u)3/2/bracketrightbigg4
1=1
6[(1+4)3/2−23/2]=1
6[53/2−23/2]. (3)
The second integral is
/integraldisplay2
1/radicalbig
1+v2dv=1
2/bracketleftBig
v/radicalbig
1+v2+log (/radicalbig
1+v2+v)/bracketrightBig2
1
=1
2/bracketleftBig
2√
5+log (√
5+2)/bracketrightBig
−1
2/bracketleftBig√
2+log (√
2+1)/bracketrightBig
(4)
(see formula 43 in the table of integrals at the back of the book). Finally, we subtract
equation (3) from equation (4) to obtain the answer
1
2/parenleftbigg
2√
5−√
2+log√
5+2√
2+1/parenrightbigg
−1
6/bracketleftbig
53/2−23/2/bracketrightbig
.
▲

<<<PAGE 319>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 292
292 Double and Triple Integrals
Mean-Value Inequality
We conclude with an inequality that helps us estimate integrals. Suppose there are
numbers mandMsuch that for all ( x,y)∈D, and m≤f(x,y)≤M, then integrating
over D,w eg e t
m·A(D)≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA≤M·A(D), (5)
where A(D) is the area of the region D. Even though this inequality is obvious, it can
help us estimate integrals that we cannot easily evaluate exactly.
example 3 Consider the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1/radicalbig
1+x6+y8dx dy,
where Dis the unit square [0, 1] ×[0, 1]. Because the integrand satisﬁes, for xandy
between 0 and 1,
1√
3≤1/radicalbig
1+x6+y8≤1,
and because the square has area 1, we get:
1√
3≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1/radicalbig
1+x6+y8dx dy≤1.
▲
Mean-Value Equality
The mean-value inequality can be turned into an equality when fis continuous. Here
is the formal statement.
Theorem 5 Mean-Value Theorem: Double Integrals
Suppose f:D→Ris continuous and Dis an elementary region. Then for some
point ( x0,y0)i nDwe have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=f(x0,y0)A(D),
where A(D) denotes the area of D.
proof We cannot prove this theorem with complete rigor, because it requires some
concepts about continuous functions not proved in this course; but we can sketch themain ideas that underlie the proof.
Because fis continuous on D, it has a maximum value Mand a minimum value m.
Thus, m≤f(x,y)≤Mfor all ( x,y)∈D. Furthermore, f(x
1,y1)=mand
f(x2,y2)=Mfor some pairs ( x1,y1) and ( x2,y2)i nD.
Dividing through inequality (5) by A(D), we get
m≤1
A(D)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA≤M. (6)

<<<PAGE 320>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 293
5.4 Changing the Order of Integration 293
Because a continuous function on Dtakes on every value between its maximum and
minimum values (this is the two-variable intermediate-value theorem proved in advanced
calculus; see also Review Exercise 32), and because the number [1/ A(D)]/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA
is, by inequality (6), between these values, there must be a point ( x0,y0)∈Dwith
f(x0,y0)=1
A(D)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA,
which is precisely the conclusion of Theorem 5. ■
exercises
1.Change the order of integration, but do not evaluate, the
following integrals:
(a)/integraldisplay8
0/integraldisplay4
1/2ydx dy
(b)/integraldisplay9
0/integraldisplay√y
0dx dy(c)/integraldisplay4
0/integraldisplay√
16−y2
−√
16−y2dx dy
(d)/integraldisplayπ
π/2/integraldisplaysinx
0dy dx
2.Change the order of integration and evaluate:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
ysin(x2)dx dy.
3.In the following integrals, change the order ofintegration, sketch the corresponding regions, andevaluate the integral both ways.
(a)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
xxy dy dx
(b)/integraldisplayπ/2
0/integraldisplaycosθ
0cosθdr dθ
(c)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay2−y
1(x+y)2dx dy
(d)/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayy
af(x,y)dx dy (express your answer in
terms of antiderivatives).
4.Find
(a)/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
|y|(x+y)2dx dy
(b)/integraldisplay1
−3/integraldisplay√
(9−y2)
−√
(9−y2)x2dx dy
(c)/integraldisplay4
0/integraldisplay2
y/2ex2dx dy
(d)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayπ/4
tan−1y(sec5x)dx dy5.Change the order of integration and evaluate:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
√yex3dx dy.
6.Consider the intuitive fact that if a region DinR2can
be split into a disjoint union of subsets D=D1∪D2,
then a double integral over Dmay also be divided into a
sum of two integrals:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1f(x,y)dA+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D2f(x,y)dA.
(See Section 5.2 for the analogous statement over arectangular box.) Are the following attempts to changethe order of integration true or false?
(a)
/integraldisplayπ/4
0/integraldisplaycosx
sinxdy dx=/integraldisplay√
2/2
0/integraldisplayarcsin y
0dx dy+/integraldisplay2
√
2/2/integraldisplayarccos y
0dx dy
(b) /integraldisplay2
−2/integraldisplay4−x2
0dy dx=/integraldisplay4
0/integraldisplay√4−y
−√4−ydx dy
(c)
/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay(1/2)x
0dy dx+/integraldisplay5
2/integraldisplay1
(1/3)x−(2/3)dy dx=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay3y+2
2ydx dy
(d) /integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayex
1dy dx=/integraldisplaye
1/integraldisplay1
lnydx dy
7.Iff(x,y)=esin(x+y)andD=[−π,π]×[−π,π],
show that
1
e≤1
4π2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA≤e.
8.Show that
1
2(1−cos 1) ≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
[0,1]×[0,1]sinx
1+(xy)4dx dy≤1.

<<<PAGE 321>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 294
294 Double and Triple Integrals
9.IfD=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 2], show that
1≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy
x2+y2+1≤6.
10. Using the mean-value inequality, show that
1
6≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdA
y−x+3≤1
4,
where Dis the triangle with vertices (0, 0), (1, 1), and
(1, 0).
11. Compute the volume of an ellipsoid with semiaxes a,b,
andc.(HINT: Use symmetry and ﬁrst ﬁnd the volume of
one half of the ellipsoid.)
12. Compute/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA, where f(x,y)=y2√xand
Dis the set of ( x,y), where x>0,y>x2, and
y<10−x2.
13. Find the volume of the region determined by
x2+y2+z2≤10,z≥2. Use the disk method from
one-variable calculus and state how the method is
related to Cavalieri’ s principle.
14. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dex−ydx dy, where Dis the interior of the
triangle with vertices (0, 0), (1, 3), and (2, 2).
15. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dy3(x2+y2)−3/2dx dy, where Dis the
region determined by the conditions1
2≤y≤1 and
x2+y2≤1.16. Given that the double integral/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy of a
positive continuous function fequals the iterated
integral/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayx
x2f(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx, sketch the region D
and interchange the order of integration.
17. Given that the double integral/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy of a
positive continuous function fequals the iterated
integral/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftBigg/integraldisplay√
2−y2
yf(x,y)dx/bracketrightBigg
dy, sketch the
region Dand interchange the order of integration.
18. Prove that
2/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayb
xf(x)f(y)dy dx=/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/parenrightbigg2
.
[HINT: Notice that/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/parenrightbigg2
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
[a,b]×[a,b]f(x)f(y)dx dy.]
19. Show that (see Section 2.5, Exercise 29)
d
dx/integraldisplayx
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y,z)dz dy=/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y,z)dz
+/integraldisplayx
a/integraldisplayd
cfx(x,y,z)dz dy.
5.5The Triple Integral
Triple integrals are needed for many physical problems. For example, if the temperature
inside an oven is not uniform, determining the average temperature involves “summing”the values of the temperature function at all points in the solid region enclosed by theoven walls and then dividing the answer by the total volume of the oven. Such a sum isexpressed mathematically as a triple integral.
Deﬁnition of the Triple Integral
Our objective now is to deﬁne the triple integral of a function f(x,y,z)o v e rab o x
(rectangular parallelepiped) B=[a,b]×[c,d]×[p,q]. Proceeding as in double
integrals, we partition the three sides of Bintonequal parts and form the sum
Sn=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0n−1/summationdisplay
j=0n−1/summationdisplay
k=0f(cijk)/Delta1V,
where cijkis a point in Bijk, the ijkth rectangular parallelepiped (or box) in the partition
ofB, and/Delta1Vis the volume of Bijk(see Figure 5.5.1).

<<<PAGE 322>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 295
5.5 The Triple Integral 295
y
xBijk
Δz
Δx Δyz
B
B
Bq
p
c
d
ba
ﬁgure 5.5.1 A partition of a box B
into n3subboxes Bijk.
Deﬁnition Triple Integrals Let fbe a bounded function of three variables
deﬁned on B. If limit n→∞Sn=Sexists and is independent of any choice of cijk,
we call fintegrable and call Sthetriple integral (or simply the integral) of f
over Band denote it by
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bfd V ,/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bf(x,y,z)dV or/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bf(x,y,z)dx dy dz .
Properties of Triple Integrals
As before, we can prove that continuous functions deﬁned on Bare integrable. Moreover,
bounded functions whose discontinuities are conﬁned to graphs of continuous functions
[such as x=α(y,z),y=β(x,z), or z=γ(x,y)] are integrable. The other basic
properties (such as the fact that the integral of a sum is the sum of the integrals) for
double integrals also hold for triple integrals. Especially important is the reduction to
iterated integrals:
Reduction to Iterated Integrals Letf(x,y,z) be integrable on the box
B=[a,b]×[c,d]×[p,q]. Then any iterated integral that exists is equal to the
triple integral; that is,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplayq
p/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayb
af(x,y,z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplayq
p/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y,z)dy dx dz
=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayq
p/integraldisplayd
cf(x,y,z)dy dz dx ,
and so on. (There are six possible orders altogether.)

<<<PAGE 323>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 296
296 Double and Triple Integrals
example 1 (a) Let Bbe the box [0, 1] ×/bracketleftbig
−1
2,0/bracketrightbig
×/bracketleftbig
0,1
3/bracketrightbig
. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
B(x+2y+3z)2dx dy dz .
(b) Verify that we get the same answer if the integration is done in the order yﬁrst,
then z, and then x.
solution (a) According to the principle of reduction to iterated integrals, this integral may be
evaluated as
/integraldisplay1/3
0/integraldisplay0
−1/2/integraldisplay1
0(x+2y+3z)2dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay1/3
0/integraldisplay0
−1/2/bracketleftBigg
(x+2y+3z)3
3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
x=0/bracketrightBigg
dy dz
=/integraldisplay1/3
0/integraldisplay0
−1/21
3/bracketleftBig
(1+2y+3z)3−(2y+3z)3/bracketrightBig
dy dz
=/integraldisplay1/3
01
24/bracketleftBig
(1+2y+3z)4−(2y+3z)4/bracketrightBig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0
y=−1/2dz
=/integraldisplay1/3
01
24/bracketleftBig
(3z+1)4−2(3z)4+(3z−1)4/bracketrightBig
dz
=1
24·15/bracketleftBig
(3z+1)5−2(3z)5+(3z−1)5/bracketrightBig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1/3
z=0
=1
24·15(25−2)=1
12.
(b) /integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
B(x+2y+3z)2dy dz dx
=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1/3
0/integraldisplay0
−1/2(x+2y+3z)2dy dz dx
=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1/3
0/bracketleftBigg
(x+2y+3z)3
6/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle0
y=−1/2/bracketrightBigg
dz dx
=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1/3
01
6/bracketleftBig
(x+3z)3−(x+3z−1)3/bracketrightBig
dz dx
=/integraldisplay1
01
6/braceleftBigg/bracketleftBigg
(x+3z)4
12−(x+3z−1)4
12/bracketrightBigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1/3
z=0/bracerightBigg
dx
=/integraldisplay1
01
72/bracketleftBig
(x+1)4+(x−1)4−2x4/bracketrightBig
dx
=1
721
5/bracketleftBig
(x+1)5+(x−1)5−2x5/bracketrightBig1
x=0=1
12.▲

<<<PAGE 324>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 297
5.5 The Triple Integral 297
example 2 Integrate ex+y+zover the box [0, 1] ×[0, 1]×[0, 1].
solution We perform the integrations in the standard order:
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0ex+y+zdx dy dz =/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(ex+y+z|1
x=0)dy dz
=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(e1+y+z−ey+z)dy dz=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftBig
e1+y+z−ey+z/bracketrightBig1
y=0dz
=/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftBig
e2+z−2e1+z+ez/bracketrightBig
dz=/bracketleftBig
e2+z−2e1+z+ez/bracketrightBig1
0
=e3−3e2+3e−1=(e−1)3. ▲
As in the two-variable case, we deﬁne the integral of a function fover a bounded region
Wby deﬁning a new function f∗, equal to fonWand zero outside W, and then setting
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bf∗(x,y,z)dx dy dz ,
where Bis any box containing the region W.
Elementary Regions
As before, we restrict our attention to particularly simple regions. An elementary region
in three-dimensional space is one deﬁned by restricting one of the variables to be
between two functions of the remaining variables, the domains of these functions being
an elementary (i.e., an x-simple or a y-simple) region in the plane. For example, if D
is an elementary region in the xyplane and if γ1(x,y) andγ2(x,y) are two functions
withγ2(x,y)≥γ1(x,y), an elementary region consists of all ( x,y,z) such that ( x,y)
lies in Dandγ1(x,y)≤z≤γ2(x,y). Figure 5.5.2 shows two elementary regions.
example 3 Describe the unit ball x2+y2+z2≤1 as an elementary region.
solution This can be done in several ways. One, in which Disy-simple, is:
−1≤x≤1,
−√
1−x2≤y≤√
1−x2,
−/radicalbig
1−x2−y2≤z≤/radicalbig
1−x2−y2.
ﬁgure 5.5.2 Two elementary
regions in space. The domain D
in the ﬁgure on the left is
y-simple, while on the right it is
x-simple.
y
xac
z = γ1(x, y)z = γ2(x, y)z = γ2(x, y)
y = φ1(x) y = φ2(x)x = χ1(x)
bz z
D
z = γ1(x, y)Dy
x
d
x = χ2(x)

<<<PAGE 325>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 298
298 Double and Triple Integrals
z = γ2(x, y) =
1 − x2 − y2
y = φ1(x) = − 1 − x2y = φ2(x) =1 − x2
z = γ1(x, y) = − 1 − x2 − y2
y
xz
ﬁgure 5.5.3 The unit ball as an elementary region in space.
In doing this, we ﬁrst write the top and bottom hemispheres as z=/radicalbig
1−x2−y2
andz=−/radicalbig
1−x2−y2, respectively, where xandyvary over the unit disk (that is,
−√
1−x2≤y≤√
1−x2andxvaries between −1 and 1). (See Figure 5.5.3.) We
can describe the region in other ways by interchanging the roles of x,y, and zin the
deﬁning inequalities. ▲
Integrals over Elementary Regions
As with integrals in the plane, any function of three variables that is continuous over an
elementary region is integrable on that region. An argument like that for double integrals
shows that a triple integral over an elementary region can be rewritten as an iterated
integral in which the limits of integration are functions. The formulas for such iterated
integrals are given in the following box.
Triple Integrals by Iterated Integration Suppose that Wis an elemen-
tary region described by bounding zbetween two functions of xand y. Then
either
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)/integraldisplayγ2(x,y)
γ1(x,y)f(x,y,z)dz dy dx
[see Figure 5.5.2 (left)] or
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)/integraldisplayγ2(x,y)
γ1(x,y)f(x,y,z)dz dx dy
[see Figure 5.5.2 (right)].
Iff=1, we get the integral/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wdx dy dz , which is the volume of the region W.
example 4 Verify that the volume formula for the ball of radius 1:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz =4
3π,
where Wis the set of ( x,y,z) with x2+y2+z2≤1.

<<<PAGE 326>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 299
5.5 The Triple Integral 299
solution We use the description of the unit ball from Example 3. From the ﬁrst formula in the
preceding box, the integral is
/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2/integraldisplay√
1−x2−y2
−√
1−x2−y2dz dy dx .
Holding yandxﬁxed and integrating with respect to zyields
/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2/bracketleftbigg
z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle√
1−x2−y2
−√
1−x2−y2/bracketrightbigg
dy dx=2/integraldisplay1
−1/bracketleftBigg/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2(1−x2−y2)1/2dy/bracketrightBigg
dx.
Because xis ﬁxed in the y-integral, it can be expressed as/integraltexta
−a(a2−y2)1/2dy, where
a=(1−x2)1/2. This integral is the area of a semicircular region of radius a, so that
/integraldisplaya
−a(a2−y2)1/2dy=a2
2π.
(We could also have used a trigonometric substitution or a table of integrals.) Thus,
/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2(1−x2−y2)1/2dy=1−x2
2π,
and so
2/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2(1−x2−y2)1/2dy dx=2/integraldisplay1
−1π1−x2
2dx
=π/integraldisplay1
−1(1−x2)dx=π/parenleftbigg
x−x3
3/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
x=−1=4
3π.▲
Other types of elementary regions are shown in Figure 5.5.4. For instance, in the second
region, ( y,z) lies in an elementary region in the yzplane and xlies between two graphs:
ρ1(y,z)≤x≤ρ2(y,z).
ﬁgure 5.5.4 Types of elementary
regions in space.
y
xz
Top and bottom are
surfaces z = γ(x, y) y
xz
Front and rear are
surfaces x = ρ(y, z) y
xz
Left and side are
surfaces y = δ(x, z) 


<<<PAGE 327>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 300
300 Double and Triple Integrals
ﬁgure 5.5.5 A symmetric
elementary region can be
described in three overall ways.
y
xz
As shown in Figure 5.5.5, some elementary regions can be simultaneously described in
all three ways. We shall call these regions symmetric elementary regions .
Corresponding to each description of a region as an elementary region is an integra-
tion formula. For instance, if Wis expressed as the set of all ( x,y,z) such that
c≤y≤d,ψ1(y)≤z≤ψ2(y), ρ1(y,z)≤x≤ρ2(y,z),
then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)/integraldisplayρ2(y,z)
ρ1(y,z)f(x,y,z)dx dz dy .
example 5 LetWbe the region bounded by the planes x=0,y=0, and z=2, and the surface
z=x2+y2and lying in the quadrant x≥0,y≥0. Compute/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wxd xd yd z and
sketch the region.
solution Method 1. The region Wis sketched in Figure 5.5.6. As indicated in the ﬁgure, we can
describe this region by the inequalities
0≤x≤√
2, 0 ≤y≤/radicalbig
2−x2, x2+y2≤z≤2.
y
xD
z = 2z = x2 + y2
y = 0x = 0
z
y =2 − x2
ﬁgure 5.5.6 Wis the region below the plane z=2,
above the paraboloid z=x2+y2,and on the
positive sides of the planes x=0,y=0.

<<<PAGE 328>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 301
5.5 The Triple Integral 301
Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wxd xd yd z =/integraldisplay√
2
0/bracketleftBigg/integraldisplay√
2−x2
0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay2
x2+y2xd z/parenrightbigg
dy/bracketrightBigg
dx
=/integraldisplay√
2
0/integraldisplay√
2−x2
0x(2−x2−y2)dy dx
=/integraldisplay√
2
0x/bracketleftbigg
(2−x2)3/2−(2−x2)3/2
3/bracketrightbigg
dx
=/integraldisplay√
2
02x
3(2−x2)3/2dx=−2(2−x2)5/2
15/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle√
2
0
=2·25/2
15=8√
2
15.
Method 2. We can also place limits on xﬁrst and describe Wby 0≤x≤(z−y2)1/2
and ( y,z)i nD, where Dis the subset of the yzplane with 0 ≤z≤2 and 0 ≤y≤z1/2
(see Figure 5.5.7).
y
xy = 0x = 0
y =zz
x =z − y2
D
ﬁgure 5.5.7 A different description of the region in
Example 5.
Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wxd xd yd z =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay(z−y2)1/2
0xd x/parenrightbigg
dy dz
=/integraldisplay2
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayz1/2
0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay(z−y2)1/2
0xdx/parenrightbigg
dy/bracketrightbigg
dz
=/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplayz1/2
0/parenleftbiggz−y2
2/parenrightbigg
dy dz
=1
2/integraldisplay2
0/parenleftbigg
z3/2−z3/2
3/parenrightbigg
dz=1
2/integraldisplay2
02
3z3/2dz
=/bracketleftbigg2
15z5/2/bracketrightbigg2
0=2
1525/2=8√
2
15,
which agrees with our previous answer. ▲

<<<PAGE 329>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 302
302 Double and Triple Integrals
example 6 Evaluate/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplay2
x2+y2dz dy dx .
Sketch the region Wof integration and interpret.
solution /integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplay2
x2+y2dz dy dx =/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0(2−x2−y2)dy dx
=/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg
2x−x3−x3
3/parenrightbigg
dx=1−1
4−1
12=2
3.
This integral is the volume of the region sketched in Figure 5.5.8.
z = x2 + y2
y
xD
z = 2
z = 1
(1, 1, 0)(1, 0, 0)
z
(1, 1, 2)
, 2)11
ﬁgure 5.5.8 The region Wlies between the
paraboloid z=x2+y2and the plane z=2,
and above the region D.
▲
exercises
1.In parts (a) through (d) below, each iterated integral is an
integral over a region D. Match the integral with the
correct region of integration.
(a)/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplay√
9−x
−√
9−xdy dz dx
(b)/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplay√
9−x2
−√
9−x2dy dx dz(c)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayy
0dz dy dx
(d)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayy
0/integraldisplayx
0dz dx dy
xy
(ii)z
(i)3
xyz
23
2
      −3(iv) (iii)z
xy
11
z
xy
11
2.Evaluate the following triple integral:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wsinxd xd yd z ,
where Wis the solid given by 0 ≤x≤π,0≤y≤1,
and 0≤z≤x.

<<<PAGE 330>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 303
5.5 The Triple Integral 303
In Exercises 3 to 6, perform the indicated integration over the given box.
3./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bx2dx dy dz ,B=[0, 1]×[0, 1]×[0, 1]
4./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Be−xyyd xd yd z ,B=[0, 1]×[0, 1]×[0, 1]5./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
B(2x+3y+z)dx dy dz ,B=[0, 2]×[−1, 1] ×[0, 1]
6./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bzex+ydx dy dz ,B=[0, 1]×[0, 1]×[0, 1]
In Exercises 7 to 10, describe the given region as an elementary region.
7.The region between the cone z=/radicalbig
x2+y2and the
paraboloid z=x2+y2
8.The region cut out of the ball x2+y2+z2≤4b yt h e
elliptic cylinder 2 x2+z2=1; that is, the region inside
the cylinder and the ball9.The region inside the sphere x2+y2+z2=1 and
above the plane z=0
10. The region bounded by the planes x=0,y=0,
z=0,x+y=4, and x=z−y−1
Find the volume of the region in Exercises 11 to 14.
11. The region bounded by z=x2+y2and
z=10−x2−2y2
12. The solid bounded by x2+2y2=2,z=0, and
x+y+2z=213. The solid bounded by x=y,z=0,y=0,x=1, and
x+y+z=0
14. The region common to the intersecting cylinders
x2+y2≤a2andx2+z2≤a2
Evaluate the integrals in Exercises 15 to 23.
15./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay3
2cos [π (x+y+z)]dx dy dz
16./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayy
0(y+xz)dz dy dx
17./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2+z2)dx dy dz ;Wis the region bounded
byx+y+z=a(where a>0),x=0,y=0, and
z=0.
18./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wzd xd yd z ;Wis the region bounded by the
planes x=0,y=0,z=0,z=1, and the cylinder
x2+y2=1, with x≥0,y≥0.
19./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wx2coszd xd yd z ;Wis the region bounded by
z=0,z=π,y=0,y=1,x=0, and x+y=1.20./integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayx+y
0dz dy dx
21./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(1−z2)dx dy dz ;Wis the pyramid with top
vertex at (0, 0, 1) and base vertices at (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0),
(0, 1, 0), and (1, 1, 0).
22./integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2)dx dy dz ;Wis the same pyramid as in
Exercise 21.
23./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay2x
0/integraldisplayx+y
x2+y2dz dy dx.
24. (a)Sketch the region for the integral/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayy
0f(x,y,z)dz dy dx.
(b)Write the integral with the integration orderdx dy dz .
For the regions in Exercises 25 to 28, ﬁnd the appropriate limits φ
1(x),φ2(x),γ1(x,y),andγ2(x,y),and write the triple
integral over the region W as an iterated integral in the form
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wfd V=/integraldisplayb
a/braceleftbigg/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayγ2(x,y)
γ1(x,y)f(x,y,z)dz/bracketrightbigg
dy/bracerightbigg
dx.

<<<PAGE 331>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 304
304 Double and Triple Integrals
25. W={(x,y,z)|/radicalbig
x2+y2≤z≤1}
26. W={(x,y,z)|1
2≤z≤1 and x2+y2+z2≤1}
27. W={(x,y,z)|x2+y2≤1,z≥0 and
x2+y2+z2≤4}
28. W={(x,y,z)||x|≤1, |y|≤1, z≥0 and
x2+y2+z2≤1}
29. Show that the formula using triple integrals for the
volume under the graph of a positive function f(x,y),
on an elementary region Din the plane, reduces to the
double integral of fover D.30. LetWbe the region bounded by the planes
x=0,y=0,z=0,x+y=1, and z=x+y.
(a) Find the volume of W.
(b) Evalute/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wxd xd yd z .
(c) Evalute/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wyd xd yd z .
31. Letfbe continuous and let Bεbe the ball of radius ε
centered at the point ( x0,y0,z0). Let vol ( Bε)b et h e
volume of Bε. Prove that
lim
ε→01
vol (Bε)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bεf(x,y,z)dV=f(x0,y0,z0).
review exercises for chapter 5
Evaluate the integrals in Exercises 1 to 4.
1./integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplayx2+1
−x2+1xy dy dx
2./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
√x(x+y)2dy dx3./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplaye2x
exxlnyd yd x
4./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay3
2cos [π (x+y+z)]dx dy dz .
Reverse the order of integration of the integrals in Exercises 5 to 8 and evaluate.
5.The integral in Exercise 1
6.The integral in Exercise 2
7.The integral in Exercise 3
8.The integral in Exercise 4
9.Evaluate the integral/integraltext1
0/integraltextx
0/integraltexty
0(y+xz)dz dy dx.
10. Evaluate/integraltext1
0/integraltexty2
yex/ydx dy.
11. Evaluate/integraltext1
0/integraltext(arcsin y)/y
0ycosxy dx dy.
12. Change the order of integration and evaluate
/integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay1
y/2(x+y)2dx dy.
13. Show that evaluating/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy, where Dis ay-simple
region, reproduces the formula from one-variablecalculus for the area between two curves.14. Change the order of integration and evaluate
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
y1/2(x2+y3x)dx dy.
15. LetDbe the region in the xyplane inside the unit circle
x2+y2=1. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dx dy in each of the
following cases:
(a) (a)] f(x,y)=xy
(b) f(x,y)=x2y2
(c) f(x,y)=x3y3
16. Find/integraltext/integraltext
Dy[1−cos (πx/4)]dx dy, where Dis the region
in Figure 5.R.1.
xy = 2y
y =   x 
ﬁgure 5.R.1 The region of integration for
Exercise 16.

<<<PAGE 332>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:11 305
Review Exercises for Chapter 5 305
Evaluate the integrals in Exercises 17 to 24. Sketch and identify the type of the region (corresponding to the way the integral is
written).
17./integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay3 sin x
sinxx(1+y)dy dx
18./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayxcos (πx/2)
x−1(x2+xy+1)dy dx
19./integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay(2−y)2
y2/3/parenleftbigg
3
2√x−2y/parenrightbigg
dx dy
20./integraldisplay2
0/integraldisplay3(√
4−x2)/2
−3(√
4−x2)/2/parenleftbigg
5√2+x+y3/parenrightbigg
dy dx21./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx2
0(x2+xy−y2)dy dx
22./integraldisplay4
2/integraldisplayy3
y2−13dx dy
23./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
x2(x+y)2dy dx
24./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay3y
0ex+ydx dy
In Exercises 25 to 27, integrate the given function f over the given region D.
25. f(x,y)=x−y;Dis the triangle with vertices (0, 0),
(1, 0), and (2, 1).
26. f(x,y)=x3y+cosx;Dis the triangle deﬁned by
0≤x≤π/2, 0≤y≤x.27. f(x,y)=x2+2xy2+2;Dis the region bounded by
the graph of y=−x2+x, the xaxis, and the lines
x=0 and x=2.
In Exercises 28 and 29, sketch the region of integration, interchange the order, and evaluate.
28./integraldisplay4
1/integraldisplay√x
1(x2+y2)dy dx
29./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
1−y(x+y2)dx dy
30. Show that
4e5≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
[1,3]×[2,4]ex2+y2dA≤4e25.
31. Show that
4π≤/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x2+y2+1)dx dy≤20π,
where Dis the disk of radius 2 centered at the origin.32. Suppose Wis apath-connected region; that is, given
any two points of Wthere is a continuous path joining
them. If fis a continuous function on W, use the
intermediate-value theorem to show that there is at leastone point in Wat which the value of fis equal to the
average of fover W; that is, the integral of fover W
divided by the volume of W. (Compare this with the
mean-value theorem for double integrals.) What happensifWis not connected?
33. Prove:/integraltextx
0[/integraltextt
0F(u)du]dt=/integraltextx
0(x−u)F(u)du.
Evaluate the integrals in Exercises 34 to 36.
34./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayz
0/integraldisplayy
0xy2z3dx dy dz
35./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayy
0/integraldisplayx/√
3
0x
x2+z2dz dx dy36./integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplayz
1/integraldisplay2
1/yyz2dx dy dz
37. Write the iterated integral/integraltext1
0/integraltext1
1−x/integraltext1
xf(x,y,z)dz dy dx
as an integral over a region in R3and then rewrite it in
ﬁve other possible orders of integration.

<<<PAGE 333>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 334>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 307
6
The Change of Variables
Formula and Applications
of Integration
If you are stuck in a calculus problem and don't know what else to do, try integrating by
parts or changing variables. ---Jerry Kazdan
God does not care about our mathematical difﬁculties. He integrates empirically.
---Albert Einstein
The change of variables formula is one of the most powerful integration
methods in single-variable calculus; it enables us to evaluate integrals
such as
/integraldisplay1
0xex2
dx
by using the substitution, or change of variables u =x2, which reduces
the problem to the easy task of integrating euwith respect to u. In this
chapter, we develop the multidimensional change of variables formula,
which is especially important and useful in evaluating multiple integralsin polar, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates.
One of the key ingredients in the change of variables formula is how to
change variables in several dimensions. This involves the notion of map-ping, which occurs in various interesting situations. For example, considera deforming object, such as a swimming ﬁsh. As it changes its shape, onecan imagine the instantaneous correspondence between points on theﬁsh in its rest state and in its current shape. This type of correspondence is,in fact, the main idea behind a change of variables, in this case, of
307

<<<PAGE 335>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 308
308 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
one three-dimensional region (the ﬁsh in its rest state) to another (the ﬁsh
in its current shape).
The ﬁrst section in this chapter describes the key concepts for
mappings between regions of the plane. It goes on to develop the
change of variables technique for double and then triple integrals. Thechapter also includes some of the important physical applications ofthe integral.
6.1The Geometry of Maps from R2toR2
In this section, we shall be interested in maps from subsets of R2toR2. The resulting
geometric understanding will be useful in the next section, when we discuss the change
of variables formula for multiple integrals.
Maps of One Region to Another
LetD∗be a subset of R2; suppose we consider a continuously differentiable map
T:D∗→R2,s oTtakes points in D∗to points in R2. We denote the set of image
points by Dor by T(D∗); hence, D=T(D∗) is the set of all points ( x,y)∈R2such
that
(x,y)=T(x∗,y∗) for some ( x∗,y∗)∈D∗.
One way to understand the geometry of a map Tis to see how it deforms or changes
D∗. For example, Figure 6.1.1 illustrates a map Tthat takes a slightly twisted region
into a disk.
ﬁgure 6.1.1 A function Tfrom a
region D∗to a disk D.
xy
xy
DT
∗D
example 1 LetD∗⊂R2be the rectangle D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 2π ]. Then all points in D∗are of the
form ( r,θ), where 0 ≤r≤1, 0≤θ≤2π. Let Tbe the polar coordinate “change of
variables” deﬁned by T(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ). Find the image set D.
solution Let ( x,y)=(rcosθ,rsinθ). Because of the identity x2+y2=r2cos2θ+r2sin2θ=
r2≤1, we see that the set of points ( x,y)∈R2such that ( x,y)∈Dhas the property
thatx2+y2≤1, and so Dis contained in the unit disk. In addition, any point ( x,y)i n

<<<PAGE 336>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 309
6.1 The Geometry of Maps from R2toR2309
the unit disk can be written as ( rcosθ,rsinθ) for some 0 ≤r≤1 and 0 ≤θ≤2π.
Thus, Dis the unit disk (see Figure 6.1.2).
T: (r, θ)        (r cos θ, r sin θ) = (x, y)
xy
(x, y)D
∗Dθ
(r,θ)2π
r
1
ﬁgure 6.1.2 Tgives a change of variables between Euclidean and polar coordinates. The
unit circle is the image of a rectangle. ▲
example 2 LetTbe deﬁned by T(x,y)=((x+y)/2, (x−y)/2) and let D∗=[−1, 1] ×
[−1, 1] ⊂R2be a square with side of length 2 centered at the origin. Determine the
image Dobtained by applying TtoD∗.
solution Let us ﬁrst determine the effect of Ton the line c1(t)=(t, 1), where −1≤t≤1
(see Figure 6.1.3). We have T(c1(t))=((t+1)/2, (t−1)/2). The map t/mapsto→T
(c1(t)) is a parametrization of the line y=x−1, 0≤x≤1, because ( t−1)/
2=(t+1)/2−1. This is the straight line segment joining (1, 0) and (0, −1).
uc4(−1, 1)
(−1, −1) (1, −1)(1, 1)c1
c2
c3Lα∗Dv
ﬁgure 6.1.3 Domain for the transformation Tof
Example 2.
Let
c2(t)=(1,t), −1≤t≤1
c3(t)=(t,−1), −1≤t≤1
c4(t)=(−1,t), −1≤t≤1
be parametrizations of the other edges of the square D∗. Using the same argument as
before, we see that T◦c2is a parametrization of the line y=1−x,0≤x≤1
[the straight line segment joining (0, 1) and (1, 0)]; T◦c3is the line y=x+1,−1≤
x≤0 joining (0, 1) and ( −1, 0); and T◦c4is the line y=− x−1,−1≤x≤0
joining ( −1, 0) and (0, −1). By this time it seems reasonable to guess that T“ﬂips”
the square D∗over and takes it to the square Dwhose vertices are (1, 0), (0, 1),
(−1, 0), (0, −1) (Figure 6.1.4).

<<<PAGE 337>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 310
310 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
T(−1, −1) = (−1, 0)
T(−1, 1) = (0, −1)T(1, 1) = (1, 0)T(1, −1) = (0, 1)
T(c4)T(c3)
T(c2)
T(c1)α − 1
2,α + 1
2 ( )
1 + α
2,α − 1
2 ( )xy
T(Lα)D ﬁgure 6.1.4 The effect of Ton the
region D∗.
To prove that this is indeed the case, let −1≤α≤1 and let Lα(Figure 6.1.3) be a ﬁxed
line parametrized by c(t)=(α,t),−1≤t≤1; then T(c(t))=((α+t)/2, (α−t)/2)
is a parametrization of the line y=− x+α,(α−1)/2≤x≤(α+1)/2. This
line begins, for t=− 1, at the point (( α−1)/2, (1 +α)/2) and ends at the point
((1+α)/2, (α−1)/2); as is easily checked, these points lie on the lines T◦c3and
T◦c1, respectively. Thus, as αvaries between −1 and 1, Lαsweeps out the square D∗
while T(Lα) sweeps out the square Ddetermined by the vertices ( −1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0),
and (0, −1). ▲
Images of Maps
The following theorem is a useful way to describe the image T(D∗).
Theorem 1LetAb ea2 ×2 matrix with det A/negationslash=0 and let Tbe the linear
mapping of R2toR2given by T(x)=Ax(matrix multiplication) .Then Ttrans-
forms parallelograms into parallelograms and vertices into vertices. Moreover, if
T(D∗) is a parallelogram, D∗must be a parallelogram.
The proof of Theorem 1 is left as Exercises 14 and 16 at the end of this section. This
theorem simpliﬁes the result of Example 2, because we need only ﬁnd the vertices of
T(D∗) and then connect them by straight lines.
One-to-One Maps
Although we cannot visualize the graph of a function T:R2→R2, it does help to con-
sider how the function deforms subsets. However, simply looking at these deformations
does not give us a complete picture of the behavior of T. We may characterize Tfurther
by using the notion of a one-to-one correspondence.
Deﬁnition A mapping Tisone-to-one onD∗if for ( u,v) and ( u/prime,v/prime)∈D∗,
T(u,v)=T(u/prime,v/prime) implies that u=u/primeandv=v/prime.
This statement means that two different points of D∗are not sent into the same point
of D by T . For example, the function T(x,y)=(x2+y2,y4) is not one-to-one, because
T(1,−1)=(2, 1) =T(1, 1), and yet (1, −1)/negationslash=(1, 1).

<<<PAGE 338>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 311
6.1 The Geometry of Maps from R2toR2311
example 3 Consider the polar coordinate mapping function T:R2→R2described in Example 1,
deﬁned by T(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ). Show that Tis not one-to-one if its domain is
all of R2.
solution Ifθ1/negationslash=θ2, then T(0,θ1)=T(0,θ2), and so Tcannot be one-to-one. This observation
implies that if Lis the side of the rectangle D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 2π ] where 0 ≤θ≤2π
andr=0 (Figure 6.1.5), then Tmaps all of Linto a single point, the center of the
unit disk D. However, if we consider the set S∗=(0, 1]×[0, 2π ), then T:S∗→Sis
one-to-one (see Exercise 5). Evidently, in determining whether a function is one-to-one,
the domain chosen must be carefully considered.
Tθ
r∗DL
12π
xy
DT(L)
1
ﬁgure 6.1.5 The polar coordinate transformation Ttakes the line Lto the
point (0, 0). ▲
example 4 Show that the function T:R2→R2of Example 2 is one-to-one.
solution Suppose T(x,y)=T(x/prime,y/prime); then
/parenleftbiggx+y
2,x−y
2/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbiggx/prime+y/prime
2,x/prime−y/prime
2/parenrightbigg
and we have
x+y=x/prime+y/prime,
x−y=x/prime−y/prime.
Adding, we have
2x=2x/prime.
Thus, x=x/primeand, similarly, subtracting gives y=y/prime, which shows that Tis one-to-one
(with domain all of R2). Actually, because Tis linear and T(x)=Ax, where Ais a
2×2 matrix, it would also sufﬁce to show that det A/negationslash=0 (see Exercise 12). ▲
Onto Maps
In Examples 1 and 2, we have been determining the image D=T(D∗) of a region D∗
under a mapping T. What will be of interest to us in the next section is, in part, the
inverse problem: Namely, given Dand a one-to-one mapping TofR2toR2, ﬁnd D∗
such that T(D∗)=D.

<<<PAGE 339>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 312
312 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
Before we examine this question in more detail, we introduce the notion of “onto.”
Deﬁnition The mapping Tisonto Dif for every point ( x,y)∈Dthere exists
at least one point ( u,v) in the domain of Tsuch that T(u,v)=(x,y).
Thus, if Tis onto, we can solve the equation T(u,v)=(x,y) for ( u,v), given
(x,y)∈D.I fTis, in addition, one-to-one, this solution is unique.
Forlinear mappings TofR2toR2(orRntoRn) it turns out that one-to-one and onto
are equivalent notions (see Exercises 12 and 13).
If we are given a region Dand a mapping T, the determination of a region D∗such
thatT(D∗)=Dwill be possible only when for every ( x,y)∈Dthere is a ( u,v) in the
domain of Tsuch that T(u,v)=(x,y) (that is, Tmust be onto D). The next example
shows that this cannot always be done.
example 5 LetT:R2→R2be given by T(u,v)=(u, 0). Let Dbe the square, D=[0, 1]×[0, 1].
Because Ttakes all of R2to one axis, it is impossible to ﬁnd a D∗such that T(D∗)=D.
▲
Let us revisit Example 2 using these methods.
example 6 LetTbe deﬁned as in Example 2 and let Dbe the square whose vertices are (1, 0), (0, 1),
(−1, 0), (0, −1). Find a D∗with T(D∗)=D.
solution Because Tis linear and T(x)=Ax, where Ais a 2×2 matrix satisfying det A/negationslash=0, we
know that T:R2→R2is onto (see Exercises 12 and 13), and thus D∗can be found. By
Theorem 1, D∗must be a parallelogram. In order to ﬁnd D∗, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd the four
points that are mapped onto vertices of D; then, by connecting these points, we will have
found D∗. For the vertex (1, 0) of D, we must solve T(x,y)=(1, 0) =((x+y)/2,
(x−y)/2), so that ( x+y)/2=1, (x−y)/2=0. Thus, ( x,y)=(1, 1) is a vertex
ofD∗. Solving for the other vertices, we ﬁnd that D∗=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1]. This is in
agreement with what we found more laboriously in Example 2. ▲
xy
rD
(a, 0) (b, 0)θ
ﬁgure 6.1.6 We seek a region
D∗in the θrplane whose
image under the polar
coordinate mapping is D.example 7 LetDbe the region in the ﬁrst quadrant lying between the arcs of the circles x2+y2=
a2,x2+y2=b2,0<a<b(see Figure 6.1.6). These circles have equations r=a
andr=bin polar coordinates. Let Tbe the polar-coordinate transformation given by
T(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ)=(x,y). Find D∗such that T(D∗)=D.
solution In the region D,a2≤x2+y2≤b2; and because r2=x2+y2, we see that a≤r≤b.
Clearly, for this region θvaries between 0 ≤θ≤π/2. Thus, if D∗=[a,b]×[0,π/2],
we have T(D∗)=DandTis one-to-one. ▲
remark The inverse function theorem discussed in Section 3.5 is relevant to the
material here. It states that if the determinant of DT(u0,v0) [which is the matrix of
partial derivatives of Tevaluated at ( u0,v0)] is not zero, then for ( u,v) near ( u0,v0)
and ( x,y) near ( x0,y0)=T(u0,v0), the equation T(u,v)=(x,y) can be uniquely
solved for (u,v) as functions of ( x,y). In particular, by uniqueness, Tis one-to-one
near ( u0,v0); also, Tis onto a neighborhood of ( x0,y0), because T(u,v)=(x,y)i s
solvable for ( u,v)i f( x,y) is near ( x0,y0).

<<<PAGE 340>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 313
6.1 The Geometry of Maps from R2toR2313
However, even if Tis one-to-one near every point, and also onto, Tneed not be
globally one-to-one. Thus, we must exercise caution (see Exercise 17).
Surprisingly, if D∗andDare elementary regions and T:D∗→Dhas the property
that the determinant of DT(u,v) is not zero for any ( u,v)i nD∗, and if Tmaps the
boundary of D∗in a one-to-one and onto manner to the boundary of D, then Tis
one-to-one and onto from D∗toD. (This proof is beyond the scope of this text.)
In summary, we have:
One-to-One and Onto Mappings A mapping T:D∗→Disone-to-one
when it maps distinct points to distinct points. It is onto when the image of D∗
under Tis all of D.
Alinear transformation of RntoRngiven by multiplication by a matrix Ais
one-to-one and onto when and only when det A/negationslash=0.
exercises
1.Determine if the following functions T:R2→R2are
one-to-one and/or onto.
(a)T(x,y)=(2x,y)
(b)T(x,y)=(x2,y)
(c)T(x,y)=(3√x,3√y)
(d)T(x,y)=(sinx, cos y)
2.Determine if the following functions T:R2→R2are
one-to-one and/or onto.
(a)T(x,y,z)=(2x+y+3z,3y−4z,5x)
(b)T(x,y,z)=(ysinx,zcosy,xy)
(c)T(x,y,z)=(xy,yz,xz)
(d)T(x,y,z)=(ex,ey,ez)
3.LetDbe a square with vertices
(0, 0), (1, 1), (2, 0), (1, −1) and D∗be a parallelogram
with vertices (0, 0), (1, 2), (2, 1), (1, −1). Find a linear
map Ttaking D∗onto D.
4.LetDbe a parallelogram with vertices
(0, 0), (−1, 3), ( −2, 0), ( −1,−3). Let
D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 1]. Find a linear map Tsuch that
T(D∗)=D.
5.LetS∗=(0, 1]×[0, 2π ) and deﬁne
T(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ). Determine the image set S.
Show that Tis one-to-one on S∗.6.Deﬁne
T(x∗,y∗)=/parenleftbigg
x∗−y∗
√
2,x∗+y∗
√
2/parenrightbigg
.
Show that Trotates the unit square, D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 1].
7.LetD∗=[0, 1]×[0, 1] and deﬁne TonD∗by
T(u,v)=(−u2+4u,v). Find the image D.I sT
one-to-one?
8.LetD∗be the parallelogram bounded by the lines
y=3x−4,y=3x,y=1
2x, and y=1
2(x+4). Let
D=[0, 1]×[0, 1]. Find a Tsuch that Dis the image of
D∗under T.
9.LetD∗=[0, 1]×[0, 1] and deﬁne TonD∗by
T(x∗,y∗)=(x∗y∗,x∗). Determine the image set D.I s
Tone-to-one? If not, can we eliminate some subset of
D∗so that on the remainder Tis one-to-one?
10. LetD∗be the parallelogram with vertices at
(−1, 3), (0, 0), (2, −1), and (1, 2), and Dbe the
rectangle D=[0, 1]×[0, 1]. Find a Tsuch that Dis
the image set of D∗under T.
11. LetT:R3→R3be the spherical coordinate mapping
deﬁned by ( ρ,φ,θ)/mapsto→(x,y,z), where
x=ρsinφcosθ, y=ρsinφsinθ, z=ρcosφ.

<<<PAGE 341>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 314
314 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
LetD∗be the set of points ( ρ,φ,θ) such that
φ∈[0,π],θ∈[0, 2π ],ρ∈[0, 1]. Find D=T(D∗). IsTone-to-one? If not, can we eliminate some subset of
D∗so that, on the remainder, Twill be one-to-one?
In Exercises 12 and 13, let T (x)=Ax, where A is a 2×2matrix.
12. Show that Tis one-to-one if and only if the determinant
ofAis not zero.
13. Show that det A/negationslash=0 if and only if Tis onto.
14. Suppose T:R2→R2is linear and is given by T(x)=
Ax, where Ai sa2×2 matrix. Show that if det A/negationslash=0,
then Ttakes parallelograms onto parallelograms. [H INT:
The general parallelogram in R2can be described by the
set of points q=p+λv+μwforλ,μ∈(0, 1) where
p,v,ware vectors in R2with vnot a scalar multiple of w.]15. A map T:R2→R2is called afﬁne ifT(x)=Ax+v,
where Ai sa2×2 matrix, and vis a ﬁxed vector
inR2. Show that Exercises 12, 13, and 14 hold for T.
16. Suppose T:R2→R2is as in Exercise 14 and that
T(P∗)=Pis a parallelogram. Show that P∗is
a parallelogram.
17. Show that Tis not one-to-one.
6.2The Change of Variables Theorem
Given two regions DandD∗inR2, a differentiable map TonD∗with image D—that
is,T(D∗)=D—and any real-valued integrable function f:D→R, we would like to
express/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dAas an integral over D∗of the composite function f◦T. In this
section we shall see how to do this.
Assume that D∗is a region in the uvplane and that Dis a region in the xyplane.
The map Tis given by two coordinate functions:
T(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v)) for ( u,v)∈D∗.
At ﬁrst, we might conjecture that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy?=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗f(x(u,v),y(u,v))du dv , (1)
where f◦T(u,v)=f(x(u,v),y(u,v)) is the composite function deﬁned on D∗.
However, if we consider the function f:D→R2where f(x,y)=1, then equation (1)
would imply
A(D)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy?=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗du dv =A(D∗). (2)
But equation (2) will hold for only a few special cases and not for a general map T.
For example, deﬁne TbyT(u,v)=(−u2+4u,v). Restrict Tto the unit square; that
is, to the region D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 1] in the uvplane (see Figure 6.2.1). Then, as in
ﬁgure 6.2.1 The map T:(u,v)/mapsto→
(−u2+4u,v) takes the square D∗
onto the rectangle D.
xy
uT
(0, 1)
(1, 0) (3, 0)(0, 1)
D∗Dv

<<<PAGE 342>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 315
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 315
Exercise 3, Section 6.1, Ttakes D∗onto D=[0, 3]×[0, 1]. Clearly, A(D)/negationslash=A(D∗),
and so formula (2) is not valid.
Jacobian Determinants
To rectify the incorrect formula (1), we need a measure of how a transformation
T:R2→R2distorts the area of a region. This is given by the Jacobian determinant,
which is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition Jacobian Determinant LetT:D∗⊂R2→R2be a C1trans-
formation given by x=x(u,v) and y=y(u,v). The Jacobian determinant of
T, written ∂(x,y)/∂(u,v), is the determinant of the derivative matrix DT(u,v)
ofT:
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
example 1 The function from R2toR2that transforms polar coordinates into Cartesian coordinates
is given by
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ
and its Jacobian determinant is
∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosθ−rsinθ
sinθ rcosθ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=r(cos
2θ+sin2θ)=r.▲
Under suitable restrictions on the function T, we will argue below that the area of
D=T(D∗) is obtained by integrating the absolute value of the Jacobian ∂(x,y)/∂(u,v)
over D∗; that is, we have the equation
A(D)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledu dv. (3)
To illustrate: From Example 1 in Section 6.1, take T:D
∗→D, where D=T(D∗)
is the set of ( x,y) with x2+y2≤1 and D∗=[0, 1]×[0, 2π ], and T(r,θ)=
(rcosθ,rsinθ). By formula (3),
A(D)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledr dθ=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗rd rdθ (4)
(here randθplay the role of uandv). From the preceding computation it follows that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗rd rdθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplay1
0rd rdθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/bracketleftbiggr2
2/bracketrightbigg1
0dθ=1
2/integraldisplay2π
0dθ=π

<<<PAGE 343>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 316
316 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
ﬁgure 6.2.2 The effect of the
transformation Ton a small
rectangle D∗.
u xy
Δvj
ΔuiD∗T
(u  , v  )00(u  , v  )00 T + T′(D∗)
(x  , y  )00
(u  , v  )00 = TT(D∗)∂x
∂vi Δv + ∂y
∂vj Δv
∂x
∂ui Δu + ∂y
∂uj Δuv
is the area of the unit disk D, conﬁrming formula (3) in this case. In fact, we can recall
from ﬁrst-year calculus that equation (4) is the correct formula for the area of a region
in polar coordinates.
It is not so easy to rigorously prove assertion (3). However, looked at in the proper
way, it becomes quite plausible. Recall that A(D)=/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy was obtained by dividing
upDinto little rectangles, summing their areas, and then taking the limit of this sum as
the size of the subrectangles tended to zero. The problem is that Tmay map rectangles
into regions whose area is not easy to compute. The solution is to approximate theseimages by simpler regions whose area we can compute. A useful tool for doing this isthe derivative of T, which we know (from Chapter 2) gives the best linear approximation
toT.
Consider a small rectangle D
∗in the uvplane as shown in Figure 6.2.2. Let T/prime
denote the derivative of Tevaluated at ( u0,v0), so T/primeis a 2×2 matrix. From our work
in Chapter 2, we know that a good approximation to T(u,v) is given by
T(u0,v0)+T/prime/parenleftbigg/Delta1u
/Delta1v/parenrightbigg
,
where /Delta1u=u−u0and/Delta1v=v−v0. This mapping T/primetakes D∗into a parallelogram
with vertex at T(u0,v0) and with adjacent sides given by the vectors
T/prime(/Delta1ui)=⎡
⎢⎢⎣∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v⎤
⎥⎥⎦/bracketleftbigg/Delta1u
0/bracketrightbigg
=/Delta1u⎡
⎢⎢⎣∂x
∂u
∂y
∂u⎤
⎥⎥⎦=/Delta1uTu
and
T/prime(/Delta1vj)=⎡
⎢⎢⎣∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v⎤
⎥⎥⎦/bracketleftbigg0
/Delta1v/bracketrightbigg
=/Delta1v⎡
⎢⎢⎣∂x
∂v
∂y
∂v⎤
⎥⎥⎦=/Delta1vTv,
where
Tu=∂x
∂ui+∂y
∂uj and Tv=∂x
∂vi+∂y
∂vj
are evaluated at ( u0,v0).

<<<PAGE 344>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 317
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 317
Recall from Section 1.3 that the area of the parallelogram with sides equal to the
vectors ai+bjandci+djis equal to the absolute value of the determinant
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleab
cd/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleac
bd/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Thus, the area of T(D
∗) is approximately equal to the absolute value of
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u/Delta1u∂x
∂v/Delta1v
∂y
∂u/Delta1u∂y
∂v/Delta1v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/Delta1u/Delta1v=∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/Delta1u/Delta1v
evaluated at ( u0,v0).
This fact and a partitioning argument should make formula (3) plausible. Indeed,
if we partition D∗into small rectangles with sides of length /Delta1uand/Delta1v, the images
of these rectangles are approximated by parallelograms with sides Tu/Delta1uandTv/Delta1v,
and hence with area |∂(x,y)/∂(u,v)|/Delta1u/Delta1v. Thus, the area of D∗is approximately/summationtext/Delta1u/Delta1v, where the sum is taken over all the rectangles Rinside D∗(see Figure 6.2.3).
Hence, the area of T(D∗) is approximately the sum/summationtext|∂(x,y)/∂(u,v)|/Delta1u/Delta1v. In the
limit, this sum becomes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledu dv.
Let us give another informal argument for the special case (4) of formula (3); that is,
the case of polar coordinates. Consider a region Din the xyplane and a grid correspond-
ing to a partition of the randθvariables (Figure 6.2.4). The area of the shaded region
shown is approximately ( /Delta1r)(r
jk/Delta1θ), because the arc length of a segment of a circle
of radius rsubtending an angle φisrφ. The total area is then the limit of/summationtextrjk/Delta1r/Delta1θ;
that is,/integraltext/integraltext
D∗rd rdθ. The key idea is thus that the jkth “polar rectangle” in the grid
has area approximately equal to rjk/Delta1r/Delta1θ.( F o rn large, the jkth polar rectangle will
look like a rectangle with sides of lengths rjk/Delta1θand/Delta1r.) This should provide some
insight into why we say the “area element dx dy” is transformed into the “area element
rdr dθ.”
ﬁgure 6.2.3 The area of the little
rectangle Ris/Delta1u/Delta1v.The area
ofT(R) is approximately
|∂(x,y)/∂(u,v)|/Delta1u/Delta1v.
xy
DT
uv
R Δv
ΔuT(R)
D∗

<<<PAGE 345>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 318
318 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
ﬁgure 6.2.4 D∗is mapped to D
under the polar coordinate
mapping T.Δθ
Δr rjkrθ
D∗DT
rjkΔrΔθrjk
xy
example 2 Let the elementary region Din the xyplane be bounded by the graph of a polar equation
r=f(θ), where θ0≤θ≤θ1and f(θ)≥0 (see Figure 6.2.5). In the rθplane we
consider the r-simple region D∗, where θ0≤θ≤θ1and 0 ≤r≤f(θ). Under the
transformation x=rcosθ,y=rsinθ, the region D∗is carried onto the region D. Use
equation (4) to calculate the area of D.
θ0θ1r = f (θ)T
r = f  (θ)D∗
θ0θ1θ
r xy
D
ﬁgure 6.2.5 The effect on the region D∗of the polar coordinate mapping.
solution
A(D)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledr dθ
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗rd rdθ=/integraldisplayθ1
θ0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayf(θ)
0rd r/bracketrightbigg
dθ
=/integraldisplayθ1
θ0/bracketleftbiggr2
2/bracketrightbiggf(θ)
0dθ=/integraldisplayθ1
θ0[f(θ)]2
2dθ
This formula for A(D) should be familiar from one-variable calculus. ▲
Change of Variables Formula
Before stating the two-variable change of variables formula, which is the culmination
of this discussion, let us recall the corresponding theorem from one-variable calculusthat goes under the name the method of substitution:
/integraldisplay
b
af(x(u))dx
dudu=/integraldisplayx(b)
x(a)f(x)dx, (5)
where f is continuous and u /mapsto→x(u)is continuously differentiable on [a,b].

<<<PAGE 346>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 319
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 319
proof LetFbe an antiderivative of f; that is, F/prime=f, whose existence is guaranteed
by the fundamental theorem of calculus. The right-hand side of equation (5) becomes
/integraldisplayx(b)
x(a)f(x)dx=F(x(b))−F(x(a)).
To evaluate the left-hand side of equation (5), let G(u)=F(x(u)). By the chain rule,
G/prime(u)=F/prime(x(u))x/prime(u)=f(x(u))x/prime(u). Hence, again by the fundamental theorem,
/integraldisplayb
af(x(u))x/prime(u)du=/integraldisplayb
aG/prime(u)du=G(b)−G(a)=F(x(b))−F(x(a)),
as required. ■
Suppose now that we have a C1function u /mapsto→x(u) that is one-to-one on [ a,b].
Thus, we must have either dx/du≥0o n[ a,b]o rdx/du ≤0o n[ a,b].1LetI∗denote
the interval [ a,b], and let Idenote the closed interval with endpoints x(a) and x(b).
(Thus, I=[x(a),x(b)] ifu/mapsto→x(u) is increasing and I=[x(b),x(a)] ifu/mapsto→x(u)i s
decreasing.) With these conventions we can rewrite formula (5) as
/integraldisplay
I∗f(x(u))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledx
du/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledu=/integraldisplay
If(x)dx.
This formula generalizes to double integrals, as was already given informally in formula
(3):I∗becomes D∗,Ibecomes D, and|dx/du|is replaced by |∂(x,y)/∂(u,v)|. Let
us state the result formally (the technical proof is omitted).
Theorem 2 Change of Variables: Double Integrals LetDandD∗be
elementary regions in the plane and let T:D∗→Dbe of class C1; suppose that
Tis one-to-one on D∗.Furthermore, suppose that D=T(D∗).Then for any
integrable function f:D→R,w eh a v e
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗f(x(u,v),y(u,v))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledu dv. (6)
One of the purposes of the change of variables theorem is to supply a method
by which some double integrals can be simpliﬁed. We might encounter an integral/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A for which either the integrand for the region Dis complicated and for which
direct evaluation is difﬁcult. Therefore, a mapping Tis chosen so that the integral is
easier to evaluate with the new integrand f◦Tand with the new region D∗[deﬁned by
T(D∗)=D]. Unfortunately, the problem may actually become more complicated if T
is not selected carefully.
1Ifdx/du is positive and then negative, the function x=x(u) rises and then falls, and thus is not
one-to-one; a similar statement applies if dx/duis negative and then positive.

<<<PAGE 347>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 320
320 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
example 3 LetPbe the parallelogram bounded by y=2x,y=2x−2,y=x, and y=x+1
(see Figure 6.2.6). Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Pxy dx dy by making the change of variables
x=u−v, y=2u−v,
that is, T(u,v)=(u−v,2u−v).
u xy
y = x + 1
(1, 2)(3, 4)
(2, 2)
(0, 0)
(1, −2) (0, −2)(0, 0) (1, 0)
∗PT
y = 2x
y = xy = 2x − 2
Pv
ﬁgure 6.2.6 The effect of T(u,v)=(u−v,2u−v) on the rectangle P∗.
solution The transformation Thas nonzero determinant and so is one-to-one (see Exercise 12,
Section 6.1). It is designed so that it takes the rectangle P∗bounded by v=0,v=
−2,u=0,u=1 onto P. The use of Tsimpliﬁes the region of integration from Pto
P∗. Moreover,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledet/bracketleftbigg1−1
2−1/bracketrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=1.
Therefore, by the change of variables formula,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Pxy dx dy =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
P∗(u−v)(2u−v)du dv =/integraldisplay0
−2/integraldisplay1
0(2u2−3vu+v2)du dv
=/integraldisplay0
−2/bracketleftbigg2
3u3−3u2v
2+v2u/bracketrightbigg1
0dv=/integraldisplay0
−2/bracketleftbigg2
3−3
2v+v2/bracketrightbigg
dv
=/bracketleftbigg2
3v−3
4v2+v3
3/bracketrightbigg0
−2=−/bracketleftbigg2
3(−2)−3−8
3/bracketrightbigg
=−/bracketleftbigg
−12
3−3/bracketrightbigg
=7.▲
Integrals in Polar Coordinates
Suppose we consider the rectangle D∗deﬁned by 0 ≤θ≤2π,0≤r≤ain the rθ
plane. The transformation Tgiven by T(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ) takes D∗onto the disk
Dwith equation x2+y2≤a2in the xyplane. This transformation represents the
change from Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates. However, Tdoes not satisfy
the requirements of the change of variables theorem, because it is not one-to-one on
D∗: In particular, Tsends all points with r=0 to (0, 0) (see Figure 6.2.7 and Example
3 of Section 6.1). Nevertheless, the change of variables theorem is valid in this case.

<<<PAGE 348>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 321
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 321
ﬁgure 6.2.7 The image of the
rectangle D∗under the polar
coordinate transformation is the
disk D.T
xy
Dx2 + y2 ≤ a2
rθ
aD∗ r = 02π
Basically, the reason for this is that the set of points where Tis not one-to-one lies on
an edge of D∗, which is the graph of a smooth curve and therefore, for the purpose of
integration, can be neglected. In summary, the formula is valid when Tsends D∗onto
Din a one-to-one fashion, except possibly for points on the boundary of D∗.
Change of Variables---Polar Coordinates
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗f(rcosθ,rsinθ)rd rdθ (7)
example 4 Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Dlog (x2+y2)dx dy, where Dis the region in the ﬁrst quadrant lying be-
tween the arcs of the circles x2+y2=a2andx2+y2=b2, where 0 <a<b
(Figure 6.2.8).
xy
rθ
a b (a, 0) (b, 0)D∗
Dπ
2
T
ﬁgure 6.2.8 The polar coordinate mapping takes a rectangle D∗onto part of
an annulus D.
solution These circles have the simple equations r=aandr=bin polar coordinates. Moreover,
r2=x2+y2appears in the integrand. Thus, a change to polar coordinates will simplify
both the integrand and the region of integration. From Example 7, Section 6.1, the polar
coordinate transformation
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ

<<<PAGE 349>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 322
322 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
sends the rectangle D∗given by a≤r≤b,0≤θ≤π/2 onto the region D. This
transformation is one-to-one on D∗and so, by formula (7), we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dlog (x2+y2)dx dy=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayπ/2
0rlogr2dθdr
=π
2/integraldisplayb
arlogr2dr=π
2/integraldisplayb
a2rlogrd r.
Applying integration by parts, or using the formula
/integraldisplay
xlogxd x=x2
2logx−x2
4
from the table of integrals at the back of the book, we obtain the result
π
2/integraldisplayb
a2rlogrd r=π
2/bracketleftbigg
b2logb−a2loga−1
2(b2−a2)/bracketrightbigg
.
▲
example 5 The Gaussian Integral One of the most beautiful applications of the change of
variables formula, polar coordinates, and the reduction to iterated integrals is their
application to the following formula, known as the Gaussian integral:
/integraldisplay∞
−∞e−x2dx=√π.
Not only is this formula very attractive in its own right, but it is also useful in areas suchas statistics. It also illustrates the unity of the transcendental numbers eandπnearly as
well as does the classic formula e
iπ=−1.
To carry out the integration of the Gaussian integral,2we ﬁrst evaluate the double
integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dae−(x2+y2)dx dy,
where Dais the disk x2+y2≤a2. Because r2=x2+y2, and dx dy=rd rdθ, the
change of variables formula gives
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dae−(x2+y2)dx dy=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplaya
0e−r2rd rdθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/parenleftbigg
−1
2e−r2/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea
0dθ
=−1
2/integraldisplay2π
0(e−a2−1)dθ=π(1−e−a2).
2The method that follows is admittedly not straightforward but requires a trick. The trick is to start with
the desired formula and square both sides. Y ou will then observe that the left-hand side resembles an
iterated integral. There are several other ways to evaluate the Gaussian integral, but all of them requiresome nonobvious method. For the use of complex variables to evaluate it, see, for example, J. Marsdenand M. Hoffman, Basic Complex Analysis, 3rd ed., W . H. Freeman, New Y ork, 1998.

<<<PAGE 350>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 323
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 323
If we let a→∞ in this expression, we give meaning to the improper integral and get
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R2e−(x2+y2)dx dy=π.
Assuming (as shown in the Internet supplement) that we can also evaluate this improper
integral as the limit of the integrals over the rectangles Ra=[−a,a]×[−a,a]a s
a→∞ ,w eg e t
lim
a→∞/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rae−(x2+y2)dx dy=π.
By reduction to iterated integrals, we can write this as
lim
a→∞/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplaya
−ae−x2dx/integraldisplaya
−ae−y2dy/bracketrightbigg
=/bracketleftbigg
lim
a→∞/integraldisplaya
−ae−x2dx/bracketrightbigg2
=π.
That is,
/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay∞
−∞e−x2dx/bracketrightbigg2
=π.
Thus, taking square roots, we arrive at the desired result.
Here is a variant of the Gaussian integral. Evaluate
/integraldisplay∞
−∞e−2x2dx.
To do this, use the change of variables formula y=√
2xto reduce the problem to the
Gaussian integral just computed:
/integraldisplay∞
−∞e−2x2dx=lim
a→∞/integraldisplaya
−ae−2x2dx=lim
a→∞/integraldisplay√
2a
−√
2ae−y2dy√
2
=1√
2/integraldisplay∞
−∞e−y2dy=1√
2√π=/radicalbiggπ
2.▲
Change of Variables Formula for Triple Integrals
To state this formula, we ﬁrst deﬁne the Jacobian of a transformation from R3toR3—it
is a simple extension of the two-variable case.
Deﬁnition LetT:W⊂R3→R3be a C1function deﬁned by the equations
x=x(u,v,w),y=y(u,v,w),z=z(u,v,w). Then the Jacobian ofT, which
is denoted ∂(x,y,z)/∂(u,v,w), is the determinant
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u∂x
∂v∂x
∂w
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v∂y
∂w
∂z
∂u∂z
∂v∂z
∂w/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.

<<<PAGE 351>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 324
324 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
The absolute value of this determinant is equal to the volume of the parallelepiped
determined by the three vectors
Tu=∂x
∂ui+∂y
∂uj+∂z
∂uk,
Tv=∂x
∂vi+∂y
∂vj+∂z
∂vk,
Tw=∂x
∂wi+∂y
∂wj+∂z
∂wk.
Just as in the two-variable case, the Jacobian measures how the transformation Tdistorts
the volume of its domain. Hence, for volume (triple) integrals, the change of variables
formula takes the following form:
Change of Variables Formula: Triple Integrals
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∗f(x(u,v,w),y(u,v,w),z(u,v,w))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y,z)
∂(u,v,w)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledu dv dw, (8)
where W
∗is an elementary region in uvwspace corresponding to Winxyzspace,
under a mapping T:(u,v,w)/mapsto→(x(u,v,w),y(u,v,w),z(u,v,w)), provided
Tis of class C1and is one-to-one, except possibly on a set that is the union of
graphs of functions of two variables.
Cylindrical Coordinates
Let us apply formula (8) to cylindrical and then to spherical coordinates. First, we com-
pute the Jacobian for the map deﬁning the change to cylindrical coordinates. Because
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ, z=z,
we have
∂(x,y,z)
∂(r,θ,z)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosθ−rsinθ0
sinθ rcosθ0
00 1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=r.
Thus, we obtain the formula
Change of Variables---Cylindrical Coordinates
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∗f(rcosθ,rsinθ,z)rd rdθdz.(9)

<<<PAGE 352>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 325
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 325
Spherical Coordinates
Next we consider the spherical coordinate system. Recall that it is given by
x=ρsinφcosθ, y=ρsinφsinθ, z=ρcosφ.
Therefore, we have
∂(x,y,z)
∂(ρ,θ,φ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglesinφcosθ−ρsinφsinθρ cosφcosθ
sinφsinθρ sinφcosθρ cosφsinθ
cosφ 0 −ρsinφ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
Expanding along the last row, we get
∂(x,y,z)
∂(ρ,θ,φ)=cosφ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−ρsinφsinθρ cosφcosθ
ρsinφcosθρ cosφsinθ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
−ρsinφ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglesinφcosθ−ρsinφsinθ
sinφsinθρ sinφcosθ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=−ρ
2cos2φsinφsin2θ−ρ2cos2φsinφcos2θ
−ρ2sin3φcos2θ−ρ2sin3φsin2θ
=−ρ2cos2φsinφ−ρ2sin3φ=−ρ2sinφ.
Thus, we arrive at the formula:
Change of Variables---Spherical Coordinates
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∗f(ρsinφcosθ,ρsinφsinθ,ρcosφ)ρ2sinφdρdθdφ. (10)
To prove formula (10), we must show that the transformation Son the set W∗is one-
to-one except on a set that is the union of ﬁnitely many graphs of continuous functions.
We shall leave this veriﬁcation as Exercise 34.
example 6 Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wexp ( x2+y2+z2)3/2dV,
where Wis the unit ball in R3.

<<<PAGE 353>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 326
326 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
solution First note that we cannot easily integrate this function using iterated integrals (try it!).
Hence (employing the strategy in the quote that opened this chapter), let us try a change
of variables. The transformation into spherical coordinates seems appropriate, becausethen the entire quantity x
2+y2+z2can be replaced by one variable, namely, ρ2.I fW∗
is the region such that
0≤ρ≤1, 0 ≤θ≤2π,0 ≤φ≤π,
we can apply formula (10) and write
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wexp ( x2+y2+z2)3/2dV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∗ρ2eρ3sinφdρdθdφ.
This integral equals the iterated integral
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0eρ3ρ2sinφdθdφdρ=2π/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayπ
0eρ3ρ2sinφdφdρ
=−2π/integraldisplay1
0ρ2eρ3[cosφ]π
0dρ
=4π/integraldisplay1
0eρ3ρ2dρ=4
3π/integraldisplay1
0eρ3(3ρ2)dρ
=/bracketleftbigg4
3πeρ3/bracketrightbigg1
0=4
3π(e−1).
▲
example 7 LetWbe the ball of radius Rand center (0, 0, 0) in R3. Find the volume of W.
solution The volume of Wis/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wdx dy dz . This integral may be evaluated by reducing it to
iterated integrals or by regarding Was a volume of revolution, but let us evaluate it here
by using spherical coordinates. We get
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz =/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayR
0ρ2sinφdρdθdφ=R3
3/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0sinφdθdφ
=2πR3
3/integraldisplayπ
0sinφdφ=2πR3
3{−[cos( π)−cos(0)]}=4πR3
3,
which is the standard formula for the volume of a solid sphere. ▲
exercises
1.Suggest a substitution/transformation that will simplify
the following integrands, and ﬁnd their Jacobians.
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(3x+2y) sin( x−y)dA
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Re(−4x+7y)cos(7 x−2y)dA2.Suggest a substitution/transformation that will simplifythe following integrands, and ﬁnd their Jacobians.
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(5x+y)3(x+9y)4dA
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rxsin(6 x+7y)−3ysin(6 x+7y)dA

<<<PAGE 354>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 327
6.2 The Change of Variables Theorem 327
3.LetDbe the unit disk: x2+y2≤1. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dexp ( x2+y2)dx dy
by making a change of variables to polar coordinates.
4.LetDbe the region 0 ≤y≤xand 0≤x≤1. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x+y)dx dy
by making the change of variables x=u+v,
y=u−v. Check your answer by evaluating the integral
directly by using an iterated integral.
5.LetT(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v)) be the mapping deﬁned
byT(u,v)=(4u,2u+3v). Let D∗be the rectangle
[0, 1]×[1, 2]. Find D=T(D∗) and evaluate
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dxy dx dy
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x−y)dx dy
by making a change of variables to evaluate them as
integrals over D∗.
6.Repeat Exercise 5 for T(u,v)=(u,v(1+u)).
7.Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy√1+x+2y,
where D=[0, 1]×[0, 1], by setting T(u,v)=(u,v/2)
and evaluating an integral over D∗, where T(D∗)=D.
8.Deﬁne T(u,v)=(u2−v2,2uv). Let D∗be the set
of (u,v) with u2+v2≤1,u≥0,v≥0. Find
T(D∗)=D. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy.
9.LetT(u,v) be as in Exercise 8. By making a change of
variables, “formally” evaluate the “improper” integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy/radicalbig
x2+y2.
[NOTE: This integral (and the one in the next exercise) is
improper, because the integrand 1//radicalbig
x2+y2is neither
continuous nor bounded on the domain of integration.(The theory of improper integrals is discussed inSection 6.4.)]
10. Calculate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R1
x+ydy dx, where Ris the region
bounded by x=0,y=0,x+y=1,x+y=4, by
using the mapping T(u,v)=(u−uv,uv).11. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x2+y2)3/2dx dy, where Dis the disk
x2+y2≤4.
12. LetD∗be av-simple region in the uvplane bounded by
v=g(u) andv=h(u)≤g(u) for a≤u≤b. Let
T:R2→R2be the transformation given by x=uand
y=ψ(u,v), where ψis of class C1and∂ψ/∂v is never
zero. Assume that T(D∗)=Dis ay-simple region;
show that if f:D→Ris continuous, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗f(u,ψ(u,v))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂ψ
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
du dv.
13. Use double integrals to ﬁnd the area inside the curve
r=1+sinθ.
14. (a) Express/integraltext1
0/integraltextx2
0xy dy dx as an integral over the
triangle D∗, which is the set of ( u,v) where
0≤u≤1, 0≤v≤u.(HINT: Find a one-to-one
mapping TofD∗onto the given region of
integration.)
(b) Evaluate this integral directly and as an integral
over D∗.
15. Integrate zex2+y2over the cylinder
x2+y2≤4, 2≤z≤3.
16. LetDbe the unit disk. Express/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(1+x2+y2)3/2dx dy as an integral over
[0, 1]×[0, 2π ] and evaluate.
17. Using polar coordinates, ﬁnd the area bounded by the
lemniscate (x2+y2)2=2a2(x2−y2).
18. Redo Exercise 15 of Section 5.3 using a change ofvariables and compare the effort involved in eachmethod.
19. Calculate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x+y)2ex−ydx dy, where Ris the region
bounded by x+y=1,x+y=4,x−y=−1, and
x−y=1.
20. LetT:R3→R3be deﬁned by
T(u,v,w)=(ucosvcosw,usinvcosw,usinw).
(a) Show that Tis onto the unit sphere; that is, every
(x,y,z) with x2+y2+z2=1 can be written as
(x,y,z)=T(u,v,w) for some ( u,v,w).
(b) Show that Tis not one-to-one.
21. Integrate x2+y2+z2over the cylinder
x2+y2≤2,−2≤z≤3.

<<<PAGE 355>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 328
328 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
22. Evaluate/integraltext∞
0e−4x2dx.
23. LetBbe the unit ball. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bdx dy dz/radicalbig
2+x2+y2+z2
by making the appropriate change of variables.
24. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
A[1/(x2+y2)2]dx dy, where Ais
determined by the conditions x2+y2≤1 and
x+y≥1.
25. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz
(x2+y2+z2)3/2, where Wis the
solid bounded by the two spheres x2+y2+z2=a2
andx2+y2+z2=b2, where 0 <b<a.
26. Use spherical coordinates to evaluate:
/integraldisplay3
0/integraldisplay√
9−x2
0/integraldisplay√
9−x2−y2
0/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2
1+[x2+y2+z2]2dz dy dx
27. LetDbe a triangle in the ( x,y) plane with vertices
(0, 0), (1
2,1
2), (1, 0). Evaluate:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dcosπ/parenleftbigg
x−y
x+y/parenrightbigg
dx dy
by making the appropriate change of variables.
28. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dx2dx dy, where Dis determined by the
two conditions 0 ≤x≤yandx2+y2≤1.
29. Integrate/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2e−(x2+y2+z2)over the region
described in Exercise 25.
30. Evaluate the following by using cylindrical coordinates.
(a)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bzd xd yd z , where Bis the region within the
cylinder x2+y2=1 above the xyplane and below
the cone z=(x2+y2)1/2
(b)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2+z2)−1/2dx dy dz , where Wis the
region determined by the conditions1
2≤z≤1 and
x2+y2+z2≤1
31. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
B(x+y)dx dy, where Bis the rectangle in
thexyplane with vertices at (0, 1), (1, 0), (3, 4), and
(4, 3).32. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x+y)dx dy, where Dis the square with
vertices at (0, 0), (1, 2), (3, 1), and (2, −1).
33. LetEbe the ellipsoid ( x2/a2)+(y2/b2)+(z2/c2)≤1,
where a,b, and care positive.
(a) Find the volume of E.
(b) Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
E[(x2/a2)+(y2/b2)+(z2/c2)]dx dy dz .
(HINT: Change variables and then use spherical
coordinates.)
34. Using spherical coordinates, compute the integral of
f(ρ,φ,θ)=1/ρover the region in the ﬁrst octant of
R3, which is bounded by the cones φ=π/4,
φ=arctan 2 and the sphere ρ=√
6.
35. The mapping T(u,v)=(u2−v2,2uv) transforms the
rectangle 1 ≤u≤2, 1≤v≤3o ft h eu vplane into a
region Rof the xyplane.
(a) Show that Tis one-to-one.
(b) Find the area of Rusing the change of variables
formula.
36. LetRdenote the region inside x2+y2=1, but outside
x2+y2=2ywith x≥0,y≥0.
(a) Sketch this region.
(b) Let u=x2+y2,v=x2+y2−2y. Sketch the
region Din the uvplane, which corresponds to
Runder this change of coordinates.
(c) Compute/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rxeydx dy using this change of
coordinates.
37. LetDbe the region bounded by x3/2+y3/2=a3/2, for
x≥0,y≥0, and the coordinate axes x=0,y=0.
Express/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy as an integral over the
triangle D∗, which is the set of points
0≤u≤a,0≤v≤a−u. (Do not attempt to evaluate.)
38. Show that S(ρ,θ,φ)=(ρsinφcosθ,ρsinφsinθ,
ρcosφ), the spherical change-of-coordinate mapping, is
one-to-one except on a set that is a union of ﬁnitely
many graphs of continuous functions.

<<<PAGE 356>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 329
6.3 Applications 329
6.3Applications
In this section, we shall discuss average values, centers of mass, moments of inertia,
and the gravitational potential as applications.
Averages
Ifx1,...,xnarennumbers, their average is deﬁned by
[xi]av=x1+···+ xn
n=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1xi.
Notice that if all the xihappen to have a common value c, then their average, of course,
also equals c.
This concept leads us to deﬁne the average values of functions as follows.
Average Values Theaverage v alue of a function of one variable on the interval
[a,b] is deﬁned by
[f]av=/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx
b−a.
Likewise, for functions of two variables, the ratio of the integral to the area of D,
[f]av=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy, (1)
is called the average value offover D. Similarly, the average value of a function
fon a region Win 3-space is deﬁned by
[f]av=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dy dz
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz.
Again, notice that the denominator is chosen so that if fis a constant, say c, then
[f]av=c.
example 1 Find the average value of f(x,y)=xsin2(xy) on the region D=[0,π]×[0,π].
solution First, we compute
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplayπ
0xsin2(xy)dx dy
=/integraldisplayπ
0/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplayπ
01−cos(2 xy)
2xd y/bracketrightbigg
dx
=/integraldisplayπ
0/bracketleftbiggy
2−sin(2 xy)
4x/bracketrightbigg
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleπ
y=0dx
=/integraldisplayπ
0/bracketleftbiggπx
2−sin(2π x)
4/bracketrightbigg
dx=/bracketleftbiggπx2
4+cos(2π x)
8π/bracketrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleπ
0
=π3
4+cos(2π2)−1
8π.

<<<PAGE 357>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 330
330 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
Thus, the average value of f, by formula (1), is
π3/4+[cos(2π2)−1]/8π
π2=π
4+cos(2π2)−1
8π3≈0.7839. ▲
example 2 The temperature at points in the cube W=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1] is proportional
to the square of the distance from the origin.
(a) What is the average temperature?
(b) At which points of the cube is the temperature equal to the average temperature?
solution (a) Let cbe the constant of proportionality, so T=c(x2+y2+z2) and the average
temperature is [ T]av=1
8/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
WTd xd yd z , because the volume of the cube is 8. Thus,
[T]av=c
8/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
−1(x2+y2+z2)dx dy dz .
The triple integral is the sum of the integrals of x2,y2, and z2. Because x,y, and zenter
symmetrically into the description of the cube, the three integrals will be equal, so that
[T]av=3c
8/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
−1z2dx dy dz =3c
8/integraldisplay1
−1z2/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
−1dx dy/parenrightbigg
dz.
The inner integral is equal to the area of the square [−1, 1] ×[−1, 1]. The area of that
square is 4, and so
[T]av=3c
8/integraldisplay1
−14z2dz=3c
2/parenleftbiggz3
3/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
−1=c.
(b) The temperature is equal to the average temperature at all points satisfying
c(x2+y2+z2)=c—that is, at all points lying on the sphere x2+y2+z2=1. ▲
Centers of Mass
If masses m1,...,mnare placed at points x1,...,xnon the xaxis, their center of mass
is deﬁned to be
x=/summationtextmixi/summationtextmi. (2)
This deﬁnition arises from the following observation: If one is balancing masses on alever (Figure 6.3.1), the balance point
xoccurs where the total moment (mass times
distance from the balance point) is zero; that is, where/summationtextmi(xi−x)=0. A physical
principle, going back ﬁrst to Archimedes and then in this generality to Newton, statesthat this condition means there is no tendency for the lever to rotate.
ﬁgure 6.3.1 The lever is
balanced if /Sigma1(xi−x)mi=0.
m3xx1x2x3
m2 m1

<<<PAGE 358>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 331
6.3 Applications 331
For a continuous mass density δ(x) along the lever (measured in, say, grams/cm),
the analogue of formula (2) is
x=/integraldisplay
xδ(x)dx
/integraldisplay
δ(x)dx. (3)
For two-dimensional plates, this generalizes to:
The Center of Mass of Two-Dimensional Plates
x=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dxδ(x,y)dx dy
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dδ(x,y)dx dyand y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dyδ(x,y)dx dy
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dδ(x,y)dx dy, (4)
where again δ(x,y) is the mass density (see Figure 6.3.2).Center of mass Plate
ﬁgure 6.3.2 The plate
balances when supported
at its center of mass.
example 3 Find the center of mass of the rectangle [0, 1] ×[0, 1] if the mass density is ex+y.
solution First we compute the total mass:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dex+ydx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0ex+ydx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbig
ex+y/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
x=0/parenrightbig
dy=/integraldisplay1
0(e1+y−ey)dy
=(e1+y−ey)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
y=0=e2−e−(e−1)=e2−2e+1.
The numerator in formula (4) for xis
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0xex+ydx dy=/integraldisplay1
0(xex+y−ex+y)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
x=0dy=/integraldisplay1
0[e1+y−e1+y−(0ey−ey)]dy
=/integraldisplay1
0eydy=ey/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
y=0=e−1,
so that
x=e−1
e2−2e+1=e−1
(e−1)2=1
e−1≈0.582.
The roles of xandymay be interchanged in all these calculations, so that y=1/(e−1)≈
0.582 as well. ▲
For a region Win space with mass density δ(x,y,z), we know that
volume =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz , (5)
mass=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz . (6)
If we denote the coordinates of the center of mass by ( x,y,z), then the generalization
of the formulas in the preceding box are as follows.

<<<PAGE 359>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 332
332 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
Coordinates for the Center of Mass of Three-Dimensional
Regions
x=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wxδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz
mass
y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wyδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz
mass(7)
z=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wzδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz
mass
example 4 The cube [1, 2] ×[1, 2]×[1, 2] has mass density given by δ(x,y,z)=(1+x)ezy.
Find the total mass of the box.
solution The mass of the box is, by formula (6),
/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay2
1(1+x)ezyd xd yd z =/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay2
1/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg
x+x2
2/parenrightbigg
ezy/bracketrightbiggx=2
x=1dy dz
=/integraldisplay2
1/integraldisplay2
15
2ezyd yd z =/integraldisplay2
115
4ezdz=/bracketleftbigg15
4ez/bracketrightbiggz=2
z=1=15
4(e2−e).▲
If a region and its mass density are reﬂection-symmetric across a plane, then the
center of mass lies on that plane. For example, in formula (7) for x, if the region and
mass density are symmetric in the yzplane, then the integrand is odd in x, and so x=0.
This kind of use of symmetry is illustrated in the next example.
example 5 Find the center of mass of the hemispherical region Wdeﬁned by the inequalities
x2+y2+z2≤1,z≥0. (Assume that the density is unity.)
solution By symmetry, the center of mass must lie on the zaxis, and so x=y=0. To ﬁnd z,
we must compute, by formula (7), the numerator I=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wzd xd yd z . The hemisphere
is an elementary region, and thus the integral becomes
I=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay√
1−z2
−√
1−z2/integraldisplay√
1−y2−z2
−√
1−y2−z2zd xd yd z .
Because zis a constant for the xandyintegrations, we can remove it from the ﬁrst two
integral signs, to obtain
I=/integraldisplay1
0z⎛
⎝/integraldisplay√
1−z2
−√
1−z2/integraldisplay√
1−y2−z2
−√
1−y2−z2dx dy⎞⎠dz.
Instead of calculating the inner two integrals explicitly, we observe that they equal the
double integral/integraltext/integraltext
Ddx dy over the disk x2+y2≤1−z2, considered as an x-simple

<<<PAGE 360>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 333
6.3 Applications 333
region in the plane. The area of this disk is π(1−z2), and so
I=π/integraldisplay1
0z(1−z2)dz=π/integraldisplay1
0(z−z3)dz=π/bracketleftbiggz2
2−z4
4/bracketrightbigg1
0=π
4.
The volume of the hemisphere is2
3π, and so z=(π/4)/(2
3π)=3
8.▲
Historical NoteIt is common knowledge that Archimedes observed the principle of the lever.
Perhaps less known is that he was also responsible for discovering the conceptsof center of mass and center of gravity. Only two of his works on mechanics havebeen handed down to us: On Floating Bodies and On the Equilibrium and
Centers of Mass of Plane Figures. Both were translated into Latin by Niccolo
Tartaglia, circa 1543.
InEquilibrium ... , Archimedes began the field of applied mathematics, doing
for mechanics what Euclid had accomplished for geometry. In this work hedescribes the principles behind all the machines of antiquity, including the lever,inclined plane, and pulley systems.
Surprisingly, Archimedes never carefully defined the center of mass; the first
proper definition was given by Pappus of Alexandria in 340
C.E.The concept of
equilibrium was to have a profound effect on the development of mechanical
engineering (through the introduction of gears), architecture, and in art,permitting the construction of complex machines, large-scale buildings, andsculptures. Figure 6.3.3 shows sketches by Leonardo DaVinci, illustratingequilibrium positions of the human body.
Moments of Inertia
Another important concept in mechanics, one that is needed in studying the dynamics
of a rotating rigid body, is that of moment of inertia. If the solid Whas uniform density
ﬁgure 6.3.3 Equilibrium positions
of the human body, to be
observed by the painter. Thecenter of mass should besupported to maintainequilibrium.


<<<PAGE 361>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 334
334 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
δ, the moments of inertia Ix,Iy, and Izabout the x,y, and zaxes, respectively, are
deﬁned by:
Moments of Inertia About the Coordinate Axes
Ix=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(y2+z2)δdxdy dz , Iy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+z2)δdx dy dz ,
Iz=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2)δdx dy dz .(8)
The moment of inertia measures a body’ s response to efforts to rotate it; for example,
as when one tries to rotate a merry-go-round. The moment of inertia is analogous to
the mass of a body, which measures its response to efforts to translate it. In contrast to
translational motion, however, the moments of inertia depend on the shape and not just
the total mass . It is harder to spin up a large plate than a compact ball of the same mass.
For example, Ixmeasures the body’ s response to forces attempting to rotate it about
thexaxis. The factor y2+z2, which is the square of the distance to the xaxis, weights
masses farther away from the rotation axis more heavily. This is in agreement with the
intuition just explained.
example 6 Compute the moment of inertia Izfor the solid above the xyplane bounded by the
paraboloid z=x2+y2and the cylinder x2+y2=a2, assuming aand the mass density
to be constants.
solution The paraboloid and cylinder intersect at the plane z=a2. Using cylindrical coordinates,
we ﬁnd from equation (8),
Iz=/integraldisplaya
0/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayr2
0δr2·rdzdθdr=δ/integraldisplaya
0/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayr2
0r3dz dθdr=πδa6
3.
▲
(x1, y1, z1)
(x, y, z)dM
rW
ﬁgure 6.3.4 The gravitational
potential that produces a force
acting on a mass mat (x1,y1,z1)
arising from the mass dM=δ
(x,y,z)dx dy dz at (x,y,z)i s
−[Gmδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz ]/r.Gravitational Fields of Solid Objects
Another interesting physical application of triple integration is the determination of the
gravitational ﬁelds of solid objects. Example 7, Section 2.6, showed that the gravitational
force ﬁeld F(x,y,z) of a particle is the negative of the gradient of a function V(x,y,z)
called the gravitational potential . If there is a point mass Mat (x,y,z), then the
gravitational potential acting on a mass mat (x1,y1,z1) due to this mass is −GmM [(x−
x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2]−1/2, where Gis the universal gravitational constant.
If our attracting object occupies a domain Wwith mass density δ(x,y,z), we
may think of it as made of inﬁnitesimal box-shaped regions with masses dM=
δ(x,y,z)dx dy dz located at points ( x,y,z). The total gravitational potential Vfor
Wis then obtained by “summing” the potentials from the inﬁnitesimal masses. Thus,
we arrive at the triple integral (see Figure 6.3.4):
V(x1,y1,z1)=−Gm/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz/radicalbig
(x−x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2. (9)

<<<PAGE 362>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 335
6.3 Applications 335
Historical NoteThe theory of gravitational force fields and gravitational potentials was
developed by Sir Isaac Newton (1642--1727). Newton withheld publication of his
gravitational theories for quite some time. The result that a spherical planet has
the same gravitational field as it would have if its mass were all concentrated at
the planet's center first appeared in his famous Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica , the first edition of which appeared in 1687. Using multiple integrals
and spherical coordinates, we shall solve Newton's problem here; remarkably,
Newton's published solution used only Euclidean geometry.
example 7 LetWbe a region of constant density and total mass M. Show that the gravitational
potential is given by
V(x1,y1,z1)=/bracketleftbigg1
r/bracketrightbigg
avGMm ,
where [1 /r]avis the average over Wof
f(x,y,z)=1/radicalbig
(x−x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2.
solution According to formula (9),
−V(x1,y1,z1)=Gm/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wδdx dy dz/radicalbig
(x−x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2
=Gmδ/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz/radicalbig
(x−x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2
=Gm[δvolume ( W)]/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz/radicalbig
(x−x1)2+(y−y1)2+(z−z1)2
volume ( W)
=GmM/bracketleftbigg1
r/bracketrightbigg
av
are required. ▲
z
(x1, y1, z1)
ρ1
ρ2(0, 0, R)
y
x
ﬁgure 6.3.5 The gravitational
potential at ( x1,y1,z1) is the
same as at (0, 0, R), where
R=/radicalBig
x2
1+y2
1+z2
1.Let us now use formula (9) and spherical coordinates to ﬁnd the gravitational poten-
tialV(x1,y1,z1) for a region Wwith constant density between the concentric spheres
ρ=ρ1andρ=ρ2, assuming the density is constant. Before evaluating the integral
in formula (9), we make some observations that will simplify the computation. Be-
cause G,m, and the density are constants, we may ignore them at ﬁrst. Because the
attracting body, W, is symmetric with respect to rotations about the origin, the poten-
tialV(x1,y1,z1) should itself be symmetric—thus, V(x1,y1,z1) depends only on the
distance R=/radicalbig
x2
1+y2
1+z2
1from the origin. Our computation will be simplest if we
look at the point (0, 0, R) on the zaxis (see Figure 6.3.5). Thus, we need to evaluate the
integral
V(0, 0, R)=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdx dy dz/radicalbig
x2+y2+(z−R)2.

<<<PAGE 363>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 336
336 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
In spherical coordinates, Wis described by the inequalities ρ1≤ρ≤ρ2,0≤θ≤2π,
and 0≤φ≤π, and so
−V(0, 0, R)=/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0ρ2sinφdθdφdρ/radicalbig
ρ2sin2φ(cos2θ+sin2θ)+(ρcosφ−R)2.
Replacing cos2θ+sin2θby 1, so that the integrand no longer involves θ,w em a y
integrate over θto get
−V(0, 0, R)=2π/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1/integraldisplayπ
0ρ2sinφdφdρ/radicalbig
ρ2sin2φ+(ρcosφ−R)2
=2π/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ2/parenleftBigg/integraldisplayπ
0sinφdφ/radicalbig
ρ2−2Rρcosφ+R2/parenrightBigg
dρ.
The inner integral over φmay be evaluated using the substitution u=− 2Rρcosφ.
We get
1
2Rρ/integraldisplay2Rρ
−2Rρ(ρ2+u+R2)−1/2du=2
2Rρ(ρ2+u+R2)1/2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2Rρ
−2Rρ
=1
Rρ/bracketleftbig
(ρ2+2Rρ+R2)1/2−(ρ2−2Rρ+R2)1/2/bracketrightbig
=1
Rρ/braceleftbig
[(ρ+R)2]1/2−[(ρ−R)2]1/2/bracerightbig
=1
Rρ(ρ+R−|ρ−R|).
The expression ρ+Ris always positive, but ρ−Rmay not be, so we must keep the
absolute value sign. Substituting into the formula for V,w eg e t
−V(0, 0, R)=2π/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ2
Rρ(ρ+R−|ρ−R|)dρ=2π
R/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ(ρ+R−|ρ−R|)dρ.
We consider two possibilities for R, corresponding to the gravitational potential for
objects outside andinside the hollow ball W.
Case 1. IfR≥ρ2[that is, if ( x1,y1,z1) is outside W], then |ρ−R|=R−ρfor all ρ
in the interval [ρ 1,ρ2], so that
−V(0, 0, R)=2π
R/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ[ρ+R−(R−ρ)]dρ=4π
R/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ2dρ=1
R4π
3/parenleftbig
ρ3
2−ρ3
1/parenrightbig
.
The factor (4π/ 3)(ρ3
2−ρ3
1) equals the volume of W. Putting back the constants G,m,
and the mass density, we ﬁnd that the gravitational potential is−GmM /R,where M is
the mass of W . Thus, V is just as it would be if all the mass of W were concentrated at
the central point.

<<<PAGE 364>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 337
6.3 Applications 337
Case 2. IfR≤ρ1[that is, if ( x1,y1,z1) is inside the hole], then |ρ−R|=ρ−Rfor
ρin [ρ 1,ρ2], and so
−V(0, 0, R)=(Gm)2π
R/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρ[ρ+R−(ρ−R)]dρ=(Gm)4π/integraldisplayρ2
ρ1ρdρ
=(Gm)2π/parenleftbig
ρ2
2−ρ2
1/parenrightbig
.
The result is independent of R, and so the potential Visconstant inside the hole.
Because the gravitational force is minus the gradient of V, we conclude that there is no
gravitational force inside a uniform hollow planet!
We leave it to you to compute V(0, 0, R) for the case ρ1<R<ρ 2.
A similar argument shows that the gravitational potential outside any spherically
symmetric body of mass M(even if the density is variable) is V=GMm /R, where R
is the distance to its center (which is its center of mass).
example 8 Find the gravitational potential acting on a unit mass of a spherical star with a mass
M=3.02×1030kg at a distance of 2.25 ×1011m from its center ( G=6.67×
10−11N·m2/kg2).
solution The negative potential is
−V=GM
R=6.67×10−11×3.02×1030
2.25×1011=8.95×108m2/s2. ▲
exercises
1.Find the coordinates of the center of mass of an
isosceles triangle of uniform density bounded by the
xaxis, y=ax, and y=−ax+2a.
2.Assuming uniform density, ﬁnd the coordinates of thecenter of mass of the semicircle y=√
r2−x2, with
y≥0.
3.Find the average of f(x,y)=ysinxyover D=
[0,π]×[0,π].
4.Find the average of f(x,y)=ex+yover the triangle
with vertices (0, 0), (0, 1), and (1, 0).
5.Find the center of mass of the region between y=x2
andy=xif the density is x+y.
6.Find the center of mass of the region between y=0 and
y=x2, where 0 ≤x≤1
2.
7.A sculptured gold plate Dis deﬁned by 0 ≤x≤2πand
0≤y≤π(centimeters) and has mass densityδ(x,y)=y2sin24x+2 (grams per square centimeter).
If gold sells for $7 per gram, how much is the gold in theplate worth?
8.In Exercise 7, what is the average mass density in gramsper square centimeter?
9.(a)Find the mass of the box [0,1
2]×[0, 1]×[0, 2],
assuming the density to be uniform.
(b)Same as part (a), but with a mass densityδ(x,y,z)=x
2+3y2+z+1.
10. Find the mass of the solid bounded by the cylinder
x2+y2=2xand the cone z2=x2+y2if the density
isδ=/radicalbig
x2+y2.
11. Find the mass of the solid ball of radius 5 with densitygiven by
δ(x,y,z)=2x
2+2y2+2z2+1
assuming the center of the ball is at the origin.

<<<PAGE 365>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 338
338 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
12. A solid disk of radius 9 and height 2 is placed at the
origin, so that it can be expressed by x2+y2=81 and
0≤z≤2. If the disk has a density given by
δ(x,y,z)=2x2+2y2+2z2+1,
ﬁnd its mass.
13. Find the center of mass of the region bounded by
x+y+z=2,x=0,y=0, and z=0, assuming the
density to be uniform.
14. Find the center of mass of the cylinder
x2+y2≤1, 1≤z≤2 if the density is
δ=(x2+y2)z2.
15. Find the average value of sin2πzcos2πxover the cube
[0, 2]×[0, 4]×[0, 6].
16. Find the average value of e−zover the ball
x2+y2+z2≤1.
17. A solid with constant density is bounded above by theplane z=aand below by the cone described in
spherical coordinates by φ=k, where kis a constant
0<k<π / 2. Set up an integral for its moment of
inertia about the zaxis.
18. Find the moment of inertia around the yaxis for the ball
x2+y2+z2≤R2if the mass density is a constant δ.
19. Find the gravitational potential on a mass mof a
spherical planet with mass M=3×1026kg, at a
distance of 2 ×108m from its center.
20. Find the gravitational force exerted on a 70-kg object atthe position in Exercise 19.
21. A body Winxyzcoordinates is called symmetric with
respect to a given plane if for every particle on one side
of the plane there is a particle of equal mass located atits mirror image through the plane.
(a) Discuss the planes of symmetry for an automobile
shell.
(b) Let the plane of symmetry be the xyplane, and
denote by W
+andW−the portions of Wabove and
below the plane, respectively. By our assumption,the mass density δ(x,y,z) satisﬁes δ(x,y,−z)=
δ(x,y,z). Justify the following steps:
z·/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wzδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W+zδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz +/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W−zδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W+zδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz +/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W+−wδ(u,v,−w)du dv dw
=0.(c) Explain why part (b) proves that if a body is
symmetrical with respect to a plane, then its centerof mass lies in that plane.
(d) Derive this law of mechanics: If a body is symmetric
with respect to two planes, then its center of masslies on their line of intersection.
22. A uniform rectangular steel plate of sides aandbrotates
about its center of mass with constant angular velocity ω.
(a) The kinetic energy equals1
2(mass)(velocity)2.
Argue that the kinetic energy of any element ofmassδdx dy(δ=constant) is given by
δ(ω
2/2)(x2+y2)dx dy, provided the origin (0, 0) is
placed at the center of mass of the plate.
(b) Justify the formula for kinetic energy:
K.E.=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
plateδω2
2(x2+y2)dx dy.
(c) Evaluate the integral, assuming that the plate is
described by the inequalities −a/2≤x≤a/2,
−b/2≤y≤b/2.
23. As is well known, the density of a typical planet is notconstant throughout the planet. Assume that planetC.M.W . has a radius of 5 ×10
8cm and a mass density
(in grams per cubic centimeter)
ρ(x,y,z)=⎧
⎨
⎩3×104
r,r≥104cm,
3, r≤104cm,
where r=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2. Find a formula for the
gravitational potential outside C.M.W .
24. LetDbe a region in the part of the xyplane with x>0.
Assume Dhas uniform density, area A(D), and center of
mass ( x,y). Let Wbe the solid obtained by rotating D
about the yaxis. Show that the volume of Wis given by
vol(W)=2πxA(D).
25. Use the previous exercise to show that if a doughnut is
obtained by rotating the circle ( x−a)2+y2=r2about
theyaxis, then the volume of the doughnut is 2π2ar2.

<<<PAGE 366>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 339
6.4 Improper Integrals [Optional] 339
6.4Improper Integrals [Optional]
In this section, we study improper integrals—that is, integrals in which the function
may be unbounded or the region of integration is unbounded. We shall ﬁrst recall thesituation for functions of one variable.
One-Variable Improper Integrals
In the study of integrals of functions of one variable, we encounter various types of“improper” integrals; that is, integrals of unbounded functions deﬁned on intervals orintegrals of functions over unbounded intervals. For example,
/integraldisplay
1
01√xdx and/integraldisplay∞
1dx
x2
are improper integrals. They are evaluated using a limiting process; for instance,
/integraldisplay1
01√xdx=lim
a→0/integraldisplay1
a1√xdx=lim
a→0/parenleftBig
2√x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
a/parenrightBig
=lim
a→0(2−2√a)=2
and
/integraldisplay∞
1dx
x2=lim
b→∞/integraldisplayb
1dx
x2=lim
b→∞/parenleftBigg
−1
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleb
1/parenrightBigg
=lim
b→∞/parenleftbigg
1−1
b/parenrightbigg
=1.
If, in such a limiting process, the limit does not exist (or is inﬁnite), we say that the
integral does not exist (or that the integral diverges).
Improper Integrals in the Plane
Next, we describe three types of improper integrals of two variables over a region D.
The ﬁrst two types are described in the text below, and the third type (integrals overunbounded regions) is left to the exercises. We will evaluate all integrals using a limitingprocess, as in the one-variable case.
For simplicity of exposition, we ﬁrst restrict ourselves to nonnegative functions f—
that is, f(x,y)≥0 for all points ( x,y)∈D—and to y-simple regions described as the
set of ( x,y) such that
a≤x≤b,φ
1(x)≤y≤φ2(x),
as in Figure 6.4.1.xy
Dy = φ2(x)
y = φ1(x)
a b
ﬁgure 6.4.1 Ay-simple domain.
In the ﬁrst case we wish to consider, let’ s assume that f:D→Ris continuous except
for points on the boundary of D. Consider, for example,
f(x,y)=1/radicalbig
1−x2−y2,
where Dis the unit disk D={(x,y)|x2+y2≤1}. Clearly, fis not deﬁned on the
boundary of D, where x2+y2=1; yet it will be of practical interest to be able to evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA, because this integral represents the area of the upper hemisphere of the
unit sphere in 3-space.

<<<PAGE 367>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 340
340 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
xy
aa + η b − η bD
1y = φ (x)2
φ (x) + δ1φ2 (x) − δ
y = φ (x)Dη, δﬁgure 6.4.2 A shrunken domain Dη,δfor
improper integrals.
Exhausting Regions
Our basic idea will be to integrate such an fover a smaller region D/prime, where we know
the integral exists, and then let D/prime“tend” to D; that is, “exhaust” Dand see if/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A
tends to some limit. With this in mind, we pick a special kind of D/prime, as follows.
Letη> 0 be small enough so that a+η< b–η. Letδ>0 be small enough so that
φ1(x)+δ<φ 2(x)–δfor all x,a≤x≤b(see Figure 6.4.2). If φ2(x)=φ1(x) for
some x, no such δwill exist, but we shall worry about this minor issue when it arises in
our later examples. Then the region
Dη,δ={(x,y)|a+η≤x≤b−ηandφ1(x)+δ≤y≤φ2(x)−δ}
is a subset of D, and as ( η,δ)→0,Dη,δtends to D.
Improper Integrals as Limits
Because fis continuous and bounded on Dη,δ, the integral/integraltext/integraltext
Dη,δfd A exists. We can
now ask what happens as the region Dη,δexpands to ﬁll the region, D—that is, as
(η,δ)→(0, 0). Provided that
lim
(η,δ)→(0,0)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δfd A
exists, we say that the integral of fover Disconvergent or that fisintegrable over
D, and we deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd xd y to be equal to this limit.
example 1 Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1
3√xydA,
where Dis the unit square [0, 1] ×[0, 1].

<<<PAGE 368>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 341
6.4 Improper Integrals [Optional] 341
solution Dis clearly a y-simple region. Choose η> 0 and δ> 0 so that Dη,δ⊂D,a si n
Figure 6.4.3. Then, by Fubini’ s theorem:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δ1
3√xydA=/integraldisplay1−η
η/integraldisplay1−δ
δ1
3√xydy dx
=/integraldisplay1−η
η1
3√xdx/integraldisplay1−δ
δ1
3√ydy
=3
2/parenleftbigg
(1−η)2/3−η2/3/parenrightbigg
·3
2/parenleftbigg
(1−δ)2/3−δ2/3/parenrightbigg
.
Letting (η ,δ)→(0, 0), we see that
lim
(η,δ)→(0,0)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δ1
3√xydy dx=3
23
2=9
4.
▲δ
δηηy
x1
ﬁgure 6.4.3 The slightly shrunken
unit square.
Unfortunately, it may not always be possible to evaluate such limits so directly and
simply. This is often the case in the most interesting examples, as with the surface area of
the hemisphere, mentioned earlier. It’ s as if the “real world” always presents the greatestchallenges to the mathematician! So let us expand a bit on our theoretical discussion.
Improper Integrals as Limits of Iterated Integrals
Suppose fis integrable over Dη,δ. We can then apply Fubini’ s theorem to obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δfd A=/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ2(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy dx.
Hence, if fis integrable over D,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dfd A= lim
(η,δ)→(0,0)/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ2(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy dx. (1)
Now F(η,δ)=/integraltext/integraltext
Dη,δfd A is a function of two variables, ηandδ, because as we
change ηandδ, we get another number. Now if fis integrable, then
lim
(η,δ)→0F(η,δ)=L
exists. It follows that the iterated limits
lim
η→0lim
δ→0F(η,δ) and lim
δ→0lim
η→0F(η,δ)
also exist and are both equal to L, which in our case is/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A. Thus, the iterated limit
lim
η→0lim
δ→0/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ1(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy dx
also exists. Conversely, if the iterated limits exist, it does not generally follow that thelimit lim
(η,δ)→(0,0) F(η,δ) exists.

<<<PAGE 369>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 342
342 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
For example, if it were to turn out in some way that F(η,δ)=ηδ/(η2+δ2), then
limη→0limδ→0F(η,δ)=limδ→0limη→0F(η,δ)=0; yet lim (η,δ)→0F(η,δ) does not
exist, because F(η,η)=1/2 (see Section 2.2).
In view of this, consider expression (1) again. If fis integrable, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA= lim
(η,δ)→(0,0)/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ2(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy dx
=lim
η→(0)lim
δ→0/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ2(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy dx.
Now suppose that for each x,
lim
δ→0/integraldisplayφ2(x)−δ
φ1(x)+δf(x,y)dy
exists. Denote this by/integraltextφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy. Suppose further that
lim
η→0/integraldisplayb−η
a+η/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy
also exists. We denote this limit by/integraltextb
a/integraltextφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx. Then if all limits exist, all
limits must be equal. Thus, if fis integrable and the iterated improper integral exists,
then necessarily
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx.
However, is it possible that the existence of justthe iterated integrals implies the inte-
grability of f? We turn to this important question next.
Fubini’s Theorem for Improper Integrals
Forintegrals, something truly remarkable happens. Unlike the case for iterated limits (as
in the counterexample considered earlier), the existence of the iterated limits does imply
the integrability of fas long as f≥0. Thus, if f≥0 and if/integraltextb
a/integraltextφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx
exists as an iterated limit, then fis integrable and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx.
IfDis an x-simple region with the xcoordinate lying between two functions ψ1and
ψ2, and if
/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)f(x,y)dx dy
exists as an improper integral, it again follows that fis integrable and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)f(x,y)dx dy.

<<<PAGE 370>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 343
6.4 Improper Integrals [Optional] 343
All these results, which are the improper analogues of Theorems 4 and 4/primein Section 5.3,
are known as Fubini’ s theorem for improper integrals, which we formally state.
Theorem 3 Fubini’s Theorem LetDbe an elementary region in the plane
and f≥0 a function continuous except for points possibly on the boundary of D.
If either of the integrals
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dA,
/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)f(x,y)dy dx, for y-simple regions
/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)f(x,y)dx dy forx-simple regions
exist as improper integrals, fis integrable and they are all equal.
The proof of this involves advanced concepts of analysis, so we omit it here. This
result can be quite useful in calculation, as the next example shows.
example 2 Letf(x,y)=1//radicalbig
1−x2−y2. Show that fis integrable and that/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA=
2π, half the surface area of the unit sphere.
solution For−1<x<1, we have
/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2dy/radicalbig
1−x2−y2=lim
δ→0/integraldisplay√
1+x2−δ
−√
1−x2+δdy/radicalbig
1−x2−y2
=lim
δ→0sin−1/parenleftbiggy√
1−x2/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle√
1−x2−δ
−√
1−x2+δ
=lim
δ→0/braceleftbigg
sin−1/parenleftbigg
1−δ√
1−x2/parenrightbigg
−sin−1/parenleftbigg
−1+δ√
1−x2/parenrightbigg/bracerightbigg
=sin−1(1)−sin−1(−1)=π
2−(−π)
2=π.
Clearly,
lim
η→0/integraldisplay1−η
−1+η/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2dy dx/radicalbig
1−x2−y2=lim
η→0/integraldisplay1−η
−1+ηπdx=lim
η→0π(2−2η)=2π.
Thus, fis integrable. To see why this theorem is so useful, try to show directly from
the deﬁnition that fis integrable. It is not easy to do so! ▲
example 3 Let f(x,y)=1/(x−y) and let Dbe the set of ( x,y) satisfying 0 ≤x≤1 and
0≤y≤x. Show that fisnotintegrable over D.
solution Because the denominator of fis zero on the line y=x,fis unbounded on part of the
boundary of D. Let 0 <η<1 and 0 <δ<η , and let Dη,δbe the set of ( x,y) with
η≤x≤1−ηandδ≤y≤x−δ(Figure 6.4.4).

<<<PAGE 371>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 344
344 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
Here the region Disy-simple with φ1(x)=0 ,φ2(x)=x, andφ1(0) =φ2(0). To ensure
thatDη,δ⊂Dand is depicted in the ﬁgure, we must choose δa bit more carefully. A
little geometry shows that we should choose 2δ ≤η. Consider
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δfd A=/integraldisplay1−η
η/integraldisplayx−δ
δ1
x−ydy dx
=/integraldisplay1−η
η[−log (x−y)]|x−δ
y=δdx
=/integraldisplay1−η
η[−log (δ)+log (x−δ)]dx
=[−logδ]/integraldisplay1−η
ηdx+/integraldisplay1−η
ηlog (x−δ)dx
=−(1−2η)l o gδ+[(x−δ)l o g( x−δ)−(x−δ)]|1−η
η.
In the last step, we used the fact that/integraltext
logud u=ulogu−u. Continuing the preceding
set of qualities, we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dη,δfd A=−(1−2η)l o gδ+(1−η−δ)l o g( 1 −η−δ)
−1(1−η−δ)−(η−δ)l o g(η−δ)+(η−δ).
As (η ,δ)→(0, 0), the second term converges to 1 log 1 =0, and the third and ﬁfth
terms converge to −1 and 0, respectively. Let v=η−δ. Because vlogv→0a sv →0
(a limit established by using L ’Hˆ opital’ s rule from calculus3), we see that the fourth term
goes to zero as (η ,δ)→(0, 0). It is the ﬁrst term that will give us trouble. Now:
−(1−2η)l o gδ=− logδ+2ηlogδ, (2)
and it is not hard to see that this does not converge as (η ,δ)→(0, 0). For example,
letη=2δ; then expression (2) becomes −logδ+4δlogδ. As before, 4δ logδ→0
asδ→0, but −logδ→+ ∞ asδ→0, which shows that expression (2) does not
converge. Hence, lim (η,δ)→(0,0)/integraltext/integraltext
Dη,δfd A does not exist and so fis not integrable. ▲xy
y = x
η 1η
η,δDδ
δ1
ﬁgure 6.4.4 The shrunken
domain Dη,δfor a triangular
domain D.
Functions Unbounded at Isolated Points
We now consider nonnegative functions fthat become “inﬁnite” or are undeﬁned at
isolated points in an x-simple or y-simple region D. For example, consider the function
f(x,y)=1//radicalbig
x2+y2on the unit disk D={(x,y)|x2+y2≤1}. Again, f≥0, but
fis unbounded and is not deﬁned at the origin.
Let ( x0,y0) be a point of a general region Dwhere a nonnegative function fis
undeﬁned. Further, let Dδ=Dδ(x0,y0) be the disk of radius δcentered at ( x0,y0)
and let D\Dδdenote the region Dwith Dδremoved. Assume that fis continuous at
every point of Dexcept ( x0,y0). Then/integraltext/integraltext
D\Dδfd A is deﬁned. We say that/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A is
convergent, or that fisintegrable over Dif
lim
δ→0/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D\Dδfd A
exists.
3L’ H ˆopital’ s rule was discovered by Bernoulli and was reported in L ’Hˆ opital’ s textbook.

<<<PAGE 372>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 345
6.4 Improper Integrals [Optional] 345
example 4 Show that f(x,y)=1//radicalbig
x2+y2is integrable over the unit disk Dand evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A.
solution LetDδbe the disk of radius δcentered at the origin. Then fis continuous everywhere on
Dexcept at (0, 0). Thus,/integraltext/integraltext
D\Dδfd A exists. To evaluate this integral, we change variables
to polar coordinates, x=rcosθ,y=rsinθ. Then f(rcosθ,rsinθ)=1/r, and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D\Dδfd A=/integraldisplay1
δ/integraldisplay2π
01
rfdθdr=/integraldisplay1
δ/integraldisplay2π
0dθdr=2π(1−δ).
Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dfd A=lim
δ→0/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D\Dδfd A=2π. ▲
More generally, we can, in an analogous manner, deﬁne the integral of nonnegative
functions fthat are continuous except at a ﬁnite number of points in D. We can also
combine both types of improper integrals; that is, we may consider functions that are
continuous except at a ﬁnite number of points on Dor at points on the boundary of D,
and deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A appropriately.
Ifftakes both positive and negative values, we can use a more advanced integration
theory, called the Lebesgue integral, to generalize the notion of convergent integral/integraltext/integraltext
D
fd A. Using this theory, it is possible to show that if/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A exists, it can then be
evaluated as an iterated integral. This latter fact is also known as Fubini’ s theorem.
Unbounded Regions
As was mentioned previously, we will leave consideration of unbounded regions to theexercise section. However, we must point out that we have already addressed the mainidea in Example 5 of Section 6.2 on the Gaussian integral. In that example, we integratedexp(−x
2−y2) over all of R2by integrating ﬁrst over a disk of radius aand then letting
a→∞ .
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 4, evaluate the following integrals if they exist (discuss how you deﬁne the integral if it was not given in the
text).
1./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1√xydA, where D=[0, 1]×[0, 1]
2./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1√|x−y|dx dy, where D={(x,y)|0≤x≤1,
0≤y≤1,y≤x}
3./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(y/x)dx dy, where Dis bounded by x=1,x=y,
andx=2y
4./integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayev
0logxd xd y5.LetD=[0, 1]×[0, 1]. Let 0 <α<1 and 0 <β<1.
Evaluate:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy
xαyβ.
6.LetD=[1,∞)×[1,∞]. Let 1 <γ and 1<ρ.
Evaluate:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy
xγyρ.

<<<PAGE 373>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 346
346 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
7.(a) Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdA
(x2+y2)2/3,
where Dis the unit disk in R2.
(b) Determine the real numbers λfor which the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdA
(x2+y2)λ
is convergent, where again Dis the unit disk.
8.(a)Discuss how you would deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A ifDis an
unbounded region—for example, the set of ( x,y)
such that a≤x<∞andφ1(x)≤y≤φ2(x),
where φ1≤φ2are given (Figure 6.4.5).
(b)Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Dxye−(x2+y2)dx dy ifx≥0,
0≤y≤1.
xy
aDy = φ2(x)
y = φ1(x)
ﬁgure 6.4.5 An unbounded region D.
9.Using Exercise 8, integrate e−xyforx≥0, 1≤y≤2
in two ways. Assuming Fubini’ s theorem can be used,
show that
/integraldisplay∞
0e−x−e−2x
xdx=log 2.
10. Show that the integral
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplaya
0(x//radicalbig
a2−y2)dy dx
exists, and compute its value.
11. Discuss whether the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dx+y
x2+2xy+y2dx dy
exists where D=[0, 1]×[0, 1]. If it exists, compute its
value.
12. We can also consider improper integrals of functionsthat fail to be continuous on entire curves lying in someregion D. For example, by breaking D=[0, 1]×[0, 1]
into two regions, deﬁne and then discuss theconvergence of the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D1√
|x−y|dx dy.
13. LetWbe the ﬁrst octant of the ball x2+y2+z2≤a2,
where x≥0,y≥0,z≥0. Evaluate the improper
integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2+z2)1/4
/radicalbig
z+(x2+y2+z2)2dx dy dz
by changing variables.
14. Letfbe a nonnegative function that may be unbounded
and discontinuous on the boundary of an elementaryregion D. Let gbe a similar function such that
f(x,y)≤g(x,y) whenever both are deﬁned. Suppose
/integraltext/integraltext
Dg(x,y)dAexists. Argue informally that this
implies the existence of/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dA.
15. Use Exercise 14 to show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dsin2(x−y)/radicalbig
1−x2−y2dy dx
exists where Dis the unit disk x2+y2≤1.
16. Letfbe as in Exercise 14 and let gbe a function such
that 0 ≤g(x,y)≤f(x,y) whenever both are deﬁned.
Suppose that/integraltext/integraltext
Dg(x,y)dAdoes not exist. Argue
informally that/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dAcannot exist.
17. Use Exercise 16 to show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dex2+y2
x−ydy dx
does not exist, where Dis the set of ( x,y) with
0≤x≤1 and 0 ≤y≤x.
18. LetDbe the unbounded region deﬁned as the set of
(x,y,z) with x2+y2+z2≥1. By making a change of
variables, evaluate the improper integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy dz
(x2+y2+z2)2.
19. Evaluate
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayy
0x
ydx dy and/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
xx
ydy dx.
Does Fubini’ s theorem apply?

<<<PAGE 374>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 347
Review Exercises for Chapter 6 347
20. In Exercise 17 of Section 5.2 we showed that
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0x2−y2
(x2+y2)2dy dx /negationslash=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0x2−y2
(x2+y2)2dx dy.
Thus, Fubini’ s theorem does not hold here, even though
the iterated improper integrals both exist. What wentwrong?
21. If 0≤f(x,y)≤g(x,y) for all ( x,y)∈D, and the
improper integral of g
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dg(x,y)dx dyexists, then/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dx dy also exists. Use this fact
and exercises 5 and 6 to argue that if 0 <α,β< 1 and
1<γ,ρ, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy
xαyβ+xγyρ
exists, where D=[0,∞)×[0,∞).
[HINT: Write D=D1∪D2and apply Exercise 14 to
each Diseparately.]
review exercises for chapter 6
1.(a) Find a linear transformation taking the square
S=[0, 1]×[0, 1] to the parallelogram Pwith
vertices (0, 0), (2, 0), (1, 2), (3, 2).
(b) Write down a change of variables formula
appropriate to the transformation you found inpart (a).
2.(a)Find the image of the square [0, 1] ×[0, 1] under the
transformation T(x,y)=(2x,x+3y).
(b)Write down a change of variables formulaappropriate to the transformation and the region youfound in part (a).
3.LetBbe the region in the ﬁrst quadrant bounded by the
curves xy=1,xy=3,x2−y2=1, and x2−y2=4.
Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
B(x2+y2)dx dy using the change of
variables u=x2−y2,v=xy.
4.In parts (a) to (d), make the indicated change ofvariables. (Do not evaluate.)
(a)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
(1−y2)
−√
(1−y2)(x2+y2)1/2dx dy dz ,
cylindrical coordinates
(b)/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
(1−y2)
−√
(1−y2)/integraldisplay√
(4−x2−y2)
−√
(4−x2−y2)xyzdzdxdy ,
cylindrical coordinates
(c)/integraldisplay√
2
−√
2/integraldisplay√
(2−y2)
−√
(2−y2)/integraldisplay√
(4−x2−y2)
√
(x2+y2)z2dz dx dy,
spherical coordinates(d)/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayπ/4
0/integraldisplay2π
0ρ3sin 2φ dθdφdρ, rectangular
coordinates
5.Find the volume inside the surfaces x2+y2=zand
x2+y2+z2=2.
6.Find the volume enclosed by the cone x2+y2=z2and
the plane 2 z−y−2=0.
7.A cylindrical hole of diameter 1 is bored through asphere of radius 2. Assuming that the axis of the cylinderpasses through the center of the sphere, ﬁnd the volumeof the solid that remains.
8.LetC1andC2be two cylinders of inﬁnite extent, of
diameter 2, and with axes on the xandyaxes,
respectively. Find the volume of their intersection,
C1∩C2.
9.Find the volume bounded by x/a+y/b+z/c=1 and
the coordinate planes.
10. Find the volume determined by z≤6−x2−y2and
z≥/radicalbig
x2+y2.
11. Thetetrahedron deﬁned by
x≥0,y≥0,z≥0,x+y+z≤1 is to be sliced into n
segments of equal volume by planes parallel to the plane
x+y+z=1. Where should the slices be made?
12. LetEbe the solid ellipsoid E={(x,y,z)|(x2/a2)+
(y2/b2)+(z2/c2)≤1}, where a>0,b>0,

<<<PAGE 375>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 348
348 The Change of Variables Formula and Applications of Integration
andc>0. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
xyzd xd yd z
(a) over the whole ellipsoid; and
(b) over that part of it in the ﬁrst quadrant:
x≥0,y≥0, and z≥0,x2
a2+y2
b2+z2
c2≤1.
13. Find the volume of the “ice cream cone” deﬁned by the
inequalities x2+y2≤1
5z2, and 0 ≤z≤
5+/radicalbig
5−x2−y2.
14. Letρ,θ,φbe spherical coordinates in R3and suppose
that a surface surrounding the origin is described by acontinuous positive function ρ=f(θ,φ). Show that the
volume enclosed by the surface is
V=1
3/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0[f(θ,φ)]3sinφdφdθ.
15. Using an appropriate change of variables, evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bexp [( y−x)/(y+x)]dx dy,
where Bis the interior of the triangle with vertices at
(0, 0), (0, 1), and (1, 0).
16. Suppose the density of a solid of radius Ris given by
(1+d3)−1, where dis the distance to the center of the
sphere. Find the total mass of the sphere.
17. The density of the material of a spherical shell whoseinner radius is 1 m and whose outer radius is2mi s0.4d
2g/cm3, where dis the distance to the center of the
sphere in meters. Find the total mass of the shell.
18. If the shell in Exercise 17 were dropped into a large tankof pure water, would it ﬂoat? What if the shell leaked?(Assume that the density of water is exactly 1 g/cm
3.)
19. The temperature at points in the cube C={(x,y,z)|−
1≤x≤1,−1≤y≤1, and −1≤z≤1}is 32d2,
where dis the distance to the origin.
(a) What is the average temperature?
(b) At what points of the cube is the temperature equal
to the average temperature?
20. Use cylindrical coordinates to ﬁnd the center of mass ofthe region deﬁned by
y
2+z2≤1
4,( x−1)2+y2+z2≤1, x≥1.21. Find the center of mass of the solid hemisphere
V={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2≤a2andz≥0},
if the density is constant.
22. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Be−x2−y2dx dy, where Bconsists of those
(x,y) satisfying x2+y2≤1 and y≤0.
23. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sdx dy dz
(x2+y2+z2)3/2,
where Sis the solid bounded by the spheres
x2+y2+z2=a2andx2+y2+z2=b2, where
a>b>0.
24. Evaluate/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x2+y2+z2)xyzd xd yd z over each of
the following regions.
(a)The sphere D={(x,y,z)|x2+y2+z2≤R2}
(b) The hemisphere D={(x,y,z)|x2+
y2+z2≤R2andz≥0}
(c) The octant D={(x,y,z)|x≥0,y≥0,z≥0,
andz2+y2+z2≤R2}
25. LetCbe the cone-shaped region
{(x,y,z)|/radicalbig
x2+y2≤z≤1}inR3and evaluate the
integral/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
C(1+/radicalbig
x2+y2)dx dy dz .
26. Find/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R3f(x,y,z)dx dy dz , where
f(x,y,z)=exp [−(x2+y2+z2)3/2].
27. Theﬂexural rigidity EI of a uniform beam is the product
of its Y oung’ s modulus of elasticity Eand the moment of
inertia Iof the cross section of the beam with respect to
a horizontal line lpassing through the center of gravity
of this cross section. Here
I=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R[d(x,y)]2dx dy,
where d(x,y)=the distance from ( x,y)t olandR=
the cross section of the beam being considered.
(a) Assume that the cross section Ris the rectangle
−1≤x≤1,−1≤y≤2, and lis the line y=1/2.
Find I.
(b) Assume the cross section Ris a circle of radius 4
andlis the xaxis. Find I, using polar coordinates.

<<<PAGE 376>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:20 349
Review Exercises for Chapter 6 349
28. Find,/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
R3f(x,y,z)dx dy dz , where
f(x,y,z)=1
[1+(x2+y2+z2)3/2]3/2.
29. Suppose Dis the unbounded region of R2given by the
set of ( x,y) with 0 ≤x<∞,0≤y≤x. Let
f(x,y)=x−3/2ey−x. Does the improper integral/integraltext/integraltext
Df(x,y)dx dy exist?
30. If the world were two-dimensional, the laws of physics
would predict that the gravitational potential of a masspoint is proportional to the logarithm of the distancefrom the point. Using polar coordinates, write an integralgiving the gravitational potential of a disk of constantdensity.
31. (a)Evaluate the improper integral
/integraldisplay∞
0/integraldisplayy
0xe−y3dx dy.(b) Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
B(x4+2x2y2+y4)dx dy,
where Bis the portion of the disk of radius 2
[centered at (0, 0) in the ﬁrst quadrant].
32. Letfbe a nonnegative function on an x-simple or a
y-simple region D⊂R2and that is continuous except
for points on the boundary of Dand at most ﬁnitely
many points interior to D. Give a suitable deﬁnition of/integraltext/integraltext
Dfd A.
33. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
R2f(x,y)dx dy, where f(x,y)=
1/(1+x2+y2)3/2.( H INT: Y ou may assume that
changing variables and Fubini’ s theorem are valid forimproper integrals.)

<<<PAGE 377>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 378>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 351
7
Integrals Over Paths
and Surfaces
I hold in fact: (1) That small portions of space are of a nature analogous to little hills on a
surface which is on the average flat. (2) That this property of being curved or distorted iscontinually passed on from one portion of space to another after the manner of a wave.(3) That this variation of curvature of space is really what happens in that phenomenonwhich we call the motion of matter whether ponderable or ethereal. (4) That in this physicalworld nothing else takes place but this variation, subject, possibly, to the law of continuity.
---W. K. Clifford (1870)
Everyone who is seriously involved in the pursuit of science becomes convinced that a spiritis manifest in the laws of the universe, one that is vastly superior to that of man.
---Albert Einstein
In Chapter 5 we studied integration over regions in R2and R3. In this
chapter we study integration over paths and surfaces. This is basic to an
understanding of Chapter 8, in which we discuss the basic relation be-tween vector differential calculus (Chapter 4) and vector integral calcu-lus (this chapter), a relation that generalizes the fundamental theoremof calculus to several variables. This generalization is summarized in thetheorems of Green, Gauss, and Stokes.
7.1The Path Integral
This section introduces the concept of a path integral; this is one of the several ways in
which integrals of functions of one variable can be generalized to functions of severalvariables. Besides those in Chapter 5, there are other generalizations, to be discussed inlater sections.
Suppose we are given a scalar function f:R
3→R, so that fsends points in R3to
real numbers. It will be useful to deﬁne the integral of such a function falong a path
351

<<<PAGE 379>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 352
352 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
c:I=[a,b]→R3, where c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)). To relate this notion to something
tangible, suppose that the image of crepresents a wire. We can let f(x,y,z) denote
the mass density at ( x,y,z) and the integral of fwill be the total mass of the wire.
By letting f(x,y,z) indicate temperature, we can also use the integral to determine
the average temperature along the wire. We ﬁrst give the formal deﬁnition of the path
integral and then, after the following example, further motivate it.
Deﬁnition Path Integrals The path integral, or the integral of f(x,y,z)
along the path c, is deﬁned when c:I=[a,b]→R3is of class C1and when
the composite function t/mapsto→f(x(t),y(t),z(t)) is continuous on I. We deﬁne this
integral by the equation
/integraldisplay
cfd s=/integraldisplayb
af(x(t),y(t),z(t))/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
Sometimes/integraltext
cfd sis denoted
/integraldisplay
cf(x,y,z)ds
or
/integraldisplayb
af(c(t))/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
Ifc(t) is only piecewise C1orf(c(t)) is piecewise continuous, we deﬁne/integraltext
cfd s by breaking [ a,b] into pieces over which f(c(t))/bardblc/prime(t)/bardblis continuous,
and summing the integrals over the pieces.
When f=1, we recover the deﬁnition of the arc length of c. Also note that fneed
only be deﬁned on the image curve Cofcand not necessarily on the whole space in
order for the preceding deﬁnition to make sense.
example 1 Letcbe the helix c: [0, 2π ]→R3,t/mapsto→(cost, sint,t) (see Figure 2.4.9), and let
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2. Evaluate the integral/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds.
solution First we compute /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl:
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=/radicalBigg/bracketleftbiggd(cost)
dt/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbiggd(sint)
dt/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbiggdt
dt/bracketrightbigg2
=/radicalbig
sin2t+cos2t+1=√
2.
Next, we substitute for x,y, and zin terms of tto obtain
f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2=cos2t+sin2t+t2=1+t2
along c. Inserting this information into the deﬁnition of the path integral yields
/integraldisplay
cf(x,y,z)ds=/integraldisplay2π
0(1+t2)√
2dt=√
2/bracketleftbigg
t+t3
3/bracketrightbigg2π
0=2√
2π
3(3+4π2).
▲

<<<PAGE 380>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 353
7.1 The Path Integral 353
ﬁgure 7.1.1 Breaking cinto
smaller ci.
a = t0 tN  = b t1t2 tic
c (t0)c (t1)c (ti)c (ti + 1)c(tN)
xyz
ti+ 1ci
To motivate the deﬁnition of the path integral, we shall consider “Riemann-like” sums
SNin the same general way we did to deﬁne arc length in Section 4.2. For simplicity,
letcbe of class C1onI. Subdivide the interval I=[a,b] by means of a partition
a=t0<t1<···<tN=b.
This leads to a decomposition of cinto paths ci(Figure 7.1.1) deﬁned on [t i,ti+1] for
0≤i≤N−1. Denote the arc length of ciby/Delta1si; thus,
/Delta1si=/integraldisplayti+1
ti/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
When Nis large, the arc length /Delta1siis small and f(x,y,z) is approximately constant
for points on ci. We consider the sums
SN=N−1/summationdisplay
i=0f(xi,yi,zi)/Delta1si,
where ( xi,yi,zi)=c(t) for some t∈[ti,ti+1]. By the mean-value theorem we know
that/Delta1si=/bardblc/prime(t∗
i)/bardbl/Delta1t i, where ti≤t∗
i≤ti+1and/Delta1ti=ti+1−ti.From the theory of
Riemann sums, it can be shown that
limit
N→∞SN=limit
N→∞N−1/summationdisplay
i=0f(xi,yi,zi)/bardblc/prime(t∗
i)/bardbl/Delta1t i=/integraldisplay
If(x(t),y(t),z(t))/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt
=/integraldisplay
cf(x,y,z)ds.
The Path Integral for Planar Curves
An important special case of the path integral occurs when the path cdescribes a plane
curve. Suppose that all points c(t) lie in the xyplane and fis a real-valued function of
two variables. The path integral of falong cis
/integraldisplay
cf(x,y)ds=/integraldisplayb
af(x(t),y(t))/radicalbig
x/prime(t)2+y/prime(t)2dt.

<<<PAGE 381>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 354
354 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
f(x(t), y(t))
c
(
t
)
=(x(t), y(t))
y
xz
ﬁgure 7.1.2 The path integral as the area of
a fence.
When f(x,y)≥0, this integral has a geometric interpretation as the “area of a fence.”
We can construct a “fence” with base the image of cand with height f(x,y)a t( x,y)
(Figure 7.1.2). If cmoves only once along the image of c, the integral/integraltext
cf(x,y)ds
represents the area of a side of this fence. Readers should try to justify this interpretation
for themselves, using an argument like the one used to justify the arc-length formula.
example 2 Tom Sawyer’ s aunt has asked him to whitewash both sides of the old fence shown in
Figure 7 .1.3. Tom estimates that for each 25 ft2of whitewashing he lets someone do for
him, the willing victim will pay 5 cents. How much can Tom hope to earn, assuming
his aunt will provide whitewash free of charge?
c:
 t     
 (30 cos
3
 t
, 30 si n
3t
t)
f
(
x
, 
y
)
=
1
+z
xy
3
y
ﬁgure 7.1.3 Tom Sawyer’s fence.
solution From Figure 7.1.3, the base of the fence in the ﬁrst quadrant is the path c: [0,π/2]→
R2,t/mapsto→(30 cos3t, 30 sin3t), and the height of the fence at ( x,y)i sf(x,y)=1+y/3.
The area of one side of the half of the fence is equal to the integral/integraltext
cf(x,y)ds=/integraltext
c(1+y/3)ds. Because c/prime(t)=(−90 cos2tsint, 90 sin2tcost), we have /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=
90 sin tcost. Thus, the integral is
/integraldisplay
c/parenleftbigg
1+y
3/parenrightbigg
ds=/integraldisplayπ/2
0/parenleftbigg
1+30 sin3t
3/parenrightbigg
90 sin tcostd t
=90/integraldisplayπ/2
0(sint+10 sin4t) cos td t
=90/bracketleftbiggsin2t
2+2 sin5t/bracketrightbiggπ/2
0=90/parenleftbigg1
2+2/parenrightbigg
=225,

<<<PAGE 382>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 355
7.1 The Path Integral 355
which is the area in the ﬁrst quadrant. Hence, the area of one side of the fence is 450 ft2.
Because both sides are to be whitewashed, we must multiply by 2 to ﬁnd the total area,
which is 900 ft2. Dividing by 25 and then multiplying by 5, we ﬁnd that Tom could
realize as much as $1.80 for the job. ▲
This concludes our study of integration of scalar functions over paths. In the next
section we shall turn our attention to the integration of vector ﬁelds over paths, and we
shall see many further applications of the path integral in Chapter 8, when we studyvector analysis.
Supplement to Section 7.1: The Total Curvature of a Curve
Exercises 16, 17, and 20–23 of Section 4.2 described the notions of curvature κand tor-
sionτof a smooth curve Cin space. If c:[a,b]→C⊂R3is a unit-speed parametrization
ofC, so that /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=1, then the curvature κ(p)a tp∈Cis deﬁned by κ(p)=/bardblc/prime/prime(t)/bardbl,
where p=c(t). A result of differential geometry is that two unit-speed curves with
the same curvature and torsion can be obtained from one another by a rigid rotation,translation, or reﬂection.
The curvature κ:C→Ris a real-valued function on the set C, so we deﬁne the
total curvature as its path integral over C:/integraltext
Cκds.There are some surprising facts that
mathematicians have been able to prove about the total curvature. For one thing, if Cis
a closed [that is, c(a)=c(b)] planar curve, then
/integraldisplay
Cκds≥2π
and equals 2π only when Cis a circle. If Cis a closed space curve with
/integraldisplay
Cκds≤4π,
thenCis “unknotted”; that is, Ccan be continuously deformed (without ever intersecting
itself ) into a planar circle. Therefore, for knotted curves,
/integraldisplay
Cκds>4π.
See Figure 7.1.4.
ﬁgure 7.1.4 A knotted curve in R3.

<<<PAGE 383>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 356
356 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
The formal statement of this fact is known as the Fary –Milnor theorem. Legend
has it that John Milnor, a contemporary of John Nash’ s1at Princeton University, was
asleep in a math class as the professor wrote three unsolved knot theory problems on the
blackboard. At the end of the class, Milnor (still an undergraduate) woke up and, thinking
the blackboard problems were assigned as homework, quickly wrote them down. Thefollowing week he turned in the solution to all three problems—one of which was a proofof the Fary–Milnor theorem! Some years later, he was appointed a professor at Princeton,and in 1962 he was awarded (albeit for other work) a Fields medal, mathematics’ highesthonor, generally regarded as the mathematical Nobel Prize.
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 4, ﬁnd an appropriate parametrization for the given piecewise-smooth curve in R2, with the implied
orientation.
1.The curve C, which goes along the circle of radius 3,
from the point (3, 0) to the point ( −3, 0), and then in a
straight line along the x-axis back to (3, 0)
2.The curve C, which goes along y=x2from the
point (0, 0) to the point (2, 4), then in a straight line
from (2, 4) to (0, 4), and then along the y-axis back
to (0, 0)3.The curve C, which goes along y=sinxfrom the point
(0, 0) to the point ( π, 0), and then along the x-axis back
to (0, 0)
4.The closed curve Cdescribed by the ellipse
(x−2)2
4+(y−3)2
9=1
oriented counterclockwise
In Exercises 5 to 8, ﬁnd an appropriate parametrization for the given piecewise-smooth curve in R3.
5.The intersection of the plane z=3 with the elliptical
cylinder
x2
9+y2
16=1
6.The triangle formed by traveling from the point (1, 2, 3)to (0,−2, 1), to (6, 4, 2), and back to (1, 2, 3)
7.The intersection of the surfaces y=xandz=x3, from
the point ( −3,−3, 9) to (2, 2, 4)
8.The intersection of the cylinder y2+z2=1 and the
plane z=x
9.Letf(x,y,z)=yandc(t)=(0, 0, t), 0≤t≤1.
Prove that/integraltext
cfd s=0.
10. Evaluate the following path integrals/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds,
where
(a) f(x,y,z)=x+y+zand
c:t/mapsto→(sint, cos t,t),t∈[0, 2π ](b) f(x,y,z)=cosz,cas in part (a)
11. Evaluate the following path integrals/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds,
where
(a) f(x,y,z)=exp√z, and
c:t/mapsto→(1, 2, t2),t∈[0, 1]
(b) f(x,y,z)=yz, and c:t/mapsto→(t,3t,2t),
t∈[1, 3]
12. Evaluate the integral of f(x,y,z) along the path c,
where
(a) f(x,y,z)=xcosz,c:t/mapsto→ti+t2j,t∈[0, 1]
(b) f(x,y,z)=(x+y)/(y+z), and
c:t/mapsto→/parenleftbig
t,2
3t3/2,t/parenrightbig
,t∈[1, 2]
13. Letf:R3\{xzplane}→R be deﬁned by
f(x,y,z)=1/y3. Evaluate/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds, where
c: [1, e]→R3is given by c(t)=(logt)i+tj+2k.
1John Nash is the subject of Sylvia Nasar’ s best-selling biography, A Beautiful Mind, a ﬁctionalized version of which was made into a movie
in 2001.

<<<PAGE 384>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 357
7.1 The Path Integral 357
14. (a)Show that the path integral of f(x,y) along a path
given in polar coordinates by r=r(θ),
θ1≤θ≤θ2,i s
/integraldisplayθ2
θ1f(rcosθ,rsinθ)/radicalbigg
r2+/parenleftBigdr
dθ/parenrightBig2
dθ.
(b) Compute the arc length of the path
r=1+cosθ,0≤θ≤2π.15. Letf(x,y)=2x−y, and consider the path
x=t4,y=t4,−1≤t≤1.
(a)Compute the integral of falong this path and
interpret the answer geometrically.
(b)Evaluate the arc-length function s(t) and redo
part (a) in terms of s(you may wish to consult
Exercise 2, Section 4.2).
Exercises 16 to 19 are concerned with the application of the path integral to the problem of deﬁning the average value of a
scalar function along a path. Deﬁne the number
/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds
l(c)
to be the average v alue of f along c. Here l (c)is the length of the path:
l(c)=/integraldisplay
c/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
(This is analogous to the average of a function over a region deﬁned in Section 6.3.)
16. (a) Justify the formula [/integraltext
cf(x,y,z)ds]/l(c) for the
average value of falong cusing Riemann sums.
(b) Show that the average value of falong cin
Example 1 is (1 +4
3π2).
(c) In Exercise 10(a) and (b) above, ﬁnd the average
value of fover the given curves.
17. Find the average ycoordinate of the points on the
semicircle parametrized by c: [0,π]→R3,
θ/mapsto→(0,asinθ,acosθ);a>0.
18. Suppose the semicircle in Exercise 17 is made of a wirewith a uniform density of 2 grams per unit length.
(a)What is the total mass of the wire?
(b)Where is the center of mass of this conﬁguration ofwire? (Consult Section 6.3.)
19. Letcbe the path given by c(t)=(t2,t, 3) for t∈[0, 1].
(a) Find l(c), the length of the path.
(b) Find the average ycoordinate along the path c.
20. Show that the path integral of a function f(x,y)o v e ra
path Cgiven by the graph of y=g(x),a≤x≤bis
given by:
/integraldisplay
Cfd s=/integraldisplayb
af(x,g(x))/radicalbig
1+[g/prime(x)]2dx
Conclude that if g:[a,b]→Ris piecewise
continuously differentiable, then the length of the graphofgon [a,b]i sg i v e nb y :
/integraldisplay
Cfd s=/integraldisplayb
a/radicalbig
1+g/prime(x)2dx.
21. Ifg:[a,b]→Ris piecewise continuously
differentiable, let the length of the graph ofgon [a,b]
be deﬁned as the length of the path t/mapsto→(t,g(t)) for
t∈[a,b]. Show that the length of the graph of gon
[a,b]i s
/integraldisplayb
a/radicalbig
1+[g/prime(x)]2dx.
22. Use Exercise 21 to ﬁnd the length of the graph of
y=logxfrom x=1t ox=2.
23. Use Exercise 20 to evaluate the path integral of
f(x,y)=yover the graph of the semicircle
y=√
1−x2,−1≤x≤1.
24. Compute the path integral of f(x,y)=y2over the
graph y=ex,0≤x≤1.
25. Compute the path integral of f(x,y,z)=xyzover the
path c(t)=(cost, sint,t), 0≤t≤π
2.
26. Find the mass of a wire formed by the intersection of thesphere x
2+y2+z2=1 and the plane x+y+z=0i f
the density at ( x,y,z) is given by ρ(x,y,z)=x2grams
per unit length of wire.

<<<PAGE 385>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 358
358 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
27. Evaluate/integraltext
cfd s, where f(x,y,z)=zand
c(t)=(tcost,tsint,t) for 0 ≤t≤t0.
28. Write the following limit as a path integral of
f(x,y,z)=xyover some path con [0, 1] and evaluate:
limit
N→∞N−1/summationdisplay
i=1t2
i/parenleftbig
t2
i+1−t2
i/parenrightbig
,
where t1,...,tNis a partition of [0, 1].
29. Consider paths that connect the points A=(0, 1) and
B=(1, 0) in the xyplane, as in Figure 7.1.5.2
xy
Circular path
Path(0,1)
(1,0)A
B
ﬁgure 7.1.5 A curve joining the points Aand B.Galileo contemplated the following question: Does a
bead falling under the inﬂuence of gravity from a point
Ato a point Balong a curve do so in the least possible
time if that curve is a circular arc? For any given path,
the time of transit Tis a path integral
T=/integraldisplaydt
v,
where the bead’ s velocity is v=√2gy, where gis the
gravitational constant. In 1697, Johann Bernoullichallenged the mathematical world to ﬁnd the path inwhich the bead would roll from AtoBin the least time.
This solution would determine whether Galileo’ sconsiderations had been correct.
(a) Calculate Tfor the straight-line path y=1−x.
(b) Write a formula for Tfor Galileo’ s circular path,
g i v e nb y( x−1)
2+(y−1)2=1.
Incidentally, Newton was the ﬁrst to send his solution[which turned out to be a cycloid—the same curve(inverted) that we studied in Section 2.4, Example 4],but he did so anonymously. Bernoulli was not fooled,however. When he received the solution, he immediatelyknew its author, exclaiming, “I know the Lion from hispaw.” While the solution of this problem is a cycloid, itis known in the literature as the brachistrochrone. This
was the beginning of the important ﬁeld called thecalculus of variations.
7.2Line Integrals
We now consider the problem of integrating a vector ﬁeld along a path. We will begin
by considering the notion of work to motivate the general deﬁnition.
Work Done by Force Fields
IfFis a force ﬁeld in space, then a test particle (for example, a small unit charge in an
electric force ﬁeld or a unit mass in a gravitational ﬁeld) will experience the force F.
Suppose the particle moves along the image of a path cwhile being acted upon by F.A
fundamental concept is the work done byFon the particle as it traces out the path c.I f
cis a straight-line displacement given by the vector dand if Fis a constant force, then
the work done by Fin moving the particle along the path is the dot product F·d:
F·d=(magnitude of force) ×(displacement in direction of force) .
If the path is curved, we can imagine that it is made up of a succession of inﬁnitesimal
straight-line displacements or that it is approximated by a ﬁnite number of straight-line
displacements. Then (as in our derivation of the formulas for the path integral in thepreceding section) we are led to the following formula for the work done by the force
2We thank Tanya Leise for suggesting this exercise.

<<<PAGE 386>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 359
7.2 Line Integrals 359
ﬁgure 7.2.1 For small
/Delta1t,/Delta1s=c(t+/Delta1t)−c(t)≈c/prime(t)/Delta1t.
a tt  + Δtb
xyz
c
c(t)c(t + Δt)
Δs = c(t + Δt) − c(t)c′(t)  Δt
c(a)c(b)
ﬁeld Fon a particle moving along a path c:[a,b]→R3:
work done by F=/integraldisplayb
aF(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt.
We can further justify this derivation as follows. As tranges over a small interval t
tot+/Delta1t, the particle moves from c(t)t oc(t+/Delta1t), a vector displacement of /Delta1s=
c(t+/Delta1t)−c(t) (see Figure 7.2.1).
From the deﬁnition of the derivative, we get the approximation /Delta1s≈c/prime(t)/Delta1t. The
work done in going from c(t)t oc(t+/Delta1t) is therefore approximately
F(c(t))·/Delta1s≈F(c(t))·c/prime(t)/Delta1t.
If we subdivide the interval [ a,b] into nequal parts a=t0<t1<···<tn=b, with
/Delta1t=ti+1−ti, then the work done by Fis approximately
n−1/summationdisplay
i=0F(c(ti))·/Delta1s≈n−1/summationdisplay
i=0F(c(ti))·c/prime(ti)/Delta1t.
Asn→∞ , this approximation becomes better and better, and so it is reasonable to
take as our deﬁnition of work to be the limit of the sum just given as n→∞ . This limit
is given by the integral
/integraldisplayb
aF(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt.
Deﬁnition of the Line Integral
The previous discussion of work motivates the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition Line Integrals LetFbe a vector ﬁeld on R3that is continuous on
theC1path c:[a,b]→R3. We deﬁne/integraltext
cF·ds, the line integral ofFalong c,b y
the formula/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplayb
aF(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt;
that is, we integrate the dot product of Fwith c/primeover the interval [ a,b].
As is the case with scalar functions, we can also deﬁne/integraltext
cF·dsifF(c(t))·c/prime(t)
is only piecewise continuous.

<<<PAGE 387>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 360
360 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
For paths cthat satisfy c/prime(t)/negationslash=0, there is another useful formula for the line integral:
namely, if T(t)=c/prime(t)//bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldenotes the unit tangent vector, we have
/integraldisplay
F·ds=/integraldisplayb
aF(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt (by deﬁnition)
=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg
F(c(t))·c/prime(t)
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl/bracketrightbigg
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt (canceling /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl) (1)
=/integraldisplayb
a[F(c(t))·T(t)]/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
This formula says that/integraltext
cF·dsis equal to something that looks like the path integral of
the tangential component F(c(t))·T(t)o fFalong c. In fact, the last part of formula (1)
is analogous to the path integral of a scalar function falong c.3
To compute a line integral in any particular case, we can either use the original deﬁ-
nition or integrate the tangential component of Falong c, as prescribed by formula (1),
whichever is easier or more appropriate.
example 1 Letc(t)=(sint, cos t,t) with 0 ≤t≤2π. Let the vector ﬁeld Fbe deﬁned by
F(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk. Compute/integraltext
cF·ds.
solution Here, F(c(t))=F(sin t, cos t,t)=(sint)i+(cost)j+tk, and c/prime(t)=(cos t)i−
(sint)j+k. Therefore,
F(c(t))·c/prime(t)=sintcost−costsint+t=t,
and so
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay2π
0td t=2π2.
▲
Another common way of writing line integrals is
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay
cF1dx+F2dy+F3dz,
where F1,F2, and F3are the components of the vector ﬁeld F. We call the expression
F1dx+F2dy+F3dzadifferential form.4Bydeﬁnition, the integral of a differential
form along a path c, where c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)), is
/integraldisplay
cF1dx+F2dy+F3dz=/integraldisplayb
a/parenleftbigg
F1dx
dt+F2dy
dt+F3dz
dt/parenrightbigg
dt=/integraldisplay
cF·ds.
Note that we may think of dsas the differential form ds=dxi+dyj+dzk. Thus,
the differential form F1dx+F2dy+F3dzmay be written as the dot product F·ds.
3Ifcdoes not intersect itself [that is, if c(t1)=c(t2) implies t1=t2], then each point P on C(the image
curve of c) can be written uniquely as c(t) for some t. If we deﬁne f(P)=f(c(t))=F(c)·T(t),fis
a function on C; by deﬁnition, its path integral along cis given by formula (1) and there is no difﬁculty
in literally interpreting/integraltext
cF·dsas a path integral. If cintersects itself, we cannot deﬁne fas a function
onCas before (why?); however, in this case it is still useful to think of the right side of formula (1) as
a path integral.
4See Section 8.5 for a brief discussion of the general theory of differential forms.

<<<PAGE 388>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 361
7.2 Line Integrals 361
example 2 Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
cx2dx+xy dy+dz,
where c: [0, 1] →R3is given by c(t)=(t,t2,1 )=(x(t),y(t),z(t)).
solution We compute dx/dt=1,dy/dt=2t,dz/dt=0; therefore,
/integraldisplay
cx2dx+xy dy+dz=/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg
[x(t)]2dx
dt+[x(t)y(t)]dy
dt/parenrightbigg
dt
=/integraldisplay1
0(t2+2t4)dt=/bracketleftbigg1
3t3+2
5t5/bracketrightbigg1
0=11
15.
▲
example 3 Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
ccoszd x+exdy+eydz,
where the path cis deﬁned by c(t)=(1,t,et) and 0 ≤t≤2.
solution We compute dx/dt=0,dy/dt=1,dz/dt=et, and so
/integraldisplay
ccoszd x+exdy+eydz=/integraldisplay2
0(0+e+e2t)dt
=/bracketleftbigg
et+1
2e2t/bracketrightbigg2
0=2e+1
2e4−1
2.
▲
example 4 Letcbe the path
x=cos3θ, y=sin3θ, z=θ,0 ≤θ≤7π
2
(see Figure 7.2.2). Evaluate the integral/integraltext
c(sinzd x+coszd y−(xy)1/3dz).
solution In this case, we have
dx
dθ=−3 cos2θsinθ,dy
dθ=3 sin2θcosθ,dz
dθ=1,
so the integral is
/integraldisplay
csinzd x+coszd y−(xy)1/3dz
=/integraldisplay7π/2
0(−3 cos2θsin2θ+3 sin2θcos2θ−cosθsinθ)dθ.
The ﬁrst two terms cancel, and so we get
−/integraldisplay7π/2
0cosθsinθdθ=−/bracketleftbigg1
2sin2θ/bracketrightbigg7π/2
0=−1
2.

<<<PAGE 389>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 362
362 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
xyz
ﬁgure 7.2.2 The image of the path
x=cos3θ,y=sin3θ,z=θ;0≤θ≤7π/2.
▲
example 5 Suppose Fis the force vector ﬁeld F(x,y,z)=x3i+yj+zk. Parametrize the circle
of radius ain the yzplane by letting c(θ) have components
x=0, y=acosθ, z=asinθ,0 ≤θ≤2π.
Because F(c(θ))·c/prime(θ)=0, the force ﬁeld Fis normal to the circle at every point on
the circle, so Fwill not do any work on a particle moving along the circle (Figure 7.2.3).
z
xy
FF
FF
ﬁgure 7.2.3 A vector ﬁeld Fnormal to a circle in the
yzplane.
We can verify by direct computation that the work done by Fis zero:
W=/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay
cx3dx+yd y+zd z
=/integraldisplay2π
0(0−a2cosθsinθ+a2cosθsinθ)dθ=0.
▲

<<<PAGE 390>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 363
7.2 Line Integrals 363
example 6 If we consider the ﬁeld and curve of Example 4, we see that the work done by the
ﬁeld is −1
2, a negative quantity. This means that the ﬁeld impedes movement along the
path. ▲
Reparametrizations
The line integral/integraltext
cF·dsdepends not only on the ﬁeld Fbut also on the path
c:[a,b]→R3. In general, if c1andc2are two different paths in R3,/integraltext
c1F·ds/negationslash=/integraltext
c2F·ds. On the other hand, we shall see that it is true that/integraltext
c1F·ds=±/integraltext
c2F·dsfor
every vector ﬁeld Fifc1is what we call a reparametrization ofc2; roughly speaking,
this means that c1andc2are different descriptions of the same geometric curve.
Deﬁnition Leth:I→I1be aC1real-valued function that is a one-to-one map
of an interval I=[a,b] onto another interval I1=[a1,b1]. Let c:I1→R3be a
piecewise C1path. Then we call the composition
p=c◦h:I→R3
areparametrization ofc.
This means that p(t)=c(h(t)), and so hchanges the variable; alternatively, we
can think of has changing the speed at which a point moves along the path. Indeed,
observe that p/prime(t)=c/prime(h(t))h/prime(t), so that the velocity vector for pequals that for cbut
is multiplied by the scalar factor h/prime(t).
It is implicit in the deﬁnition that hmust carry endpoints to endpoints; that is, either
h(a)=a1andh(b)=b1,o rh(a)=b1andh(b)=a1. We thus distinguish two types
of reparametrizations. If c◦his a reparametrization of c, then either
(c◦h)(a)=c(a1) and ( c◦h)(b)=c(b1)
or
(c◦h)(a)=c(b1) and ( c◦h)(b)=c(a1).
In the ﬁrst case, the reparametrization is said to be orientation-preserving, and a particle
tracing the path c◦hmoves in the same direction as a particle tracing c. In the second
case, the reparametrization is described as orientation-reversing, and a particle tracing
the path c◦hmoves in the opposite direction to that of a particle tracing c(Figure 7.2.4).
For example, if Cis the image of a path c, as shown in Figure 7.2.5—that is, C=
c([a1,b1])—and if his orientation-preserving, then c◦h(t) will go from c(a1)t oc(b1)
astgoes from atob; and if his orientation-reversing, c◦h(t) will go from c(b1)t o
c(a1)a stgoes from atob.
example 7 Letc:[a,b]→R3be a piecewise C1path. Then:
(a) The path cop:[a,b]→R3,t/mapsto→c(a+b−t), is a reparametrization of c
corresponding to the map h:[a,b]→[a,b],t/mapsto→a+b−t; we call copthe
opposite path toc. This reparametrization is orientation-reversing.
(b) The path p: [0, 1] →R3,t/mapsto→c(a+(b−a)t), is an orientation-preserving
reparametrization of ccorresponding to a change of coordinates
h: [0, 1] →[a,b],t/mapsto→a+(b−a)t.▲

<<<PAGE 391>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 364
364 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
ﬁgure 7.2.4 Illustrating (a) an
orientation-preserving
reparametrization, and (b) anorientation-reversingreparametrization.h
h h h hh
a a
a a b bb bb1
b1b1b1
a1
a1 a1a1
x xy y
Graph of h Graph of h
preserves orientation reverses orientation hh
(a) (a) (b)
ﬁgure 7.2.5 The path p=c◦his
a reparametrization of c.
ca1c()
xyz
t abCb1c()
c(h(t))
h
a1b1 h(t)ap() = bp() = 
tp()  = 
Theorem 1 Change of Parametrization for Line Integrals LetFbe a
vector ﬁeld continuous on the C1path c:[a1,b1]→R3, and let p:[a,b]→R3
be a reparametrization of c.I fp is orientation-preserving, then
/integraldisplay
pF·ds=/integraldisplay
cF·ds,
and if pis orientation-reversing, then
/integraldisplay
pF·ds=−/integraldisplay
cF·ds.

<<<PAGE 392>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 365
7.2 Line Integrals 365
proof By hypothesis, we have a map hsuch that p=c◦h. By the chain rule,
p/prime(t)=c/prime(h(t))h/prime(t),
and so
/integraldisplay
pF·ds=/integraldisplayb
a[F(c(h(t)))·c/prime(h(t))]h/prime(t)dt.
Changing variables with s=h(t), this becomes
/integraldisplayh(b)
h(a)F(c(s))·c/prime(s)ds
=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩/integraldisplay
b1
a1F(c(s))·c/prime(s)ds=/integraldisplay
cF·ds ifpis orientation-
preserving/integraldisplaya1
b1F(c(s))·c/prime(s)ds=−/integraldisplay
cF·ds ifpis orientation-
reversing. ■
Theorem 1 also holds for piecewise C1paths, as may be seen by breaking up the
intervals into segments on which the paths are of class C1and summing the integrals
over the separate intervals.
Thus, if it is convenient to reparametrize a path when evaluating an integral, Theo-
rem 1 assures us that the value of the integral will not be affected, except possibly for
the sign, depending on the orientation.
example 8 LetF(x,y,z)=yzi+xzj+xykandc:[−5, 10] →R3be deﬁned by t/mapsto→(t,t2,t3).
Evaluate/integraltext
cF·dsand/integraltext
copF·ds.
solution For the path c,w eh a v edx/dt =1,dy/dt=2t,dz/dt=3t2, and F(c(t))=t5i+t4j+t3k.
Therefore,
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay10
−5/parenleftbigg
F1dx
dt+F2dy
dt+F3dz
dt/parenrightbigg
dt
=/integraldisplay10
−5(t5+2t5+3t5)dt=[t6]10
−5=984,375.
On the other hand, for
cop:[−5, 10] →R3,t/mapsto→c(5−t)=(5−t,( 5−t)2,( 5−t)3),
we have dx/dt =− 1,dy/dt =− 10+2t=− 2(5−t),dz/dt=− 75+30t−3t2=
−3(5−t)2, and F(cop(t))=(5−t)5i+(5−t)4j+(5−t)3k. Therefore,
/integraldisplay
copF·ds=/integraldisplay10
−5[−(5−t)5−2(5−t)5−3(5−t)5]dt=[(5−t)6]10−5=−984, 375.
▲
We are interested in reparametrizations, because if the image of a particular ccan be
represented in many ways, we want to be sure that path and line integrals depend only
on the image curve and not on the particular parametrization. For example, for some

<<<PAGE 393>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 366
366 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
problems the unit circle may be conveniently represented by the map pgiven by
x(t)=cos 2t , y(t)=sin 2t ,0 ≤t≤π.
Theorem 1 guarantees that any integral computed for this representation will be the
same as when we represent the circle by the map cgiven by
x(t)=cost, y(t)=sint,0 ≤t≤2π,
because p=c◦h, where h(t)=2t, and thus pis an orientation-preserving repara-
metrization of c. However, notice that the map γgiven by
γ(t)=(cost, sint), 0 ≤t≤4π
isnota reparametrization of c. Although it traces out the same image (the circle), it
does so twice. (Why does this imply that γis not a reparametrization of c?)
The line integral is an oriented integral, in that a change of sign occurs (as we have
seen in Theorem 1) if the orientation of the curve is reversed. The path integral does not
have this property. This follows from the fact that changing tto−t(reversing orientation)
just changes the sign of c/prime(t), not its length. This is one of the differences between line
and path integrals. The following theorem, which is proved by the same method as inTheorem 1, shows that path integrals are unchanged under reparametrizations—evenorientation-reversing ones.
Theorem 2 Change of Parametrization for Path Integrals Letcbe
piecewise C1, let fbe a continuous (real-valued) function on the image of c, and
letpbe any reparametrization of c. Then
/integraldisplay
cf(x,y,z)ds=/integraldisplay
pf(x,y,z)ds. (2)
Line Integrals of Gradient Fields
We next consider a useful technique for evaluating certain types of line integrals. Recallthat a vector ﬁeld Fis agradient vector ﬁeld ifF=∇ ffor some real-valued function
f. Thus,
F=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj+∂f
∂zk.
Suppose gandGare real-valued continuous functions deﬁned on a closed interval
[a,b], that Gis differentiable on ( a,b), and that G/prime=g. Then by the fundamental
theorem of calculus
/integraldisplayb
ag(x)dx=G(b)−G(a).
Thus, the value of the integral of gdepends only on the value of Gat the endpoints
of the interval [ a,b]. Because ∇frepresents the derivative of f, we can ask whether

<<<PAGE 394>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 367
7.2 Line Integrals 367
/integraltext
c∇f·dsis completely determined by the value of fat the endpoints c(a) and c(b).
The answer is contained in the following generalization of the fundamental theorem of
calculus.
Theorem 3 Line Integrals of Gradient Vector Fields Suppose f:R3→R
is of class C1and that c:[a,b]→R3is a piecewise C1path. Then
/integraldisplay
c∇f·ds=f(c(b))−f(c(a)).
proof Apply the chain rule to the composite function
F:t/mapsto→f(c(t))
to obtain
F/prime(t)=(f◦c)/prime(t)=∇ f(c(t))·c/prime(t).
The function Fis a real-valued function of the variable t, and so, by the fundamental
theorem of single-variable calculus,
/integraldisplayb
aF/prime(t)dt=F(b)−F(a)=f(c(b))−f(c(a)).
Therefore,
/integraldisplay
c∇f·ds=/integraldisplayb
a∇f(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt=/integraldisplayb
aF/prime(t)dt=F(b)−F(a)
=f(c(b))−f(c(a)). ■
example 9 Letcbe the path c(t)=(t4/4, sin3(tπ/2), 0), t∈[0, 1]. Evaluate
/integraldisplay
cyd x+xd y
/parenleftbig
which means/integraltext
cyd x+xd y+0dz/parenrightbig
.
solution We recognize yd x+xd y, or, equivalently, the vector ﬁeld yi+xj+0k, as the gradient
of the function f(x,y,z)=xy. Thus,
/integraldisplay
cyd x+xd y=f(c(1))−f(c(0))=1
4·1−0=1
4.
▲
Obviously, if we can recognize the integrand as a gradient, then evaluation of the
integral becomes much easier. For example, try to work out the integral in Example 9
directly. In one-variable calculus, every integral is, in principle, obtainable by ﬁnding anantiderivative. For vector ﬁelds, however, this is not always true, because a given vectorﬁeld need not be a gradient. This point will be examined in detail in Section 8.3, where

<<<PAGE 395>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 368
368 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
ﬁgure 7.2.6 A simple curve that
has no self-intersections is shown
on the left. On the right is a curvewith a self-intersection, so it is notsimple.
a bcc(a)
c(b)b acc(a)
c(b)
Simple curve Not a simple curve
we derive a test to determine when a vector ﬁeld Fis a gradient; that is, when F=∇ f
for some f.
Line Integrals Over Geometric Curves
We have seen how to deﬁne path integrals (integrals of scalar functions) and line integrals
(integrals of vector functions) over parametrized curves. We have also seen that our workis simpliﬁed if we make a judicious choice of parametrization. Because these integralsare independent of the parametrization (except possibly for the sign), it seems naturalto express the theory in a way that is independent of the parametrization, and that isthereby more “geometric.” We do this brieﬂy and somewhat informally in the followingdiscussion.
Q
PQ
P
ﬁgure 7.2.7 There
are two possible
senses of directionon a curve joiningP and Q.Deﬁnition We deﬁne a simple curve Cto be the image of a piecewise C1map
c:I→R3that is one-to-one on an interval I;cis called a parametrization of
C. Thus, a simple curve is one that does not intersect itself (Figure 7.2.6). If
I=[a,b], we call c(a) and c(b)endpoints of the curve.
Each simple curve Chas two orientations or directions associated with it. If P
and Q are the endpoints of the curve, then we can consider Cas directed either
from P to Q or from Q to P. The simple curve Ctogether with a sense of direction
is called an oriented simple curve ordirected simple curve (Figure 7.2.7).
Deﬁnition Simple Closed Curves By a simple closed curve we mean the
image of a piecewise C1map c:[a,b]→R3that is one-to-one on [ a,b) and
satisﬁes c(a)=c(b) (Figure 7.2.8). If csatisﬁes the condition c(a)=c(b), but
is not necessarily one-to-one on [ a,b), we call its image a closed curve. Simple
closed curves have two orientations, corresponding to the two possible directions
of motion along the curve (Figure 7.2.9).
IfCis an oriented simple curve or an oriented simple closed curve, we can unam-
biguously deﬁne line integrals along them.
ﬁgure 7.2.8 A simple closed
curve (left) and a closed curve
that is not simple (right).
a bcc(a) = c(b)
a bcc(a) = c(b)

<<<PAGE 396>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 369
7.2 Line Integrals 369
C C
ﬁgure 7.2.9 Two possible orientations
for a simple closed curve C.
Line Integrals and Path Integrals Over Oriented Simple Curves
and Simple Closed Curves C:
/integraldisplay
CF·ds=/integraldisplay
cF·ds and/integraldisplay
Cfd s=/integraldisplay
cfd s, (3)
where cis any orientation-preserving parametrization of C.
These integrals do not depend on the choice of cas long as cis one-to-one (except
possibly at the endpoints) by virtue of Theorems 1 and 2.5The point we want to make
here is that, although a curve must be parametrized to make integration along it tractable,
it is not necessary to include the parametrization in our notation for the integral.
example 10 IfI=[a,b] is a closed interval on the xaxis, then I, as a curve, has two orientations:
one corresponding to motion from atob(left to right) and the other corresponding to
motion from btoa(right to left). If fis a real-valued function continuous on I, then
denoting Iwith the ﬁrst orientation by I+andIwith the second orientation by I−,w e
have
/integraldisplay
I+f(x)dx=/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx=−/integraldisplaya
bf(x)dx=−/integraldisplay
I−f(x)dx.
▲
A given simple closed curve can be parametrized in many different ways. Fig-
ure 7.2.10 shows Crepresented as the image of a map p, with p(t) progressing in
a prescribed direction around an oriented curve Castranges from atob. Note that
p/prime(t) points in this direction also. The speed with which we traverse Cmay vary from
parametrization to parametrization, but as long as the orientation is preserved, the inte-gral will not, according to Theorems 1 and 2.
The following precaution should be noted in regard to these remarks. It is possible
to have two mappings candpwith the same image, and inducing the same orientation
on the image, such that
/integraldisplay
cF·ds/negationslash=/integraldisplay
pF·ds.
5We have not proved that any two one-to-one paths candpwith the same image must be reparametriza-
tions of each other, but this technical point will be omitted.

<<<PAGE 397>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 370
370 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
p(a) = p(b)
a   t0t1t2t3pp(t1)Cp(t2)
p(t3)
p(t0) p′(t0)
bﬁgure 7.2.10 Astgoes from atob,
p(t)moves around the curve Cin
some ﬁxed direction.
For an example, let c(t)=(cost, sint, 0) and p(t)=(cos 2t , sin 2t ,0 ) ,0 ≤t≤2π,
with F(x,y,z)=(y, 0, 0). Then F1(x,y,z)=y,F2(x,y,z)=0, and F3(x,y,z)=0,
so
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay2π
0F1(c(t))dx
dtdt=−/integraldisplay2π
0sin2td t=−π.
But/integraltext
pF·ds=− 2/integraltext2π
0sin22td t=− 2π. Clearly, candphave the same image,
namely, the unit circle in the xyplane. Moreover, they traverse the unit circle in the same
direction; yet/integraltext
cF·ds/negationslash=/integraltext
pF·ds. The reason for this is that cis one-to-one, but pis
not (p traverses the unit circle twice in a counterclockwise direction); therefore, pis not
a parametrization of the unit circle as a simple closed curve.
As a consequence of Theorem 1 and generalizing the notation in Example 10, we
introduce the following convention:
Line Integrals Over Curves with Opposite Orientations LetC−be
the same curve as C, but with the opposite orientation. Then
/integraldisplay
CF·ds=−/integraldisplay
C−F·ds.
C1C2C3
ﬁgure 7.2.11 A curve can
be made up of several
components.We also have:
Line Integrals Over Curves Consisting of Several Components Let
Cbe an oriented curve that is made up of several oriented component curves
Ci,i=1,...,k, as in Figure 7.2.11. Then we shall write C=C1+C2+···+ Ck.
Because we can parametrize Cby parametrizing the pieces C1,...,Ckseparately,
we can prove that
/integraldisplay
CF·ds=/integraldisplay
C1F·ds+/integraldisplay
C2F·ds+···+/integraldisplay
CkF·ds. (4)
One reason for writing a curve as a sum of components is that it may be easier to
parametrize the components Ciindividually than it is to parametrize Cas a whole. If
that is the case, formula (4) provides a convenient way of evaluating/integraltext
CF·ds.

<<<PAGE 398>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 371
7.2 Line Integrals 371
ThedrNotation for Line Integrals
Sometimes one writes, as we occasionally do later, the line integral using the notation
/integraldisplay
CF·dr.
The reason is that we think of describing a C1path cin terms of a moving position
vector based at the origin and ending at the point c(t) at time t.Position vectors are
often denoted by r=xi+yj+zk, and so the curve is described using the notation
r(t)=x(t)i+y(t)j+z(t)kin place of c(t). By deﬁnition, the line integral is given by
/integraldisplayb
aF(r(t))·dr
dtdt.
Formally canceling the dt’ s, and using the parametrization independence to replace the
limits of integration with the geometric curve C, we arrive at the notation/integraltext
CF·dr.
example 11 Consider C, the perimeter of the unit square in R2, oriented in the counterclockwise
sense (see Figure 7.2.12). Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
Cx2dx+xy dy.
xy
C3(0, 1)
(0, 0) (1, 0)(1, 1)
C2
C1C4ﬁgure 7.2.12 The perimeter of the unit square,
parametrized in four pieces.
solution We evaluate the integral using a convenient parametrization of Cthat induces the given
orientation. For example:
c: [0, 4] →R2, t/mapsto→⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩(t,0 ) 0 ≤t≤1
(1,t−1) 1 ≤t≤2
(3−t,1 ) 2 ≤t≤3
(0, 4−t)3 ≤t≤4.
Then
/integraldisplay
Cx2dx+xy dy=/integraldisplay1
0(t2+0)dt+/integraldisplay2
1[0+(t−1)]dt
+/integraldisplay3
2[−(3−t)2+0]dt+/integraldisplay4
3(0+0)dt
=1
3+1
2+/parenleftbigg
−1
3/parenrightbigg
+0=1
2.

<<<PAGE 399>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 372
372 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Now let us reevaluate this line integral, using formula (4) and parametrizing the Ci
separately. Notice that C=C1+C2+C3+C4, where Ciare the oriented curves
pictured in Figure 7.2.12. These can be parametrized as follows:
C1:c1(t)=(t,0 ) ,0 ≤t≤1
C2:c2(t)=(1,t), 0≤t≤1
C3:c3(t)=(1−t,1 ) ,0 ≤t≤1
C4:c4(t)=(0, 1−t), 0≤t≤1,
and so
/integraldisplay
C1x2dx+xy dy=/integraldisplay1
0t2dt=1
3
/integraldisplay
C2x2dx+xy dy=/integraldisplay1
0td t=1
2
/integraldisplay
C3x2dx+xy dy=/integraldisplay1
0−(1−t)2dt=−1
3
/integraldisplay
C4x2dx+xy dy=/integraldisplay1
00dt=0.
Thus, again,
/integraldisplay
Cx2dx+xy dy=1
3+1
2−1
3+0=1
2.
▲
example 12 An interesting application of the line integral is the mathematical formulation of Amp` ere’ s
law, which relates electric currents to their magnetic effects.6Suppose Hdenotes a mag-
netic ﬁeld in R3, and let Cbe a closed oriented curve in R3. In appropriate physical
units, Amp` ere’ s law states that
/integraldisplay
CH·ds=I,
where Iis the net current that passes through any surface bounded by C(see
Figure 7.2.13).
CH
Current Iﬁgure 7.2.13 The magnetic ﬁeld H
surrounding a wire carrying a current I
satisﬁes Ampére’s law:/integraltext
CH·ds=I.
▲
6The discovery that electric currents produce magnetic effects was made by Haas Christian Oersted
circa 1820. See any elementary physics text for discussions of the physical basis of these ideas.

<<<PAGE 400>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 373
7.2 Line Integrals 373
Finally, let us mention that the line integral has another important physical meaning,
speciﬁcally, the interpretation of/integraltext
CV·dsascirculation, where Vis the velocity ﬁeld
of a ﬂuid, as we shall discuss in Section 8.2. Thus, a wide variety of physical concepts,
from the notion of work to electromagnetic ﬁelds and the motions of ﬂuids, can beanalyzed with the help of line integrals.
exercises
1.Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
CF·ds,
where F(x,y)=y2i−xyjandCis the part of the circle
x2+y2=1 that starts at (1, 0) and ends at (0, 1),
oriented counterclockwise.
2.Repeat Problem 1 for F=y2i+2xyj, where Cis the
entire unit circle x2+y2=1.
3.LetF(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk. Evaluate the integral of F
along each of the following paths:
(a)c(t)=(t,t,t), 0 ≤t≤1
(b)c(t)=(cost, sint,0 ) , 0 ≤t≤2π
(c)c(t)=(sint,0 ,c o s t), 0 ≤t≤2π
(d)c(t)=(t2,3t,2t3),−1≤t≤2
4.Evaluate each of the following line integrals:
(a)/integraltext
cxd y−yd x, c(t)=(cost, sint),
0≤t≤2π
(b)/integraltext
cxd x+yd y, c(t)=(cosπt, sinπt),
0≤t≤2
(c)/integraltext
cyz dx+xzdy+xy dz , where cconsists of
straight-line segments joining (1, 0, 0) to (0, 1, 0) to
( 0 ,0 ,1 )
(d)/integraltext
cx2dx−xy dy+dz, where cis the parabola
z=x2,y=0 from ( −1, 0, 1) to (1, 0, 1).
5.Consider the force ﬁeld F(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk.
Compute the work done in moving a particle along theparabola y=x
2,z=0, from x=−1t ox=2.
6.Letcbe a smooth path.
(a)Suppose Fis perpendicular to c/prime(t) at the point c(t).
Show that
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=0.(b)IfFis parallel to c/prime(t)a tc(t), show that
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay
c/bardblF/bardblds.
[By parallel to c/prime(t) we mean that
F(c(t))=λ(t)c/prime(t), where λ(t)>0.]
7.Suppose the path chas length l, and/bardblF/bardbl≤ M. Prove
that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay
cF·ds/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
≤Ml.
8.Evaluate/integraltext
cF·ds, where F(x,y,z)=yi+2xj+yk
and the path cis deﬁned by c(t)=ti+t2j+t3k,
0≤t≤1.
9.Evaluate
/integraldisplay
cyd x+(3y3−x)dy+zd z
for each of the paths c(t)=(t,tn,0 ) ,0 ≤t≤1, where
n=1, 2, 3, ....
10. This exercise refers to Example 12. Let Lbe a very long
wire, a planar section of which (with the plane
perpendicular to the wire) is shown in Figure 7.2.14.
r
xy
C(x, y)H
T
ﬁgure 7.2.14 A planar section of a long wire
and a curve Cabout the wire.

<<<PAGE 401>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 374
374 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Suppose this plane is the xyplane. Experiments show
thatHis tangent to every circle in the xyplane whose
center is the axis of L, and that the magnitude of His
constant on every such circle C. Thus, H=HT, where
Tis a unit tangent vector to CandHis some scalar.
Using this information, show that H=I/2πr, where r
is the radius of circle CandIis the current ﬂowing in
the wire.
11. The image of the path t/mapsto→(cos3t, sin3t), 0≤t≤2π
in the plane is shown in Figure 7.2.15. Evaluate the
integral of the vector ﬁeld F(x,y)=xi+yjaround this
curve.
(0, 1) = cπ
2()
3( )1
2,
21
22
(0, −1) = cπ
2()(−1, 0) = c(π) (1, 0) = c(0) = c(2π)xy
ﬁgure 7.2.15 The hypocycloid c(t)=( cos3t,sin3t)
(Exercise 11).
12. Suppose c1andc2are two paths with the same endpoints
andFis a vector ﬁeld. Show that/integraltext
c1F·ds=/integraltext
c2F·ds
is equivalent to/integraltext
cF·ds=0, where Cis the closed
curve obtained by ﬁrst moving along c1and then moving
along c2in the opposite direction.
13. Letc(t) be a path and Tthe unit tangent vector. What is/integraltext
cT·ds?
14. LetF=(z3+2xy)i+x2j+3xz2k. Show that the
integral of Faround the circumference of the unit square
with vertices ( ±1,±1) is zero.
15. Using the path in Exercise 11, observe that a C1map
c:[a,b]→R3can have an image that does not “look
smooth.” Do you think this could happen if c/prime(t) were
always nonzero?
16. What is the value of the integral of a gradient ﬁeld
around a closed curve C?17. Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
C2xyz dx +x2zd y+x2yd z,
where Cis an oriented simple curve connecting (1, 1, 1)
t o( 1 ,2 ,4 ) .
18. Suppose ∇f(x,y,z)=2xyzex2i+zex2j+yex2k.I f
f( 0 ,0 ,0 ) =5, ﬁnd f( 1 ,1 ,2 ) .
19. Consider the gravitational force ﬁeld (with
G=m=M=1) deﬁned [for ( x,y,z)/negationslash=( 0 ,0 ,0 ) ]b y
F(x,y,z)=−1
(x2+y2+z2)3/2(xi+yj+zk).
Show that the work done by the gravitational force as a
particle moves from ( x1,y1,z1)t o( x2,y2,z2) along any
path depends only on the radii R1=/radicalbig
x2
1+y2
1+z2
1
andR2=/radicalbig
x2
2+y2
2+z2
2.
20. A cyclist rides up a mountain along the path shown in
Figure 7.2.16. She makes one complete revolution
around the mountain in reaching the top, while her
vertical rate of climb is constant. Throughout the trip she
exerts a force described by the vector ﬁeld
F(x,y,z)=yi+xj+k.
What is the work done by the cyclist in traveling from
A to B? What is unrealistic about this model of a cyclist?
x2+y2+z 
ABz
xy
ﬁgure 7.2.16 How much work is done in
cycling up this mountain?
21. Letc:[a,b]→R3be a path such that c/prime(t)/negationslash=0. Recall
from Section 4.1 that when this condition holds, cis said
to be regular . Let the function fbe deﬁned by the
formula f(x)=/integraltextx
a/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt.
(a) What is df/dx?
(b) Using the answer to part (a), prove that
f:[a,b]→[0,L], where Lis the length of c, has a

<<<PAGE 402>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 375
7.3 Parametrized Surfaces 375
differentiable inverse g: [0, L]→[a,b] satisfying
f◦g(s)=s,g◦f(x)=x. (Y ou may use the
one-variable inverse function theorem stated at the
beginning of Section 3.5.)
(c) Compute dg/ds.
(d) Recall that a path s/mapsto→b(s) is said to be of unit
speed, or parametrized by arc length, if /bardblb/prime(s)/bardbl=1.
Show that the reparametrization of cgiven by
b(s)=c◦g(s) is of unit speed. Conclude that any
regular path can be reparametrized by arc length.(Thus, for example, the Frenet formulas in Exercise23 of Section 4.2 can be applied to thereparametrization b.)
22. Along a “thermodynamic path” Cin (V,T,P) space,
(i) The heat gained is/integraltext
C/Lambda1VdV+KVdT, where
/Lambda1V,KVare functions of ( V,T,P), depending on
the particular physical system.
(ii) The work done is/integraltext
CPd V .
For a van der Waals gas, we have
P(V,T)=RT
V−b−a
V2, J/Lambda1V=RT
V−b,
and KV=constant,
where R,b,a, and Jare known constants. Initially, the
gas is at a temperature T0and volume V0.(a) An adiabatic process is a thermodynamic motion
(V(t),T(t),P(t)) for which
dT
dV=dT/dt
dV/dt=−/Lambda1V
KV.
If the van der Waals gas undergoes an adiabaticprocess in which the volume doubles to 2 V
0,
compute
(1) the heat gained;
(2) the work done; and(3) the ﬁnal volume, temperature, and pressure.
(b) After the process indicated in part (a), the gas is
cooled (or heated) at constant volume until the
original temperature T
0is achieved. Compute
(1) the heat gained;
(2) the work done; and(3) the ﬁnal volume, temperature, and pressure.
(c) After the process indicated in part (b), the gas is
compressed until the gas returns to its original
volume V
0. The temperature is held constant
throughout the process. Compute
(1) the heat gained;
(2) the work done; and(3) the ﬁnal volume, temperature, and pressure.
(d) For the cyclic process described in parts (a), (b), (c),
compute
(1) the total heat gained; and
(2) the total work done.
7.3Parametrized Surfaces
In Sections 7.1 and 7.2, we studied integrals of scalar and vector functions along curves.
Now we turn to integrals over surfaces and begin by studying the geometry of surfacesthemselves.
Graphs Are Too Restrictive
We are already used to one kind of surface, namely, the graph of a function f(x,y).
Graphs were extensively studied in Chapter 2, and we know how to compute theirtangent planes. However, it would be unduly limiting to restrict ourselves to this case.For example, many surfaces arise as level surfaces of functions. Suppose our surface
Sis the set of points ( x,y,z), where x−z+z
3=0. Here Sis a sheet that (relative
to the xyplane) doubles back on itself (see Figure 7.3.1). Obviously, we want to call
Sa surface, because it is just a plane with a wrinkle. However, Sisnotthe graph
of some function z=f(x,y), because this means that for each ( x0,y0)∈R2there
must be one z 0with ( x0,y0,z0)∈S. As Figure 7.3.1 illustrates, this condition is
violated.
Another example is the torus, or surface of a doughnut, which is depicted in Fig-
ure 7.3.2. Anyone would call a torus a surface; yet, by the same reasoning as before, a

<<<PAGE 403>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 376
376 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
y
(
x
0
,
y
0
, 0)
x
z
ﬁgure 7.3.1 A surface that is not
the graph of a function z=f(x,y).
z
y
x
ﬁgure 7.3.2 The torus is not the graph of a function
of the form z=f(x,y).
torus cannot be the graph of a differentiable function of two variables. These observa-
tions encourage us to extend our deﬁnition of a surface.
The motivation for the extended deﬁnition that follows is partly that a surface can
be thought of as being obtained from the plane by “rolling,” “bending,” and “pushing.”
For example, to get a torus, we take a portion of the plane and roll it (see Figure 7.3.3),
then take the two “ends” and bring them together until they meet (Figure 7.3.4).
Parametrized Surfaces as Mappings
In our study of differential calculus we dealt with mappings f:A⊂Rn→Rm. Taking
n=2 and m=3 corresponds to the case of a two-dimensional surface in 3-space. With
surfaces, just as with curves, we want to distinguish a map (a parametrization) from its
image (a geometric object). This leads us to the following deﬁnition.
ﬁgure 7.3.3 The ﬁrst step in
obtaining a torus from a
rectangle is to make a cylinder.
ﬁgure 7.3.4 Bend the cylinder
and glue the ends to get a torus.
Ends glued

<<<PAGE 404>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 377
7.3 Parametrized Surfaces 377
ﬁgure 7.3.5 /Phi1“twists” and
“bends” Donto the surface
S=/Phi1(D).
S =Φ(D(()Φz
y
xv
u
S
Φ
(
D
(
)
D
Deﬁnition Parametrized Surfaces Aparametrization of a surface is a func-
tion/Phi1:D⊂R2→R3, where Dis some domain in R2. The surface Scorre-
sponding to the function /Phi1is its image: S=/Phi1(D). We can write
/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)).
If/Phi1is differentiable or is of class C1[which is the same as saying that x(u,v),
y(u,v), and z(u,v) are differentiable or C1functions of ( u,v)], we call Sa
differentiable or a C1surface .
We can think of /Phi1as twisting or bending the region Din the plane to yield the
surface S(see Figure 7.3.5). Thus, each point ( u,v)i nDbecomes a label for a point
(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)) on S.
Of course, surfaces need not bend or twist at all. In fact, planes are ﬂat, as shown in
our ﬁrst, and simplest, example.
example 1 In Section 1.3 we studied the equation of a plane P.We did so in terms of graphs and
level sets. Now we examine the same notion using a parametrization.
LetPbe a plane that is parallel to two vectors αandβand that passes through the
tip of another vector γ, as in Figure 7.3.6.
γγb
a
xyz
(x0, y0, z0)
ﬁgure 7.3.6 Describing a plane parametrically.

<<<PAGE 405>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 378
378 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Our goal in this example is to ﬁnd a parametrization of this plane. Notice that the vector
α×β=N, which we also write as Ai+Bj+Ck, is normal to P. If the tip of γis the
point ( x0,y0,z0), then the equation of Pas a level set (as discussed in Section 1.3) is
given by:
A(x−x0)+B(y−y0)+C(z−z0)=0.
However, the set of all points on the plane Pcan also be described by the set of all
vectors that are γplus a linear combination of αandβ. Using our preferred choice of
real parameters uandv,w ea r r i v ea tt h e parametric equation of the plane P:
/Phi1(u,v)=αu+βv+γ.▲
Tangent Vectors to Parametrized Surfaces
Suppose that /Phi1is a parametrized surface that is differentiable at ( u0,v0)∈R2. Fixing
uatu0, we get a map R→R3given by t/mapsto→/Phi1(u0,t), whose image is a curve on the
surface (Figure 7.3.7). From Chapters 2 and 4 we know that the vector tangent to this
curve at the point /Phi1(u0,v0), which we denote by Tv,i sg i v e nb y
Tv=∂/Phi1
∂v=∂x
∂v(u0,v0)i+∂y
∂v(u0,v0)j+∂z
∂v(u0,v0)k.
Similarly, if we ﬁx vand consider the curve t/mapsto→/Phi1(t,v0), we obtain the tangent vector
to this curve at /Phi1(u0,v0), given by
Tu=∂/Phi1
∂u=∂x
∂u(u0,v0)i+∂y
∂u(u0,v0)j+∂z
∂u(u0,v0)k.
Regular Surfaces
Because the vectors TuandTvare tangent to two curves on the surface at a given point,
the vector Tu×Tvought to be normal to the surface at the same point.
We say that the surface Sisregular orsmooth7at/Phi1(u0,v0), provided that
Tu×Tv/negationslash=0at (u0,v0). The surface is called regular if it is regular at all points
/Phi1(u0,v0)∈S.The nonzero vector Tu×Tvisnormal toS(recall that the vector product
ﬁgure 7.3.7 The tangent vectors
TuandTvthat are tangent to the
curve on a surface S, and hence
tangent to S.
(u0, v0)Tv
u =consta
antv =constan t
z
y
xv
u
DS = Φ(D)
Φ(u0, v0) Φ
Tu
7Strictly speaking, regularity depends on the parametrization /Phi1and not just on its image S.Therefore,
this terminology is somewhat imprecise; however, it is descriptive and should not cause confusion. (See
Exercise 19.)

<<<PAGE 406>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 379
7.3 Parametrized Surfaces 379
ofTuandTvis perpendicular to the plane spanned by TuandTv); the fact that it is
nonzero ensures that there will be a tangent plane. Intuitively, a smooth surface has no
“corners.”8
xy
z
ﬁgure 7.3.8 The surface
z=/radicalbig
x2+y2is a cone. It is not
regular at its tip.example 2 Consider the surface given by the equations
x=ucosv, y=usinv, z=u, u≥0.
Is this surface differentiable? Is it regular?
solution These equations describe the surface z=/radicalbig
x2+y2(square the equations for x,y, and
zto check this), which is shown in Figure 7.3.8. This surface is a cone with a “point” at
(0, 0, 0); it is a differentiable surface because each component function is differentiable
as a function of uandv. However, the surface is not regular at (0, 0, 0). To see this,
compute TuandTvat (0, 0) ∈R2:
Tu=∂/Phi1
∂u=∂x
∂u(0, 0) i+∂y
∂u(0, 0) j+∂z
∂u(0, 0) k=(cos 0) i+(sin 0) j+k=i+k,
and similarly,
Tv=∂/Phi1
∂v=0(−sin 0) i+0(cos 0) j+0k=0.
Thus, Tu×Tv=0, and so, by deﬁnition, the surface is not regular at (0, 0, 0). ▲
Tangent Plane to a Parametrized Surface
We can use the fact that n=Tu×Tvis normal to the surface to both formally deﬁne
the tangent plane and to compute it.
Deﬁnition The Tangent Plane to a Surface If a parametrized surface
/Phi1:D⊂R2→R3isregular at/Phi1(u0,v0)—that is, if Tu×Tv/negationslash=0at (u0,v0)—we
deﬁne the tangent plane of the surface at /Phi1(u0,v0) to be the plane determined by
the vectors TuandTv. Thus, n=Tu×Tvis a normal vector, and an equation of
the tangent plane at ( x0,y0,z0) on the surface is given by
(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0)·n=0, (1)
where nis evaluated at ( u0,v0); that is, the tangent plane is the set of ( x,y,z)
satisfying (1). If n=(n1,n2,n3)=n1i+n2j+n3k, then formula (1) becomes
n1(x−x0)+n2(y−y0)+n3(z−z0)=0. (1/prime)
8In Section 3.5 we showed that level surfaces f(x,y,z)=0 were in fact graphs of functions of two
variables in some neighborhood of a point ( x0,y0,z0) satisfying ∇f(x0,y0,z0)/negationslash=0. This united two
concepts of a surface—graphs and level sets. Again, using the implicit function theorem, it is likewise
possible to show that the image of a parametrized surface /Phi1in the neighborhood of a point ( u0,v0)
where Tu×Tv/negationslash=0is also the graph of a function of two variables. Thus, all deﬁnitions of a surface
are consistent. (See Exercise 20.)

<<<PAGE 407>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 380
380 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
example 3 Let/Phi1:R2→R3be given by
x=ucosv, y=usinv, z=u2+v2.
Where does a tangent plane exist? Find the tangent plane at /Phi1(1, 0).
solution We compute
Tu=(cosv)i+(sinv)j+2uk and Tv=−u(sinv)i+u(cosv)j+2vk,
so the tangent plane at the point /Phi1(u0,v0) is the set of vectors through /Phi1(u0,v0)
perpendicular to
(Tu×Tv)(u 0,v0)=/parenleftbig
−2u2
0cosv0+2v0sinv0,−2u20sinv0−2v0cosv0,u0/parenrightbig
if this vector is nonzero. Because Tu×Tvis equal to 0at (u0,v0)=(0, 0), we cannot
ﬁnd a tangent plane at /Phi1(0, 0) =(0, 0, 0). However, we can ﬁnd an equation of the
tangent plane at all the other points, where Tu×Tv/negationslash=0. At the point /Phi1(1, 0) =( 1 ,0 ,1 ) ,
n=(Tu×Tv)(1, 0) =(−2, 0, 1) =−2i+k.
Because we have the vector nnormal to the surface and a point (1, 0, 1) on the surface,
we can use formula (1/prime) to obtain an equation of the tangent plane:
−2(x−1)+(z−1)=0; that is, z=2x−1. ▲
example 4 Suppose a surface Sis the graph of a differentiable function g:R2→R. Write Sin para-
metric form and show that the surface is smooth at all points ( u0,v0,g(u0,v0))∈R3.
solution Write Sin parametric form as follows:
x=u, y=v, z=g(u,v),
which is the same as z=g(x,y). Then at the point ( u0,v0),
Tu=i+∂g
∂u(u0,v0)k and Tv=j+∂g
∂v(u0,v0)k,
and for ( u0,v0)∈R2,
n=Tu×Tv=−∂g
∂u(u0,v0)i−∂g
∂v(u0,v0)j+k/negationslash=0. (2)
This is nonzero because the coefﬁcient of kis 1; consequently, the parametrization
(u,v)/mapsto→(u,v,g(u,v)) is regular at all points. Moreover, the tangent plane at the point
(x0,y0,z0)=(u0,v0,g(u0,v0)) is given, by formula (1), as
(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0)·/parenleftbigg
−∂g
∂u,−∂g
∂v,1/parenrightbigg
=0,
where the partial derivatives are evaluated at ( u0,v0). Remembering that x=uand
y=v, we can write this as
z−z0=/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg
(x−x0)+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg
(y−y0), (3)
where ∂g/∂xand∂g/∂yare evaluated at ( x0,y0). ▲
This example also shows that the deﬁnition of the tangent plane for parametrized
surfaces agrees with the one for surfaces obtained as graphs, because equation (3) is

<<<PAGE 408>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 381
7.3 Parametrized Surfaces 381
the same formula we derived (in Chapter 2) for the plane tangent to Sat the point
(x0,y0,z0)∈S.
It is also useful to consider piecewise smooth surfaces, that is, surfaces composed of
a certain number of images of smooth parametrized surfaces. For example, the surface
of a cube in R3is such a surface. These surfaces are considered in Section 7.4.
example 5 Find a parametrization for the hyperboloid of one sheet:
x2+y2−z2=1.
solution Because xand yappear in the combination x2+y2, the surface is invariant under
rotation about the zaxis, and so it is natural to write
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ.
Then x2+y2−z2=1 becomes r2−z2=1. This we can conveniently parametrize by9
r=cosh u, z=sinh u.
Thus, a parametrization is
x=(cosh u)(cosθ), y=(cosh u)(sinθ), z=sinh u,
where 0 ≤θ<2π,−∞<u<∞. ▲
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 3, ﬁnd an equation for the plane tangent to the given surface at the speciﬁed point.
1.x=2u, y=u2+v, z=v2, at( 0 ,1 ,1 )
2.x=u2−v2, y=u+v, z=u2+4v,
at(−1
4,1
2,2 )3.x=u2, y=usinev, z=1
3ucosev,
at(13,−2, 1)
4.At what points are the surfaces in Exercises 1 and 2
regular?
In Exercises 5 and 6, ﬁnd all points (u0,v0), where S =/Phi1(u0,v0)isnotsmooth (regular).
5./Phi1(u,v)=(u2−v2,u2+v2,v)
6./Phi1(u,v)=(u−v,u+v,2uv)
7.Match the following parameterizations to the surfacesshown in the ﬁgures.
(a)/Phi1(u,v)=((2√
1+u2) cosv,( 2√
1+u2) sinv,u)
(b)/Phi1(u,v)=(3 cos usinv, 2 sin usinv, cosv)
(c)/Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,u2)
(d)/Phi1(u,v)=(ucosv,usinv,u)
9Recall from one-variable calculus that cosh u=(eu+e−u)/2 and sinh u=(eu−e−u)/2. We easily verify from these deﬁnitions that
cosh2u−sinh2u=1.

<<<PAGE 409>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 382
382 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
(i) (ii)yz
xyz
xyz
xyz
x
(iii) (iv)
8.Match the following parametrizations to the surfaces
shown in the ﬁgures.
(a)/Phi1(u,v)=(ucosv,usinv,4−ucosv−usinv);
u∈[0, 1], v∈[0, 2π]
(b)/Phi1(u,v)=(ucosv,usinv,4−u2)
(c)/Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,1
3(12−8u−3v))
(d)/Phi1(u,v)=((u2+6u+11) cos v,
u,(u2+6u+11) sin v)
(i) (ii)yz
xyzxyz
xyzx
(iii) (iv)
9.Find an expression for a unit vector normal to the surface
x=cosvsinu, y=sinvsinu, z=cosu
at the image of a point ( u,v) for uin [0,π] andvin
[0, 2π]. Identify this surface.
10. Repeat Exercise 9 for the surface
x=3 cosθsinφ, y=2 sinθsinφ, z=cosφ
forθin [0, 2 π] andφin [0,π].
11. Repeat Exercise 9 for the surface
x=sinv, y=u, z=cosv
for 0≤v≤2πand−1≤u≤3.
12. Repeat Exercise 9 for the surface
x=(2−cosv) cos u,y=(2−cosv) sinu,z=sinv
for−π≤u≤π,−π≤v≤π. Is this surface regular?
13. (a)Develop a formula for the plane tangent to the
surface x=h(y,z).
(b) Obtain a similar formula for y=k(x,z).
14. Find the equation of the plane tangent to the surface
x=u2,y=v2,z=u2+v2at the point u=1,v=1.
15. Find a parametrization of the surface z=3x2+8xyand
use it to ﬁnd the tangent plane at x=1,y=0,z=3.
Compare your answer with that using graphs.
16. Find a parametrization of the surface
x3+3xy+z2=2,z>0, and use it to ﬁnd the tangent
plane at the point x=1,y=1/3,z=0. Compare your
answer with that using level sets.
17. Consider the surface in R3parametrized by
/Phi1(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ,θ), 0 ≤r≤1
and 0 ≤θ≤4π.
(a)Sketch and describe the surface.
(b)Find an expression for a unit normal to the surface.
(c)Find an equation for the plane tangent to the surface
at the point ( x0,y0,z0).
(d) If ( x0,y0,z0) is a point on the surface, show that the
horizontal line segment of unit length from the z
axis through ( x0,y0,z0) is contained in the surface
and in the plane tangent to the surface at
(x0,y0,z0).

<<<PAGE 410>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 383
7.4 Area of a Surface 383
18. Given a sphere of radius 2 centered at the origin, ﬁnd the
equation for the plane that is tangent to it at the point(1, 1,√
2) by considering the sphere as:
(a) a surface parametrized by
/Phi1(θ,φ)=(2 cos θsinφ, 2 sin θsinφ, 2 cos φ);
(b) a level surface of f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2; and
(c) the graph of g(x,y)=/radicalbig
4−x2−y2.
19. (a) Find a parametrization for the hyperboloid
x2+y2−z2=25.
(b) Find an expression for a unit normal to this surface.
(c) Find an equation for the plane tangent to the surface
at (x0,y0, 0), where x2
0+y2
0=25.
(d) Show that the lines ( x0,y0,0 )+t(−y0,x0, 5) and
(x0,y0,0 )+t(y0,−x0, 5) lie in the surface andin
the tangent plane found in part (c).
20. A parametrized surface is described by a differentiablefunction /Phi1:R
2→R3. According to Chapter 2, the
derivative should give a linear approximation that yieldsa representation of the tangent plane. This exercisedemonstrates that this is indeed the case.
(a) Assuming T
u×Tv/negationslash=0, show that the range of the
linear transformation D/Phi1( u0,v0) is the plane
spanned by TuandTv.[Here TuandTvare
evaluated at ( u0,v0).]
(b) Show that w⊥(Tu×Tv) if and only if wis in the
range of D/Phi1( u0,v0).
(c) Show that the tangent plane as deﬁned in this
section is the same as the “parametrized plane”
(u,v)/mapsto→/Phi1(u0,v0)+D/Phi1( u0,v0)/bracketleftBigu−u0
v−v0/bracketrightBig
.
21. Consider the surfaces /Phi11(u,v)=(u,v, 0) and
/Phi12(u,v)=(u3,v3,0 ) .
(a)Show that the image of /Phi11and of /Phi12is the xyplane.
(b)Show that /Phi11describes a regular surface, yet /Phi12
does not. Conclude that the notion of regularity of asurface Sdepends on the existence of at least one
regular parametrization for S.
(c) Prove that the tangent plane of Sis well deﬁned
independently of the regular (one-to-one)parametrization (you will need to use the inversefunction theorem from Section 3.5).
(d)After these remarks, do you think you can ﬁnd aregular parametrization of the cone of Figure 7.3.7?
22. The image of the parametrization
/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))
=(asinucosv,bsinusinv,ccosu)
with b<a,0≤u≤π,0≤v≤2πparametrizes an
ellipsoid.
(a) Show that all points in the image of /Phi1satisfy:
x2
a2+y2
b2+z2
c2=1
(the Cartesian equation of an ellipsoid).
(b) Show that the image surface is regular at all points.
23. The image of the parametrization
/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))
=((R+rcosu) cosv,(R+rcosu) sinv,rsinu)
with 0 ≤u,v≤2π,0<r<1 parametrizes a torus (or
doughnut) S.
(a) Show that all points in the image ( x,y,z) satisfy:
(/radicalbig
x2+y2−R)2+z2=r2.
(b) Show that the image surface is regular at all points.
24. Let/Phi1be a regular surface at ( u0,v0); that is, /Phi1is of
class C1andTu×Tv/negationslash=0at (u0,v0).
(a) Use the implicit function theorem (Section 3.5) to
show that the image of /Phi1near (u0,v0) is the graph
of aC1function of two variables. If the z
component of Tu×Tvis nonzero, we can write it
asz=f(x,y).
(c) Show that the tangent plane at /Phi1(u0,v0) deﬁned by
the plane spanned by TuandTvcoincides with the
tangent plane of the graph of z=f(x,y) at this
point.
7.4Area of a Surface
Before proceeding to general surface integrals, let us ﬁrst consider the problem of
computing the area of a surface, just as we considered the problem of ﬁnding the arclength of a curve before discussing path integrals.

<<<PAGE 411>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 384
384 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Deﬁnition of Surface Area
In Section 7.3 we deﬁned a parametrized surface Sto be the image of a function
/Phi1:D⊂R2→R3, written as /Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)). The map /Phi1was
called the parametrization of SandSwas said to be regular at /Phi1(u,v)∈Sprovided
thatTu×Tv/negationslash=0, where
Tu=∂x
∂u(u,v)i+∂y
∂u(u,v)j+∂z
∂u(u,v)k
and
Tv=∂x
∂v(u,v)i+∂y
∂v(u,v)j+∂z
∂v(u,v)k.
Recall that a regular surface (loosely speaking) is one that has no corners or breaks.
In the rest of this chapter and in the next one, we shall consider only piecewise regular
surfaces that are unions of images of parametrized surfaces /Phi1i:Di→R3for which:
(i)Diis an elementary region in the plane;
(ii)/Phi1iis of class C1and one-to-one, except possibly on the boundary of Di; and
(iii) Si, the image of /Phi1i, is regular, except possibly at a ﬁnite number of points.
Deﬁnition Area of a Parametrized Surface We deﬁne the surface area10
A(S) of a parametrized surface by
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv , (1)
where /bardblTu×Tv/bardblis the norm of Tu×Tv.I fSis a union of surfaces Si, its area is
the sum of the areas of the Si.
As you can easily verify, we have
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl=/radicalBigg/bracketleftbigg∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
, (2)
where
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
and so on. Thus, formula (1) becomes
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalBigg/bracketleftbigg∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
du dv. (3)
10As we have not yet discussed the independence of parametrization, it may seem that A(S) depends
on the parametrization /Phi1. We shall discuss independence of parametrization in Section 7.6; the use of
this notation here should not cause confusion.

<<<PAGE 412>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 385
7.4 Area of a Surface 385
vn
vj
v0
u0 uiunui
uvj,()Δu
Δv( xij, yij, zij )
Pij
(Rij) ΦΦ
xyz
Rijv
TvjvΔ
uΔ
T
ui
ﬁgure 7.4.1 /bardblTui×Tvj/bardbl/Delta1u/Delta1vis equal to the area of a parallelogram that approximates the
area of a patch on a surface S=/Phi1(D).
Justiﬁcation of the Area Formula
We can justify the deﬁnition of surface area by analyzing the integral/integraltext/integraltext
D/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv in terms of Riemann sums. For simplicity, suppose Dis a rect-
angle; consider the nth regular partition of D, and let Rijbe the ijth rectangle in the
partition, with vertices ( ui,vj), (u i+1,vj), (u i,vj+1), and ( ui+1,vj+1), 0≤i≤n−1,
0≤j≤n−1. Denote the values of TuandTvat (ui,vj)b yTuiandTvj. We can think
of the vectors /Delta1uTuiand/Delta1vTvjas tangent to the surface at /Phi1(ui,vj)=(xij,yij,zij),
where /Delta1u=ui+1−ui,/Delta1v=vj+1−vj. Then these vectors form a parallelogram Pij
that lies in the plane tangent to the surface at ( xij,yij,zij) (see Figure 7.4.1). We thus
have a “patchwork cover” of the surface by the Pij.F o rn large, the area of Pijis a good
approximation to the area of /Phi1(Rij). Because the area of the parallelogram spanned by
two vectors v1andv2is/bardblv1×v2/bardbl(see Chapter 1), we see that
A(Pij)=/bardbl/Delta1uTui×/Delta1vTvj/bardbl=/bardbl Tui×Tvj/bardbl/Delta1u/Delta1v.
Therefore, the area of the patchwork cover is
An=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0n−1/summationdisplay
j=0A(Pij)=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0n−1/summationdisplay
j=0/bardblTui×Tvj/bardbl/Delta1u/Delta1v.
Asn→∞ , the sums Anconverge to the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv.
Because Anshould approximate the surface area better and better as n→∞ , we are
led to formula (1) as a reasonable deﬁnition of A(S).
example 1 LetDbe the region determined by 0 ≤θ≤2π,0≤r≤1 and let the function
/Phi1:D→R3, deﬁned by
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ, z=r,
be a parametrization of a cone S(see Figure 7.3.8). Find its surface area.

<<<PAGE 413>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 386
386 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
solution In formula (3),
∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosθ−rsinθ
sinθ rcosθ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=r,
∂(y,z)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglesinθ rcosθ
10/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−rcosθ,
and
∂(x,z)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosθ−rsinθ
10/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=rsinθ,
so the area integrand is
/bardblTr×Tθ/bardbl=/radicalbig
r2+r2cos2θ+r2sin2θ=r√
2.
Clearly, /bardblTr×Tθ/bardblvanishes for r=0, but /Phi1(0,θ)=(0, 0, 0) for any θ. Thus, (0, 0, 0)
is the only point where the surface is not regular. We have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bardblTr×Tθ/bardbldr dθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplay1
0√
2rd rdθ=/integraldisplay2π
01
2√
2dθ=√
2π.
To conﬁrm that this is the area of /Phi1(D), we must verify that /Phi1is one-to-one (for
points not on the boundary of D). Let D0be the set of ( r,θ) with 0 <r<1 and
0<θ< 2π. Hence, D0isDwithout its boundary. To see that /Phi1:D0→R3is
one-to-one, assume that /Phi1(r,θ)=/Phi1(r/prime,θ/prime) for ( r,θ) and ( r/prime,θ/prime)∈D0. Then
rcosθ=r/primecosθ/prime, rsinθ=r/primesinθ/prime, r=r/prime.
From these equations it follows that cos θ=cosθ/primeand sin θ=sinθ/prime. Thus, either
θ=θ/primeorθ=θ/prime+2πn. But the second case is impossible for na nonzero integer,
because both θandθ/primebelong to the open interval (0, 2 π) and thus cannot be more than
2πradians apart. This proves that off the boundary, /Phi1is one-to-one. (Is /Phi1:D→R3
one-to-one?) In future examples, we shall not usually verify that the parametrization is
one-to-one when it is intuitively clear. ▲
example 2 Ahelicoid is deﬁned by /Phi1:D→R3, where
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ, z=θ
andDis the region where 0 ≤θ≤2πand 0≤r≤1 (Figure 7.4.2). Find its area.
(1, 0, 0)z
y
x
π
2π2π
3π
2
ﬁgure 7.4.2 The helicoid x=rcosθ,y=rsinθ,z=θ.

<<<PAGE 414>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 387
7.4 Area of a Surface 387
solution We compute ∂(x,y)/∂(r,θ)=ras in Example 1, and
∂(y,z)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglesinθrcosθ
01/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=sinθ,
∂(x,z)
∂(r,θ)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosθ−rsinθ
01/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=cosθ.
The area integrand is therefore√
r2+1, which never vanishes, so the surface is regular.
The area of the helicoid is
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bardblTr×Tθ/bardbldr dθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplay1
0/radicalbig
r2+1dr dθ=2π/integraldisplay1
0/radicalbig
r2+1dr.
After a little computation (using the table of integrals), we ﬁnd that this integral is
equal to
π[√
2+log (1 +√
2)]. ▲
Surface Area of a Graph
A surface Sgiven in the form z=g(x,y), where ( x,y)∈D, admits the parametri-
zation
x=u, y=v, z=g(u,v)
for (u,v)∈D. When gis of class C1, this parametrization is smooth, and the formula
for surface area reduces to
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D⎛
⎝/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg2
+1⎞⎠dA, (4)
after applying the formulas
T
u=i+∂g
∂uk, Tv=j+∂g
∂vk,
and
Tu×Tv=−∂g
∂ui−∂g
∂vj+k=−∂g
∂xi−∂g
∂yj+k,
as noted in Example 4 of Section 7.3.
Surfaces of Revolution
In most books on one-variable calculus, it is shown that the lateral surface area generated
by revolving the graph of a function y=f(x) about the xaxis is given by
A=2π/integraldisplayb
a(|f(x)|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(x)]2)dx. (5)

<<<PAGE 415>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 388
388 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
If the graph is revolved about the yaxis, the surface area is
A=2π/integraldisplayb
a(|x|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(x)]2)dx. (6)
We shall derive formula (5) by using the methods just developed; we can obtain formula
(6) in a similar fashion (Exercise 10).
To derive formula (5) from formula (3), we must give a parametrization of S. Deﬁne
the parametrization by
x=u, y=f(u) cosv, z=f(u) sinv
over the region Dgiven by
a≤u≤b,0 ≤v≤2π.
This is indeed a parametrization of S, because for ﬁxed u, the point
(u,f(u) cosv,f(u) sinv)
traces out a circle of radius |f(u)|with the center ( u, 0, 0) (Figure 7.4.3).
We calculate
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=− f(u) sinv,∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)=f(u)f/prime(u),∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)=f(u) cosv,
and so by formula (3)
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalBigg/bracketleftbigg∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
du dv
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalbig
[f(u)]2sin2v+[f(u)]2[f/prime(u)]2+[f(u)]2cos2vdu dv
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D|f(u)|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(u)]2du dv
=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplay2π
0|f(u)|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(u)]2dvdu
=2π/integraldisplayb
a|f(u)|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(u)]2du,
which is formula (5).
| f(x)|y
xa x
 b
Circumference  = 2π| f(x)|ﬁgure 7.4.3 The curve y=f(x) rotated
about the xaxis.

<<<PAGE 416>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 389
7.4
Area of a Surface
389
If
S
is the surface of revolution, then 2
π
|
f
(
x
)
|
is the circumference of the vertical
cross section to
S
at the point
x
(Figure 7.4.3). Observe that we can write
2
π
/integraldisplay
b
a
|
f
(
x
)
|
/radicalbig
1
+
[
f
/prime
(
x
)]
2
dx
=
/integraldisplay
c
2
π
|
f
(
x
)
|
ds
,
where the expression on the right is the path integral of 2
π
|
f
(
x
)
|
along the path given
by
c
:[
a
,
b
]
→
R
2
,
t
/mapsto→
(
t
,
f
(
t
)). Therefore,
the lateral surface of a solid of revolution
is obtained by integrating the cross-sectional circumference along the path that is the
graph of the given function.
Historical Note
The most famous mathematician in ancient times was Archimedes. In addition to
being an extraordinarily gifted mathematician, he was also an engineering
genius on a scale never before seen and was greatly admired by his
contemporaries and by later writers for his insights into mechanics. It was these
talents that helped the people of the city of Syracuse in 214
B.C.
to defend their
city against the onslaught of the Roman legions under their commander
Marcellus.
When the Romans besieged the city, they encountered an enemy whom
Archimedes had supplied---totally unexpectedly---with powerful weapons,
including artillery and burning mirrors, which, as legend has it, incinerated the
Roman fleet.
The siege of Syracuse lasted two years, and the city finally fell as a result of
acts of treason. In the aftermath of the assault, the old scientist was slain by a
Roman soldier, even though the commander had asked his men to spare
Archimedes' life. As the story goes, Archimedes was sitting in front of his house
studying some geometric figures he had drawn in the sand. When a Roman
soldier approached, Archimedes shouted out, “Don’t disturb my figures!” The
ruffian, feeling insulted, slew Archimedes.
To honor this great man, Marcellus erected a tomb for Archimedes on which,
according to Archimedes’ own wishes, were depicted a cone, a sphere, and a
cylinder (Figure 7.4.4).
Archimedes was incredibly proud of his calculation of the volume and surface
area of the sphere, which justifiably were seen as truly outstanding
accomplishments for their time. As in his works on centers of gravity, for which he
provided no clear definition, Archimedes was able to compute the surface area
of the sphere without having a clear definition of precisely what it was. However,
as with many mathematical works, one knows the answer long before a proof or
even the correct definition can be found.
The problem of properly defining surface areas is a difficult one. To
Archimedes’ credit, a careful theory of surface areas was not achieved until the
1 : 2 : 3 
=
::
ﬁgure
7.4.4
Archimedes’ theorem: The ratios of the volumes of a cone, a
half ball, and a cylinder, all of the same height and radius, are 1:2:3.

<<<PAGE 417>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 390
390 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
twentieth century, after a long development that began in the seventeenth
century with the discovery of calculus.
Christiaan Huygens (1629--1695) was the first person since Archimedes to give
results on the areas of special surfaces beyond the sphere, and he obtained the
areas of portions of surfaces of revolution, such as the paraboloid and
hyperboloid.
The brilliant and prolific mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707--1783) presented
the first fundamental work on the theory of surfaces in 1760 with Recherches sur la
courbure des surfaces . However, it was in 1728, in a paper on shortest paths on
surfaces, that Euler defined a surface as a graph z=f(x,y). Euler was interested
in studying the curvature of surfaces, and in 1771 he introduced the notion of the
parametric surfaces that are described in this section.
After the rapid development of calculus in the early eighteenth century,
formulas for the lengths of curves and areas of surfaces were developed.
Although we do not know when all the area formulas presented in this section first
appeared, they were certainly common by the end of the eighteenth century.
The underlying concepts of the length of a curve and the area of a surface were
understood intuitively before this time, and the use of formulas from calculus to
compute areas was considered a great achievement.
Augustin-Louis Cauchy (1789--1857) was the first to take the step of defining the
quantities of length and surface areas by integrals as we have done in this book.
The question of defining surface area independent of integrals was taken up
somewhat later, but this posed many difficult problems that were not properly
resolved until this century.
The Spheres of Archimedes can be seen throughout nature, from the shapes of
stars and planets to that of soap bubbles. Figure 7.4.5 shows a boy blowing a
soap bubble.
Bubble blowing is an old pastime. There is even an Etruscan Vase in the Louvre
on which children are portrayed blowing bubbles. Have you ever wondered why
soap bubbles are round and not cubical? Analogously, why are the planets and
sun round? What really determines shape and form in our universe?
ﬁgure 7.4.5 A boy blowing a soap bubble. Painting by
the French artist Jean Baptiste Siméon Chardin
(1699–1779), The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

<<<PAGE 418>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 391
7.4 Area of a Surface 391
Answers to these questions involve central concepts in our book, namely,
problems of maxima and minima, and in the case of soap bubbles problems of
area and volume. Soap bubbles are round because nature is economical. Thespherical shape is the shape of the unique surface of least possible areacontaining a fixed volume (which in the case of a bubble is air).
Mathematical problems of this kind belong to a subject called The Calculus of
Variations, a subject almost as old as The Calculus itself.
For more information, consult our Internet supplement or the book The
Parsimonious Universe by Hildebrandt and Tromba (Springer-Verlag, 1995).
exercises
1.Find the surface area of the unit sphere Srepresented
parametrically by /Phi1:D→S⊂R3, where Dis the
rectangle 0 ≤θ≤2π,0≤φ≤πand/Phi1is given by the
equations
x=cosθsinφ, y=sinθsinφ, z=cosφ.
Note that we can represent the entire sphere
parametrically, but we cannot represent it in the form
z=f(x,y).
2.In Exercise 1, what happens if we allow φto vary from
−π/ 2t oπ/ 2 ?F r o m0t o2 π? Why do we obtain
different answers?
3.Find the area of the helicoid in Example 2 if the domain
Dis 0≤r≤1 and 0 ≤θ≤3π.
4.The torus Tcan be represented parametrically by the
function /Phi1:D→R3, where /Phi1is given by the
coordinate functions x=(R+cosφ) cosθ,
y=(R+cosφ) sinθ,z=sinφ;Dis the rectangle
[0, 2π ]×[0, 2π ], that is, 0 ≤θ≤2π,0≤φ≤2π; and
R>1 is ﬁxed (see Figure 7.4.6). Show that
A(T)=(2π)2R, ﬁrst by using formula (3) and then by
using formula (6).
R
xz
y
(0, R, 0)
ﬁgure 7.4.6 A cross section of a torus.5.Let/Phi1(u,v)=(eucosv,eusinv,v) be a mapping from
D=[0, 1]×[0,π]i nt h eu vplane onto a surface Sin
xyzspace.
(a) Find Tu×Tv.
(b) Find the equation for the tangent plane to Swhen
(u,v)=(0,π
2).
(c) Find the area of /Phi1(D).
6.Find the area of the surface deﬁned by z=xyand
x2+y2≤2.
7.Use a surface integral to ﬁnd the area of the triangle Tin
R3with vertices at (1, 1, 0), (2, 1, 2), and (2, 3, 3).
Verify your answer by ﬁnding the lengths of the sidesand using classical geometry.[H
INT: Write the triangle as the graph z=g(x,y)o v e ra
triangle T∗in the xyplane.]
8.Use a surface integral to ﬁnd the area of the quadrilateral
DinR3with vertices at ( −1, 1, 2), (1, 1, 2), (0, 3, 5),
and (5, 3, 5). Verify your answer by ﬁnding the lengthsof the sides and using classical geometry. [H
INT: See the
hint in the previous problem.]
9.Let/Phi1(u,v)=(u−v,u+v,uv) and let Dbe the unit
disc in the uvplane. Find the area of /Phi1(D).
10. Find the area of the portion of the unit sphere that is cut
out by the cone z≥/radicalbig
x2+y2(see Exercise 1).
11. Show that the surface x=1//radicalbig
y2+z2, where
1≤x<∞, can be ﬁlled but not painted!
12. Find a parametrization of the surface x2−y2=1,
where x>0,−1≤y≤1 and 0 ≤z≤1. Use your
answer to express the area of the surface as an integral.
13. Represent the ellipsoid E:
x2
a2+y2
b2+z2
c2=1

<<<PAGE 419>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 392
392 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
parametrically and write out the integral for its surface
area A(E). (Do not evaluate the integral.)
14. Let the curve y=f(x),a≤x≤b, be rotated about the
yaxis. Show that the area of the surface swept out is
given by equation (6); that is,
A=2π/integraldisplayb
a|x|/radicalbig
1+[f/prime(x)]2dx.
Interpret the formula geometrically using arc length and
slant height.
15. Find the area of the surface obtained by rotating the
curve y=x2,0≤x≤1, about the yaxis.
16. Use formula (4) to compute the surface area of the cone
in Example 1.
17. Find the area of the surface deﬁned by
x+y+z=1,x2+2y2≤1.
18. Show that for the vectors TuandTv,w eh a v et h e
formula
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl=/radicalbigg/bracketleftBig∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightBig2
+/bracketleftBig∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightBig2
+/bracketleftBig∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightBig2
.
19. Compute the area of the surface given by
x=rcosθ, y=2rcosθ, z=θ,
0≤r≤1, 0 ≤θ≤2π.
Sketch.
20. Prove Pappus’ theorem : Let c:[a,b]→R2be a C1
path whose image lies in the right half plane and is a
simple closed curve. The area of the lateral surface
generated by rotating the image of cabout the yaxis is
equal to 2 π¯xl(c), where ¯xis the average value of the x
coordinates of points on candl(c) is the length of c.
(See Exercises 16 to 19, Section 7.1, for a discussion of
average values.)
21. The cylinder x2+y2=xdivides the unit sphere Sinto
two regions S1andS2, where S1is inside the cylinder
andS2outside. Find the ratio of areas A(S2)/A(S1).
22. Suppose a surface Sthat is the graph of a function
z=f(x,y), where ( x,y)∈D⊂R2can also be
described as the set of ( x,y,z)∈R3with
F(x,y,z)=0 (a level surface). Derive a formula for
A(S) that involves only F.
23. Calculate the area of the frustum shown in Figure 7.4.7
using (a) geometry alone and, second, (b) a surface-area
formula.
y
r1s
br2
x a
y
= m
mx +q
ﬁgure 7.4.7 A line segment revolved
around the yaxis becomes a frustum of a
cone.
24. A cylindrical hole of radius 1 is bored through a solid
ball of radius 2 to form a ring coupler, as shown in
Figure 7.4.8. Find the volume and outer surface area of
this coupler.
y
xz
ﬁgure 7.4.8 Find the outer surface area
and volume of the shaded region.
25. Find the area of the graph of the function f(x,y)=
2
3(x3/2+y3/2) that lies over the domain [0, 1] ×[0, 1].
26. Express the surface area of the following graphs over the
indicated region Das a double integral. Do not evaluate.
(a) ( x+2y)2;D=[−1, 2]×[0, 2]
(b)xy+x/(y+1);D=[1, 4]×[1, 2]
(c)xy3ex2y2;D=unit circle centered at the origin
(d)y3cos2x;D=triangle with vertices
(−1, 1), (0, 2), and (1, 1)
27. Show that the surface area of the upper hemisphere of
radius R,z=/radicalbig
R2−x2−y2, can be computed by
formula (4), evaluated as an improper integral.

<<<PAGE 420>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 393
7.5 Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces 393
7.5Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces
Now we are ready to deﬁne the integral of a scalar function f over a surface S .
This concept is a natural generalization of the area of a surface, which corresponds to
the integral over Sof the scalar function f(x,y,z)=1. This is quite analogous to
considering the path integral as a generalization of arc length. In the next section weshall deal with the integral of a vector function Fover a surface. These concepts will
play a crucial role in the vector analysis treated in the ﬁnal chapter.
Let us start with a surface Sparametrized by a mapping /Phi1:D→S⊂R
3, where D
is an elementary region, which we write as /Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)).
Deﬁnition The Integral of a Scalar Function Over a Surface
Iff(x,y,z) is a real-valued continuous function deﬁned on a parametrized surface
S, we deﬁne the integral of fover Sto be
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sf(x,y,z)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(/Phi1(u,v))/bardblT u×Tv/bardbldu dv. (1)
Written out, equation (1) becomes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))/radicalBigg/bracketleftbigg∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂(x,z)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg2
du dv. (2)
Thus, if fis identically 1, we recover the area formula (3) of Section 7.4. Like surface
area, the surface integral is independent of the particular parametrization used. This willbe discussed in Section 7.6.
We can gain some intuitive knowledge about this integral by considering it as a limit
of sums. Let Dbe a rectangle partitioned into n
2rectangles Rijwith areas /Delta1u/Delta1v. Let
Sij=/Phi1(Rij)be the portion of the surface /Phi1(D) corresponding to Rij(see Figure 7.5.1),
and let A(Sij) be the area of this portion of the surface. For large n,fwill be approxi-
mately constant on Sij, and we form the sum
Sn=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0n−1/summationdisplay
j=0f(/Phi1(ui,vj))A(Sij), (3)
ﬁgure 7.5.1 /Phi1takes a portion Rij
ofDto a portion of S.
u
xyD/H9021z
Rij
SijSv

<<<PAGE 421>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 394
394 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
where ( ui,vj)∈Rij. From Section 7.4 we have a formula for A(Sij):
A(Sij)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rij/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv ,
which, by the mean-value theorem for integrals, equals /bardblTu∗
i×Tv∗
j/bardbl/Delta1u/Delta1vfor some
point ( u∗
i,v∗
j)i nRij. Hence, our sum becomes
Sn=n−1/summationdisplay
i=0n−1/summationdisplay
j=0f(/Phi1(ui,vj))/bardblT u∗
i×Tv∗
j/bardbl/Delta1u/Delta1v,
which is an approximating sum for the last integral in formula (1). Therefore,
limit
n→∞Sn=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S.
Note that each term in the sum in formula (3) is the value of fat some point
/Phi1(ui,vj) times the area of Sij. Compare this with the Riemann-sum interpretation of
the path integral in Section 7.1.
IfSis a union of parametrized surfaces Si,i=1,..., N, that do not intersect
except possibly along curves deﬁning their boundaries, then the integral of fover Sis
deﬁned by
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=N/summationdisplay
i=1/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sifd S,
as we should expect. For example, the integral over the surface of a cube may be
expressed as the sum of the integrals over the six sides.
example 1 Suppose a helicoid is described as in Example 2, Section 7.4, and let fbe given by
f(x,y,z)=/radicalbig
x2+y2+1. Find/integraltext/integraltext
Sfd S.
solution As in Examples 1 and 2 of Section 7.4,
∂(x,y)
∂(r,θ)=r,∂(y,z)
∂(r,θ)=sinθ,∂(x,z)
∂(r,θ)=cosθ.
Also, f(rcosθ,rsinθ,θ)=√
r2+1. Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sf(x,y,z)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(/Phi1(r,θ))/bardblT r×Tθ/bardbldr dθ
=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplay1
0/radicalbig
r2+1/radicalbig
r2+1dr dθ=/integraldisplay2π
04
3dθ=8
3π.
▲
Surface Integrals Over Graphs
Suppose Sis the graph of a C1function z=g(x,y). Recall from Section 7.4 that we
can parametrize Sby
x=u, y=v, z=g(u,v),

<<<PAGE 422>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 395
7.5 Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces 395
and that in this case
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl=/radicalBigg
1+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂u/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂v/parenrightbigg2
,
so
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sf(x,y,z)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y,g(x,y))/radicalBigg
1+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg2
dx dy. (4)
example 2 LetSbe the surface deﬁned by z=x2+y, where Dis the region 0 ≤x≤1,
−1≤y≤1. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sxd S.
solution If we let z=g(x,y)=x2+y, formula (4) gives
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sxd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dx/radicalBigg
1+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg2
dx dy=/integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay1
0x/radicalbig
1+4x2+1dx dy
=1
8/integraldisplay1
−1/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay1
0(2+4x2)1/2(8xd x)/bracketrightbigg
dy=2
3·1
8/integraldisplay1
−1[(2+4x2)3/2]|1
0dy
=1
12/integraldisplay1
−1(63/2−23/2)dy=1
6(63/2−23/2)=√
6−√
2
3
=√
2/parenleftbigg√
3−1
3/parenrightbigg
.
▲
example 3 Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sz2dS, where Sis the unit sphere x2+y2+z2=1.
solution For this problem, it is convenient to use spherical coordinates and to represent the sphere
parametrically by the equations x=cosθsinφ,y=sinθsinφ,z=cosφ, over the
region Din the θφplane given by the inequalities 0 ≤φ≤π,0≤θ≤2π. From
equation (1) we get
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sz2dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(cosφ)2/bardblTθ×Tφ/bardbldθdφ.
A little computation [use formula (2) of Section 7.4; see Exercise 12] shows that
/bardblTθ×Tφ/bardbl=sin φ.
(Note that for 0 ≤φ≤π, we have sin φ≥0.) Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sz2dS=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0cos2φsinφdφdθ
=1
3/integraldisplay2π
0[−cos3φ]π
0dθ=2
3/integraldisplay2π
0dθ=4π
3.
▲
This example also shows that on a sphere of radius R,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd s=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0f(φ,θ)R2sinφdφdθ,

<<<PAGE 423>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 396
396 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
or, for short, the area element on the sphere is given by
dS=R2sinφdφdθ.
Integrals Over Graphs
We now develop another formula for surface integrals when the surface can be repre-
sented as a graph. To do so, we let Sbe the graph of z=g(x,y) and consider formula
(4). We claim that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sf(x,y,z)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y,g(x,y))
cosθdx dy , (5)
where θis the angle the normal to the surface makes with the unit vector kat the point
(x,y,g(x,y)) (see Figure 7.5.2). Describing the surface by the equation φ(x,y,z)=
z−g(x,y)=0, a normal vector Nis∇φ; that is,
N=−∂g
∂xi−∂g
∂yj+k (6)
[see Example 4 of Section 7.3, or recall that the normal to a surface with equation
g(x,y,z)=constant is given by ∇g]. Thus,
cosθ=N·k
/bardblN/bardbl=1/radicalbig
(∂g/∂x)2+(∂g/∂y)2+1.
Substitution of this formula into equation (4) gives equation (5). Note that cos θ=n·k,
where n=N//bardblN/bardblis the unit normal. Thus, we can write
dS=dx dy
n·k.
The result is, in fact, obvious geometrically, for if a small rectangle in the xyplane
has area /Delta1A, then the area of the portion above it on the surface is /Delta1S=/Delta1A/cosθ
(Figure 7.5.2). This intuitive approach can help us to remember formula (5) and to apply
it in problems.
y
xz
k
qn
D
z
= 
g
(
x
(
(
,
y
)
ΔSΔS cos q  = Δ A
ΔA
ﬁgure 7.5.2 The area of a patch of area
/Delta1Sover a patch /Delta1Ais/Delta1S=/Delta1A/cosθ,
where θis the angle the unit normal n
makes with k.

<<<PAGE 424>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 397
7.5 Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces 397
example 4 Compute/integraltext/integraltext
Sxd S, where Sis the triangle with vertices (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1) (see
Figure 7.5.3).
y
xz
DS
(1, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 1) 
k
n
q
ﬁgure 7.5.3 In computing a speciﬁc surface
integral, we ﬁnd a formula for the unit normal
nand computes the angle θin preparation for
formula (5).
solution This surface is the plane described by the equation x+y+z=1. Because the surface
is a plane, the angle θis constant and a unit normal vector is n=(1/√
3, 1/√
3, 1/√
3).
Thus, cos θ=n·k=1/√
3, and by equation (5),
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sxd S=√
3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dxd xd y ,
where Dis the domain in the xyplane. But
√
3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dxd xd y =√
3/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1−x
0xd yd x =√
3/integraldisplay1
0x(1−x)dx=√
3
6.▲
Integrals of functions over surfaces are useful for computing the mass of a surface
when the mass density function mis known. The total mass of a surface with mass
density (per unit area) mis given by
M(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sm(x,y,z)dS. (7)
example 5 Let/Phi1:D→R3be the parametrization of the helicoid S=/Phi1(D) of Example 2
of Section 7.4. Recall that /Phi1(r,θ)=(rcosθ,rsinθ,θ), where 0 ≤θ≤2π, and
0≤r≤1. Suppose Shas a mass density at ( x,y,z)∈Sequal to twice the distance of
(x,y,z) from the central axis (see Figure 7.4.2), that is, m(x,y,z)=2/radicalbig
x2+y2=2r,
in the cylindrical coordinate system. Find the total mass of the surface.
solution Applying formula (7),
M(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2/radicalbig
x2+y2dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D2rd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D2r/bardblTr×Tθ/bardbldr dθ.
From Example 2 of Section 7.4, we see that /bardblTr×Tθ/bardbl=√
1+r2. Thus,
M(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D2r/radicalbig
1+r2dr dθ=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplay1
02r/radicalbig
1+r2dr dθ
=/integraldisplay2π
0/bracketleftbigg2
3(1+r2)3/2/bracketrightbigg1
0dθ=/integraldisplay2π
02
3(23/2−1)dθ=4π
3(23/2−1).
▲

<<<PAGE 425>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 398
398 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
exercises
1.Evaluate the integral of the function f(x,y,z)=x+y
over the surface Sgiven by:
/Phi1(u,v)=(2ucosv,2usinv,u),u∈[0, 4], v∈[0,π]
2.Evaluate the integral of the function f(x,y,z)=z+6
over the surface Sgiven by:
/Phi1(u,v)=(u,v
3,v),u∈[0, 2], v∈[0, 3].
3.Evaluate the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(3x−2y+z)dS,
where Sis the portion of the plane 2 x+3y+z=6 that
lies in the ﬁrst octant.
4.Evaluate the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(x+z)dS,
where Sis the part of the cylinder y2+z2=4 with
x∈[0, 5].
5.LetSbe the surface deﬁned by
/Phi1(u,v)=(u+v,u−v,uv).
(a) Show that the image of Sis in the graph of the
surface 4 z=x2−y2.
(b) Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sxd S for all points on the graph S,o v e r
x2+y2≤1.
6.Evaluate the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(x2z+y2z)dS,
where Sis the part of the plane z=4+x+ythat lies
inside the cylinder x2+y2=4.
7.Compute/integraltext/integraltext
Sxy d S , where Sis the surface of the
tetrahedron with sides z=0,y=0,x+z=1, and
x=y.
8.Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sxyz d S , where Sis the triangle with
vertices (1, 0, 0), (0, 2, 0), and (0, 1, 1).
9.Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SzdS, where Sis the upper hemisphere of
radius a, that is, the set of ( x,y,z) with
z=/radicalbig
a2−x2−y2.10. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
S(x+y+z)dS, where Sis the boundary of
the unit ball B; that is, Sis the set of ( x,y,z) with
x2+y2+z2=1. (H INT: Use the symmetry of the
problem.)
11. (a)Compute the area of the portion of the cone
x2+y2=z2with z≥0 that is inside the sphere
x2+y2+z2=2Rz, where Ris a positive constant.
(b)What is the area of that portion of the sphere that is
inside the cone?
12. Verify that in spherical coordinates, on a sphere ofradius R,
/bardblT
φ×Tθ/bardbldφdθ=R2sinφdφdθ.
13. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SzdS, where Sis the surface
z=x2+y2,x2+y2≤1.
14. Evaluate the surface integral/integraltext/integraltext
Sz2dS, where Sis the
boundary of the cube C=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1].
(HINT: Do each face separately and add the results.)
15. Find the mass of a spherical surface Sof radius Rsuch
that at each point ( x,y,z)∈Sthe mass density is equal
to the distance of ( x,y,z) to some ﬁxed point
(x0,y0,z0)∈S.
16. A metallic surface Sis in the shape of a hemisphere
z=/radicalbig
R2−x2−y2, where ( x,y) satisﬁes
0≤x2+y2≤R2. The mass density at ( x,y,z)∈Sis
given by m(x,y,z)=x2+y2. Find the total mass of S.
17. LetSbe the sphere of radius R.
(a)Argue by symmetry that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sx2dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sy2dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sz2dS.
(b)Use this fact and some clever thinking to evaluate,with very little computation, the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sx2dS.
(c)Does this help in Exercise 16?
18. (a) Use Riemann sums to justify the formula
1
A(S)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sf(x,y,z)dS
for the average value offover the surface S.

<<<PAGE 426>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 399
7.5 Integrals of Scalar Functions Over Surfaces 399
(b) In Example 3 of this section, show that the average
off(x,y,z)=z2over the sphere is 1/3.
(c) Deﬁne the center of gravity (¯x,¯y,¯z) of a surface S
to be such that ¯x,¯y, and ¯zare the average values of
thex,y, and zcoordinates on S. Show that the
center of gravity of the triangle in Example 4 of this
section is (1
3,1
3,1
3).
19. Find the average value of f(x,y,z)=x+z2on the
truncated cone z2=x2+y2, with 1 ≤z≤4.
20. Evaluate the integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(1−z)dS,
where Sis the graph of z=1−x2−y2, with
x2+y2≤1.
21. Find the x,y, and zcoordinates of the center of gravity
of the octant of the solid sphere of radius Rand centered
at the origin determined by x≥0,y≥0,z≥0. (H INT:
Write this octant as a parametrized surface—seeExample 3 of this section and Exercise 18.)
22. Find the zcoordinate of the center of gravity (the average
zcoordinate) of the surface of a hemisphere ( z≤0)
with radius r(see Exercise 18). Argue by symmetry that
the average xandycoordinates are both zero.
23. Let/Phi1:D⊂R2→R3be a parametrization of a surface
Sdeﬁned by
x=x(u,v), y=y(u,v), z=z(u,v).
(a) Let
∂/Phi1
∂u=/parenleftbigg
∂x
∂u,∂y
∂u,∂z
∂u/parenrightbigg
and∂/Phi1
∂v=/parenleftbigg
∂x
∂v,∂y
∂v,∂z
∂v/parenrightbigg
,
that is, ∂/Phi1/∂u=Tuand∂/Phi1/∂v =Tv, and set
E=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
, F=∂/Phi1
∂u·∂/Phi1
∂v, G=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂v/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
.
Show that
/radicalbig
EG−F2=/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl,and that the surface area of Sis
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalbig
EG−F2du dv.
In this notation, how can we express/integraltext/integraltext
Sfd Sfor a
general function of f?
(b) What does the formula for A(S) become if the
vectors ∂/Phi1/∂uand∂/Phi1/∂v are orthogonal?
(c) Use parts (a) and (b) to compute the surface area of
a sphere of radius a.
24. Dirichlet’s functional for a parametrized surface
/Phi1:D→R3is deﬁned by11
J(/Phi1)=1
2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftBig/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
+/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂v/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2/parenrightBig
du dv.
Use Exercise 23 to argue that the area A(/Phi1)≤J(/Phi1)
and equality holds if
(a)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂v/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
and (b)∂/Phi1
∂u·∂/Phi1
∂v=0.
Compare these equations with Exercise 23 and the
remarks at the end of Section 7.4. A parametrization /Phi1
that satisﬁes conditions (a) and (b) is said to beconformal.
25. LetD⊂R2and/Phi1:D→R2be a smooth function
/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v)) satisfying conditions (a)
and (b) of Exercise 16 and assume that
det⎡
⎢⎢⎣∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v⎤
⎥⎥⎦>0.
Show that xandysatisfy the Cauchy–Riemann
equations ∂x/∂u=∂y/∂v,∂x/∂v=−∂y/∂u.
Conclude that ∇2/Phi1=0 (i.e., each component of /Phi1is
harmonic).
26. LetSbe a sphere of radius randpbe a point inside or
outside the sphere (but not on it). Show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1
/bardblx−p/bardbldS=/braceleftbigg
4πr ifpis inside S
4πr2/d ifpis outside S,
11Dirichlet’ s functional played a major role in the mathematics of the nineteenth century. The mathematician Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann
(1826–1866) used it to develop his complex function theory and to give a proof of the famous Riemann mapping theorem. Today it is still used
extensively as a tool in the study of partial differential equations.

<<<PAGE 427>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 400
400 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
where dis the distance from pto the center of the sphere
and the integration is over the sphere. [H INT: Assume p
is on the z-axis. Then change variables and evaluate.
Why is this assumption on pjustiﬁed?]
27. Find the surface area of that part of the cylinder
x2+z2=a2that is inside the cylinder x2+y2=2ay
and also in the positive octant ( x≥0,y≥0,z≥0).
Assume a>0.28. Let a surface Sbe deﬁned implicitly by F(x,y,z)=0
for (x,y) in a domain DofR2. Show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂F
∂z/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
dS
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalbigg/parenleftBig∂F
∂x/parenrightBig2
+/parenleftBig∂F
∂y/parenrightBig2
+/parenleftBig∂F
∂z/parenrightBig2
dx dy.
Compare with Exercise 22 of Section 7.4.
7.6Surface Integrals of Vector Fields
The goal of this section is to develop the notion of the integral of a vector ﬁeld over a
surface. Recall that the deﬁnition of the line integral of a vector ﬁeld was motivated bythe fundamental physical notion of work. Similarly, there is a basic physical notion of
ﬂuxthat motivates the deﬁnition of the surface integral of a vector ﬁeld.
For example, if the vector ﬁeld is the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid (perhaps the velocity
ﬁeld of a ﬂowing river), and we put an imagined mathematical surface into the ﬂuid,we can ask: “What is the rate at which ﬂuid is crossing the given surface (measured in,say, cubic meters per second)?” The answer is given by the surface integral of the ﬂuidvelocity vector ﬁeld over the surface.
We shall come back to the physical interpretation shortly and reconcile it with the
formal deﬁnition that we give ﬁrst.
Deﬁnition of the Surface Integral
We now deﬁne the integral of a vector ﬁeld, denoted F, over a surface S.We ﬁrst
give the deﬁnition and later in this section give its physical interpretation. This canalso be used as a motivation for the deﬁnition if you so desire. Also, we shall start
with a parametrized surface /Phi1and later study the question of independence of
parametrization.
Deﬁnition The Surface Integral of Vector Fields LetFbe a vector ﬁeld
deﬁned on S, the image of a parametrized surface /Phi1. The surface integral ofF
over/Phi1, denoted by
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi1F·dS,
is deﬁned by (see Figure 7.6.1)
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi1F·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DF·(Tu×Tv)du dv.

<<<PAGE 428>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 401
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 401
ﬁgure 7.6.1 The geometric
signiﬁcance of F·(Tu×Tv).
Tu /H11003 Tv F(Tu /H11003 Tv)
||Tu /H11003 Tv||z
x
y
uv
DSΦ(D(()=S
Tu TvF
example 1 LetDbe the rectangle in the θφplane deﬁned by
0≤θ≤2π,0 ≤φ≤π,
and let the surface Sbe deﬁned by the parametrization /Phi1:D→R3given by
x=cosθsinφ, y=sinθsinφ, z=cosφ.
(Thus, θandφare the angles of spherical coordinates, and Sis the unit sphere para-
metrized by /Phi1.) Let rbe the position vector r(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk. Compute/integraltext/integraltext
/Phi1r·dS.
solution First we ﬁnd
Tθ=(−sinφsinθ)i+(sinφcosθ)j
Tφ=(cosθcosφ)i+(sinθcosφ)j−(sinφ)k,
and hence
Tθ×Tφ=(−sin2φcosθ)i−(sin2φsinθ)j−(sinφcosφ)k.
Then we evaluate
r·(Tθ×Tφ)=(xi+yj+zk)·(Tθ×Tφ)
=[(cosθsinφ)i+(sinθsinφ)j+(cosφ)k]
·(−sinφ)[(sinφcosθ)i+(sinφsinθ)j+(cosφ)k]
=(−sinφ)(sin2φcos2θ+sin2φsin2θ+cos2φ)=−sinφ.
Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi1r·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D−sinφdφdθ=/integraldisplay2π
0(−2)dθ=−4π. ▲
Orientation
An analogy can be drawn between the surface integral/integraltext/integraltext
/Phi1F·dSand the line integral/integraltext
cF·ds. Recall that the line integral is an oriented integral. We needed the notion of
orientation of a curve to extend the deﬁnition of/integraltext
cF·dsto line integrals/integraltext
CF·dsover
oriented curves. We extend the deﬁnition of/integraltext/integraltext
/Phi1F·dStooriented surfaces in a similar
fashion; that is, given a surface Sparametrized by a mapping /Phi1, we want to deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=/integraltext/integraltext
/Phi1F·dSand show that it is independent of the parametrization, except
possibly for the sign. To accomplish this, we need the notion of orientation of a surface.

<<<PAGE 429>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 402
402 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Deﬁnition Oriented Surfaces Anoriented surface is a two-sided surface
with one side speciﬁed as the outside orpositive side ; we call the other side the
inside ornegative side .12At each point ( x,y,z)∈Sthere are two unit normal
vectors n1andn2, where n1=−n2(see Figure 7 .6.2). Each of these two normals
can be associated with one side of the surface. Thus, to specify a side of a surface
S, at each point we choose a unit normal vector nthat points away from the positive
side of Sat that point.
n2
S
n1
ﬁgure 7.6.2 The two possible unit
normals to a surface at a point.
This deﬁnition assumes that our surface does have two sides. In fact, this is necessary,
because there are examples of surfaces with only one side! The ﬁrst known example
of such a surface was the M¨ obius strip (named after the German mathematician and
astronomer A. F . M¨ obius, who, along with the mathematician J. B. Listing, discovered
it in 1858). Pictures of such a surface are given in Figures 7.6.3 and 7.6.4. At each point
ofMthere are two unit normals, n1andn2. However, n1does not determine a unique
side of M, and neither does n2. To see this intuitively, we can slide n2around the closed
curve C(Figure 7.6.3). When n2returns to a ﬁxed point ponCit will coincide with
n1, showing that both n1andn2point away from the same side of Mand, consequently,
thatMhas only one side.
Figure 7.6.4 is a M¨ obius strip as drawn by the well-known twentieth-century mathe-
matician and artist M. C. Escher. It depicts ants crawling along the M¨ obius band. After
n2
p
CM 
n1
ﬁgure 7.6.3 The Möbius strip: Slide n2around C
once; when n2returns to its initial point, it will
coincide with n1=−n2.
ﬁgure 7.6.4 Ants walking on a
Möbius strip.
12We use the term “side” in an intuitive sense. This concept can be developed rigorously, but this will
not be done here. Also, the choice of the side to be named the “outside” is often dictated by the surface
itself, as, for example, is the case with a sphere. In other cases, the naming is somewhat arbitrary (see
the piece of surface depicted in Figure 7.6.2, for instance).

<<<PAGE 430>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 403
7.6
Surface Integrals of Vector Fields
403
one trip around the band (without crossing an edge) they end up on the “opposite side”
of the surface.
Let
/Phi1
:
D
→
R
3
be a parametrization of an oriented surface
S
and suppose
S
is
regular at
/Phi1
(
u
0
,
v
0
), (
u
0
,
v
0
)
∈
D
; thus, the vector (
T
u
0
×
T
v
0
)
/
/bardbl
T
u
0
×
T
v
0
/bardbl
is deﬁned.
If
n
(
/Phi1
(
u
0
,
v
0
)) denotes the unit normal to
S
at
/Phi1
(
u
0
,
v
0
), it follows that
(
T
u
0
×
T
v
0
)
/
/bardbl
T
u
0
×
T
v
0
/bardbl=±
n
(
/Phi1
(
u
0
,
v
0
))
.
The parametrization
/Phi1
is said to be
orientation-preserving
if we have the
+
sign;
that is, if (
T
u
×
T
v
)
/
/bardbl
T
u
×
T
v
/bardbl=
n
(
/Phi1
(
u
,
v
)) at all (
u
,
v
)
∈
D
for which
S
is smooth at
/Phi1
(
u
,
v
). In other words,
/Phi1
is orientation-preserving if the vector
T
u
×
T
v
points to the
outside of the surface. If
T
u
×
T
v
points to the inside of the surface at all points (
u
,
v
)
∈
D
for which
S
is regular at
/Phi1
(
u
,
v
), then
/Phi1
is said to be
orientation-reversing
. Using the
preceding notation, this condition corresponds to the choice (
T
u
×
T
v
)
/
/bardbl
T
u
×
T
v
/bardbl=
−
n
(
/Phi1
(
u
,
v
)).
It follows from this discussion that the M¨ obius band
M
cannot be parametrized
by a single parametrization for which
n
=
T
u
×
T
v
/negationslash=
0
and
n
is continuous over
the whole surface
13
(if there were such a parameterization, then
M
would indeed have
two sides, one determined by
n
and one determined by
−
n
). The sphere in Example
1 can be parametrized by a single parametrization, but not by one that is everywhere
one-to-one—see the discussion at the beginning of Section 7.4.
Thus, any one-to-one parametrized surface for which
T
u
×
T
v
never vanishes can
be considered as an oriented surface with a positive side determined by the direction of
T
u
×
T
v
.
example
2
We can give the unit sphere
x
2
+
y
2
+
z
2
=
1i n
R
3
(Figure 7.6.5) an orientation by
selecting the unit vector
n
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
r
, where
r
=
x
i
+
y
j
+
z
k
, which points to the
outside of the surface. This choice corresponds to our intuitive notion of outside for the
sphere.
Now that the sphere
S
is an oriented surface, consider the parametrization
/Phi1
of
S
given in Example 1. The cross product of the tangent vectors
T
θ
and
T
φ
—that is, a
normal to
S
is given by
(
−
sin
φ
)[(cos
θ
sin
φ
)
i
+
(sin
θ
sin
φ
)
j
+
(cos
φ
)
k
]
=−
r
sin
φ.
n
n
n
y
x
z
(1,
1
(
 0,
0
 0,
0)
 0)
)
1
1,
,
(
0, 1, 0
)
ﬁgure
7.6.5
The unit sphere oriented by its
outward normal
n
.
13
There is a single parametrization obtained by cutting a strip of paper, twisting it, and gluing the ends,
but it produces a discontinuous
n
on the surface.

<<<PAGE 431>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 404
404 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Because −sinφ≤0 for 0 ≤φ≤π, this normal vector points inward from the sphere.
Thus, the given parametrization /Phi1isorientation-reversing . By swapping the order of θ
andφ, we would get an orientation-preserving parametrization. ▲
Orientation and the Vector Surface Element
of a Sphere
Consider the sphere of radius R, namely, x2+y2+z2=R2. It is standard practice
to orient the sphere with the outward unit normal. In terms of the position vector
r=xi+yj+zk, the outward unit normal is given by
n=r
R.
The order of spherical coordinates that goes along with this orientation, as is evident
from Example 2, is given by the order ( φ,θ). The computation in Example 2 shows that
the surface-area element is then given by
dS=n·(Tφ×Tθ)dφdθ=rRsinφdφdθ=nR2sinφdφdθ.
The Orientation of Graphs
The next example discusses the orientation conventions for graphs. We shall compute
the area element on graphs later in this section.
example 3 LetSbe a surface described by z=g(x,y). As in equation (6), Section 7.5, there are
two unit normal vectors to Sat (x0,y0,g(x0,y0)), namely, ±n, where
n=−∂g
∂x(x0,y0)i−∂g
∂y(x0,y0)j+k
/radicalBigg/bracketleftbigg∂g
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg2
+/bracketleftbigg∂g
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightbigg2
+1.
We can orient all such surfaces by taking the positive side of Sto be the side away from
which npoints (Figure 7.6.6). Thus, the positive side of such a surface is determined
by the unit normal nwith positive kcomponent—that is, it is upward-pointing .I f
we parametrize this surface by /Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,g(u,v)), then /Phi1will be orientation-
preserving.
y
xz
de
Insitside
 Out
n
ﬁgure 7.6.6 npoints away from the outside of the
surface.
▲

<<<PAGE 432>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 405
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 405
Independence of Parametrization
We now state without proof a theorem showing that the integral over an oriented surface
is independent of the parametrization. The proof of this theorem is analogous to thatof Theorem 1 (Section 7.2); the heart of the proof is again the change of variablesformula—this time applied to double integrals.
Theorem 4 Independence of Surface Integrals on Parametrizations
LetSbe an oriented surface and let /Phi11and/Phi12be two regular orientation-
preserving parametrizations, with Fa continuous vector ﬁeld deﬁned on S. Then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi11F·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi12F·dS.
If/Phi11is orientation-preserving and /Phi12orientation-reversing, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi11F·dS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi12F·dS.
Iffis a real-valued continuous function deﬁned on S, and if /Phi11and/Phi12are
parametrizations of S, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi11fdS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi12fdS.
Note that if f=1, we obtain
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi11dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi12dS,
thus showing that area is independent of parametrization.
We can therefore unambiguously use the notation
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi1F·dS
(or a sum of such integrals, if Sis a union of parametrized surfaces that intersect only
along their boundary curves) where /Phi1is an orientation-preserving parametrization.
Theorem 4 guarantees that the value of the integral does not depend on the selectionof/Phi1.
Relation with Scalar Integrals
Recall from formula (1) of Section 7.2 that a line integral/integraltext
cF·dscan be thought of
as the path integral of the tangential component of Falong c(although for the case
in which cintersects itself, the integral obtained is technically not a path integral). A
similar situation holds for surface integrals, because we are assuming that the mappings/Phi1deﬁning the surface Sare one-to-one, except perhaps on the boundary of D, which
can be ignored for the purposes of integration. Thus, in deﬁning integrals over surfaces,we assume in this book that the surfaces are nonintersecting.

<<<PAGE 433>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 406
406 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
For an oriented smooth surface Sand an orientation-preserving parametrization /Phi1of
S, we can express/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSas an integral of a real-valued function fover the surface.
Letn=(Tu×Tv)//bardblT u×Tv/bardblbe the unit normal pointing to the outside of S. Then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Phi1F·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DF·(Tu×Tv)du dv
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DF·/parenleftbiggTu×Tv
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl/parenrightbigg
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(F·n)/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(F·n)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S,
where f=F·n. We have thus proved the following theorem.
Theorem 5/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, the surface integral of Fover S, is equal to the integral
of the normal component of Fover the surface. In short,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·ndS.
The observation in Theorem 5 can often save computational effort, as Example 4
demonstrates.
The Physical Interpretation of Surface Integrals
The geometric and physical signiﬁcance of the surface integral can be understood byexpressing it as a limit of Riemann sums. For simplicity, we assume Dis a rectangle.
Fix a parametrization /Phi1ofSthat preserves orientation and partition the region Dinto
n
2pieces Dij,0≤i≤n−1, 0≤j≤n−1. We let /Delta1udenote the length of the
horizontal side of Dijand/Delta1vdenote the length of the vertical side of Dij. Let ( u,v)
be a point in Dij, and ( x,y,z)=/Phi1(u,v) the corresponding point on the surface. We
consider the parallelogram with sides /Delta1uTuand/Delta1vTvlying in the plane tangent to S
at (x,y,z) and the parallelepiped formed by F,/Delta1uTu, and/Delta1vTv. The volume of the
parallelepiped is the absolute value of the triple product
F·(/Delta1uTu×/Delta1vTv)=F·(Tu×Tv)/Delta1u/Delta1v.
The vector Tu×Tvis normal to the surface at ( x,y,z) and points away from the outside
of the surface. Thus, the number F·(Tu×Tv) is positive when the parallelepiped lies
on the outside of the surface (Figure 7.6.7).
In general, the parallelepiped lies on that side of the surface away from which F
is pointing. If we think of Fas the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid, F(x,y,z) is pointing in
the direction in which ﬂuid is moving across the surface near ( x,y,z). Moreover, the
number
|F·(Tu/Delta1u×Tv/Delta1v)|
measures the amount of ﬂuid that passes through the tangent parallelogram per unit time.Because the sign of F·(/Delta1uT
u×/Delta1vTv) is positive if the vector Fis pointing outward at
(x,y,z) and negative if Fis pointing inward,/summationtext
i,jF·(Tu×Tv)/Delta1u/Delta1vis an approximate
measure of the net quantity of ﬂuid to ﬂow outward across the surface per unit time.

<<<PAGE 434>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 407
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 407
ﬁgure 7.6.7 F·(Tu×Tv)>0
when the parallelpiped formed
by/Delta1vTv,/Delta1uTu, and Flies to the
“outside” of the surface S.
uv
SΦ
y
xz
F
ΔuTuΔv Tv ΔvΔu
Dij
TuTv
Tvn
 F
F
Tu
 ﬁgure 7.6.8 When F·(Tu×Tv)>0 (left),
Fpoints outward; when F·(Tu×Tv)<0
(right), Fpoints inward.
(Remember that “outward” or “inward” depends on our choice of parametrization.
Figure 7.6.8 illustrates Fdirected outward and inward, given TuandTv.) Hence, the
integral/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSis the net quantity of ﬂuid to ﬂow across the surface per unit time,
that is, the rate of ﬂuid ﬂow . This integral is also called the ﬂuxofFacross the surface.
In the case where Frepresents an electric or a magnetic ﬁeld,/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSis also
commonly known as the ﬂux. The reader may be familiar with physical laws (such
asFaraday’ s law ) that relate ﬂux of a vector ﬁeld to a circulation (or current) in a
bounding loop. This is the historical and physical basis of Stokes’ theorem, which we
will discuss in Section 8.2. The corresponding principle in ﬂuid mechanics is called
Kelvin’ s circulation theorem .
Surface integrals also apply to the study of heat ﬂow. Let T(x,y,z) be the temperature
at a point ( x,y,z)∈W⊂R3, where Wis some region and Tis aC1function. Then
∇T=∂T
∂xi+∂T
∂yj+∂T
∂zk
represents the temperature gradient, and heat “ﬂows” with the vector ﬁeld −k∇T=F,
where kis a positive constant (see Section 8.5). Therefore,/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSis the total rate of
heat ﬂow or ﬂux across the surface S.
example 4 Suppose a temperature function is given in R3by the formula T(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2,
and let Sbe the unit sphere x2+y2+z2=1 oriented with the outward normal (see
Example 2). Find the heat ﬂux across the surface Sifk=1.
solution We have
F=− ∇ T(x,y,z)=−2xi−2yj−2zk.

<<<PAGE 435>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 408
408 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
OnS, the vector n(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zkis the unit “outward” normal to Sat (x,y,z),
and f(x,y,z)=F·n=−2x2−2y2−2z2=−2 is the normal component of F. From
Theorem 5 we can see that the surface integral of Fis equal to the integral of its normal
component f=F·nover S. Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=−2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SdS=−2A(S)=−2(4π)=−8π.
The ﬂux of heat is directed toward the center of the sphere (why toward?). Clearly, our
observation that/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=/integraltext/integraltext
Sfd S has saved us considerable computational time.
In this example, F(x,y,z)=−2xi−2yj−2zkcould also represent an electric ﬁeld,
in which case/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=−8πwould be the electric ﬂux across S.▲
example 5 Gauss’ Law There is an important physical law, due to the great mathematician and
physicist K. F . Gauss, that relates the ﬂux of an electric ﬁeld Eover a “closed” surface
S(e.g., a sphere or an ellipsoid) to the net charge Qenclosed by the surface, namely (in
suitable units),
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SE·dS=Q (1)
(see Figure 7.6.9). Gauss’ law will be discussed in detail in Chapter 8. This law is
analogous to Amp` ere’ s law (see Example 12, Section 7.2).
Suppose that E=En; that is, Eis a constant scalar multiple of the unit normal to
S. Then Gauss’ law, equation (1) in Example 5, becomes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SE·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SEd S=E/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SdS=Q
because E=E·n. Thus,
E=Q
A(S). (2)
S = closed surface
E = electric fiel d
E
ﬁgure 7.6.9 Gauss’ law:/integraltext/integraltext
SE·dS=Q,
where Qis the net charge inside S.
In the case where Sis the sphere of radius R, equation (2) becomes
E=Q
4πR2(3)
(see Figure 7.6.10).
Now suppose that Earises from an isolated point charge, Q. From symmetry it is
reasonable that E=En, where nis the unit normal to any sphere centered at Q. Hence,

<<<PAGE 436>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 409
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 409
QE
ﬁgure 7.6.10 The ﬁeld Edue to a point charge Qis
E=Qn/4π R2.
equation (3) holds. Consider a second point charge, Q0, located at a distance Rfrom
Q. The force Fthat acts on this second charge, Q0,i sg i v e nb y
F=EQ0=EQ 0n=QQ 0
4πR2n.
IfFis the magnitude of F,w eh a v e
F=QQ 0
4πR2,
which is Coulomb’s law for the force between two point charges.14▲
Surface Integrals Over Graphs
Finally, let us derive the surface-integral formulas for vector ﬁelds Fover surfaces S
that are graphs of functions. Consider the surface Sdescribed by z=g(x,y), where
(x,y)∈D, where Sis oriented with the upward-pointing unit normal:
n=−∂g
∂xi−∂g
∂yj+k
/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg2
+1.
We have seen that we can parametrize Sby/Phi1:D→R3given by /Phi1(x,y)=
(x,y,g(x,y)). In this case,/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dScan be written in a particularly simple form.
We have
Tx=i+∂g
∂xk, Ty=j+∂g
∂yk.
Thus, Tx×Ty=−(∂g/∂x)i−(∂g/∂y)j+k.I fF =F1i+F2j+F3kis a continuous
vector ﬁeld, then we get
14Sometimes one sees the formula F=(1/4πε 0)QQ 0/R2. The extra constant ε0appears when MKS
units are used for measuring charge. We are using CGS, or Gaussian, units.

<<<PAGE 437>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 410
410 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
The Surface Integral of a Vector Field Over a Graph S
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DF·(Tx×Ty)dx dy
(4)
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg
F1/parenleftbigg
−∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg
+F2/parenleftbigg
−∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg
+F3/bracketrightbigg
dx dy.
example 6 The equations
z=12, x2+y2≤25
describe a disc of radius 5 lying in the plane z=12. Suppose ris the vector ﬁeld
r(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk.
Compute/integraltext/integraltext
Sr·dS.
solution We shall do this in three ways. First, we have ∂z/∂x=∂z/∂y=0, because z=12 is
constant on the disc, so
r(x,y,z)·(Tx×Ty)=r(x,y,z)·(i×j)=r(x,y,z)·k=z.
Using the original deﬁnition at the beginning of this section, the integral becomes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dzd xd y =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D12dx dy=12(area of D)=300π.
A second solution: Because the disc is parallel to the xyplane, the outward unit normal
isk. Hence, n(x,y,z)=kandr·n=z. However, /bardblTx×Ty/bardbl=/bardbl k/bardbl=1, and so we
know from the discussion preceding Theorem 5 that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Szd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D12dx dy=300π.
Third, we may solve this problem by using formula (4) directly, with g(x,y)=12 and
Dthe disc x2+y2≤25:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x·0+y·0+12)dx dy=12(area of D)=300π. ▲
Summary: Formulas for Surface Integrals
1.Parametrized Surface: /Phi1(u,v)
a. Integral of a scalar function f:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SfdS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(/Phi1(u,v))/bardblT u×Tv/bardbldu dv
b. Scalar surface element:
dS=/bardblTu×Tv/bardbldu dv

<<<PAGE 438>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 411
7.6 Surface Integrals of Vector Fields 411
c. Integral of a vector ﬁeld F:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DF·(Tu×Tv)du dv
d. Vector surface element:
dS=(Tu×Tv)du dv =ndS
2.Graph: z=g(x,y)
a. Integral of a scalar function f:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y,g(x,y))
cosθdx dy
b. Scalar surface element:
dS=dx dy
cosθ=/radicalBigg/parenleftbigg∂g
∂x/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftbigg∂g
∂y/parenrightbigg2
+1dx dy,
where cos θ=n·k, and nis a unit normal vector to the surface.
c. Integral of a vector ﬁeld F:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg
−F1∂g
∂x−F2∂g
∂y+F3/parenrightbigg
dx dy
d. Vector surface element:
dS=n·dS=/parenleftbigg
−∂g
∂xi−∂g
∂yj+k/parenrightbigg
dx dy
3.Sphere: x2+y2+z2=R2
a. Scalar surface element:
dS=R2sinφdφdθ
b. Vector surface element:
dS=(xi+yj+zk)Rsinφdφdθ=rRsinφdφdθ=nR2sinφdφdθ
exercises
1.Consider the closed surface Sconsisting of the graph
z=1−x2−y2with z≥0, and also the unit disc in the
xyplane. Give this surface an outer normal. Compute:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS
where F(x,y,z)=(2x,2y,z).2.Evaluate the surface integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS
where F(x,y,z)=xi+yj+z2kandSis the surface
parameterized by /Phi1(u,v)=(2 sin u, 3 cos u,v), with
0≤u≤2πand 0≤v≤1.

<<<PAGE 439>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 412
412 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
3.LetF(x,y,z)=(x,y,z). Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS,
where Sis:
(a) the upper hemisphere of radius 3, centered at the
origin.
(b) the entire sphere of radius 3, centered at the origin.
4.LetF(x,y,z)=2xi−2yj+z2k. Evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS,
where Sis the cylinder x2+y2=4 with z∈[0, 1].
5.Let the temperature of a point in R3be given by
T(x,y,z)=3x2+3z2. Compute the heat ﬂux across
the surface x2+z2=2, 0≤y≤2, ifk=1.
6.Compute the heat ﬂux across the unit sphere Sif
T(x,y,z)=x. Can you interpret your answer
physically?
7.LetSbe the closed surface that consists of the
hemisphere x2+y2+z2=1,z≥0, and its base
x2+y2≤1,z=0. Let Ebe the electric ﬁeld deﬁned
byE(x,y,z)=2xi+2yj+2zk. Find the electric ﬂux
across S.(HINT: Break Sinto two pieces S1andS2and
evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
S1E·dSand/integraltext/integraltext
S2E·dSseparately.)
8.Let the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid be described by F=√yi
(measured in meters per second). Compute how many
cubic meters of ﬂuid per second are crossing the surface
x2+z2=1, 0≤y≤1, 0≤x≤1.
x2 2 2+y+z=4R
x2 2 2+y=4Rx22+yz
=R −R2( )
y
x
xy 2R2R
RRestaurant
Side view
Top viewR
ﬁgure 7.6.11 Restaurant plans.9.Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS, where Sis the surface
x2+y2+3z2=1,z≤0 and Fis the vector ﬁeld
F=yi−xj+zx3y2k. (Let n, the unit normal, be
upward pointing.)
10. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS, where F=(x2+y−4)i+
3xyj+(2xz+z2)kandSis the surface x2+y2+
z2=16,z≥0. (Let n, the unit normal, be upward
pointing.)
11. Calculate the integral/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where Sis the entire
surface of the solid half ball x2+y2+z2≤1,z≥0,
andF=(x+3y5)i+(y+10xz)j+(z−xy)k. (Let S
be oriented by the outward-pointing normal.)
12.∗A restaurant is being built on the side of a mountain.
The architect’ s plans are shown in Figure 7.6.11.
(a)The vertical curved wall of the restaurant is to bebuilt of glass. What will be the surface area of thiswall?
(b)To be large enough to be proﬁtable, the consultingengineer informs the developer that the volume ofthe interior must exceed πR
4/2. For what Rdoes
the proposed structure satisfy this requirement?
(c)During a typical summer day, the environs of therestaurant are subject to a temperature ﬁeld given by
T(x,y,z)=3x
2+(y−R)2+16z2.
A heat ﬂux density V=−k∇T(kis a constant
depending on the grade of insulation to be used)through all sides of the restaurant (including the topand the contact with the hill) produces a heat ﬂux.
∗The solution to this problem may be somewhat time-consuming.

<<<PAGE 440>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 413
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life 413
What is this total heat ﬂux? (Y our answer will
depend on Randk.)
13. Find the ﬂux of the vector ﬁeld V(x,y,z)=3xy2i+
3x2yj+z3kout of the unit sphere.
14. Evaluate the surface integral/integraltext/integraltext
SF·ndA, where
F(x,y,z)=i+j+z(x2+y2)2kandSis the surface of
the cylinder x2+y2≤1, 0≤z≤1.
15. LetSbe the surface of the unit sphere. Let Fbe a vector
ﬁeld and Frits radial component. Prove that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay2π
θ=0/integraldisplayπ
φ=0Frsinφdφdθ.
What is the corresponding formula for real-valuedfunctions f?
16. Prove the following mean-value theorem for surfaceintegrals: If Fis a continuous vector ﬁeld, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·ndS=[F(Q) ·n(Q)] A(S)
for some point Q ∈S, where A(S) is the area of S.
[HINT: Prove it for real functions ﬁrst, by reducing the
problem to one of a double integral: Show that if g≥0,
then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dfg dA =f(Q)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dgd A
for some Q ∈D(do it by considering
(/integraltext/integraltext
Dfg dA )/(/integraltext/integraltext
Dgd A) and using the intermediate-
value theorem).]
17. Work out a formula like that in Exercise 15 forintegration over the surface of a cylinder.
18. LetSbe a surface in R3that is actually a subset Dof the
xyplane. Show that the integral of a scalar function
f(x,y,z)o v e r Sreduces to the double integral of
f(x,y,z)o v e r D. What does the surface integral of avector ﬁeld over Sbecome? (Make sure your answer is
compatible with Example 6.)
19. Let the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid be described byF=i+xj+zk(measured in meters per second).
Compute how many cubic meters of ﬂuid per second arecrossing the surface described by
x
2+y2+z2=1,z≥0.
20. (a)A uniform ﬂuid that ﬂows vertically downward(heavy rain) is described by the vector ﬁeldF(x,y,z)=(0, 0,−1). Find the total ﬂux through
the cone z=(x
2+y2)1/2,x2+y2≤1.
(b)The rain is driven sideways by a strong wind so thatit falls at a 45
◦angle, and it is described by
F(x,y,z)=−(√
2/2, 0,√
2/2). Now what is the
ﬂux through the cone?
21. Fora>0,b>0,c>0, let Sbe the upper half ellipsoid
S=/braceleftbigg
(x,y,z)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex2
a2+y2
b2+z2
c2=1,z≥0/bracerightbigg
,
with orientation determined by the upward normal.
Compute/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSwhere F(x,y,z)=(x3,0 ,0 ) .
22. IfSis the upper hemisphere {(x,y,z)|x2+y2+
z2=1,z≥0}oriented by the normal pointing out of
the sphere, compute/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dSfor parts (a) and (b).
(a)F(x,y,z)=xi+yj
(b)F(x,y,z)=yi+xj
(c) For each of these vector ﬁelds, compute/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dSand/integraltext
CF·ds, where Cis the unit
circle in the xyplane traversed in the
counterclockwise direction (as viewed from thepositive zaxis). (Notice that Cis the boundary of S.
The phenomenon illustrated here will be studiedmore thoroughly in the next chapter, using Stokes’theorem.)
7.7Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life∗
In the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century, the great German mathematician Karl Friedrich
Gauss developed a theory of curved surfaces in R3. More than a century earlier, Isaac
Newton had deﬁned a measure of the curvature of a space curve, and Gauss was ableto ﬁnd extensions of this idea of curvature that would apply to surfaces. In so doing,Gauss made several remarkable discoveries.
∗This section can be skipped on a ﬁrst reading without loss of continuity.

<<<PAGE 441>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 414
414 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
Curvature of Surfaces
For paths c:[a,b]→R3that have unit speed—that is, /bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=1—the curvature κof
the image curve κ(c(t)) at the point c(t) is deﬁned to be the length of the acceleration
vector. That is, /bardblc/prime/prime(t)/bardbl=κ (c(t)). For paths cin space, the curvature is a true measure
of the curvature of the geometric image curve C.As we saw at the end of Section 7.1,
the “total curvature”/integraltext
κdsover Chas “topological” implications. The same, and even
more, will hold for Gauss’ deﬁnition of the total curvature of a surface. We begin with
some deﬁnitions.
Let/Phi1:D→R3be a smooth parametrized surface. Then, as we know,
Tu=∂/Phi1
∂uand Tv=∂/Phi1
∂v
are tangent vectors to the image surface S=/Phi1(D) at the point /Phi1(u,v). We will also
assume that there is a well-deﬁned normal vector; that is, we assume the surface isregular: T
u×Tv/negationslash=0.
Let
E=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂u/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
, F=∂/Phi1
∂u·∂/Phi1
∂v, G=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble∂/Phi1
∂v/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
.
In Exercise 23 of Section 7.5, we saw that
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl2=EG−F2.
For notational reasons, we denote EG–F2byW. Furthermore, we let
N=Tu×Tv
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl=Tu×Tv√
W
denote the unitnormal vector to the image surface at p=/Phi1(u,v). Next we will deﬁne
two new measures of the curvature of a surface at p—the “Gauss curvature,” K(p),
and the “mean curvature,” H(p). Both of these curvatures have deep connections to the
curvature of space curves, which illuminate the meaning of their deﬁnitions, but we do
not explore these here.
To deﬁne these two curvatures, we ﬁrst deﬁne three new functions /lscript,m,nonSas
follows:
/lscript(p)=N(u,v)·∂2/Phi1
∂u2=N(u,v)·/Phi1uu
m(p)=N(u,v)·∂2/Phi1
∂u∂v=N(u,v)·/Phi1uv (1)
n(p)=N(u,v)·∂2/Phi1
∂v2=N(u,v)·/Phi1vv.
TheGauss curvature K(p)o fSatpis given by
K(p)=/lscriptn−m2
W, (2)

<<<PAGE 442>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 415
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life 415
and the mean curvature H(p)o fSatpis deﬁned by15
H(p)=G/lscript+En−2Fm
2W, (3)
where the right-hand sides of both expressions are calculated at the point p=/Phi1(u,v).
example 1 Planes Have Zero Curvature Let/Phi1(u,v)=αu+βv+γ,(u,v)∈R2, where
α,β,γare vectors in R3. According to Example 1 of Section 7.3, this determines a
parametrized plane in R3. Show that at every point, both the Gauss and mean curvatures
are zero, and hence KandHvanish identically.
solution Because /Phi1uu=/Phi1uv=/Phi1vv≡0, the functions /lscript,m,nvanish everywhere, and so
doHand K.Thus, a plane has “zero” curvature. Hence, at least in this example,
we ought to be convinced that HandKactually do measure the ﬂatness of the plane.
Conversely, we can show that if HandKvanish identically, then Sis part of a plane (see
Exercise 12). ▲
example 2 Curvature of a Hemisphere Let
/Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,g(u,v)),
where g(u,v)=√
R2−u2−v2is a parametrization of the “upper hemisphere” of
radius R.Show that the Gauss curvature at every point is 1/ R2and the mean curvature
is 1/ R.
solution We must ﬁrst calculate the following quantities:
Tu,Tv,Tu×Tv,/Phi1uu,/Phi1vv,/Phi1uv,E,G,F,/lscript,m,n.
First of all, we have
/Phi1u=Tu=i−u√
R2−u2−v2k
/Phi1v=Tv=j−v√
R2−v2−v2k.
From formula (2) in Section 7.3, we have
Tu×Tv=−∂g
∂ui−∂g
∂vj+k
=u√
R2−u2−v2i+v√
R2−u2−v2j+k.
Therefore,
E=/bardbl/Phi1u/bardbl2=1+u2
R2−u2−v2=R2−v2
R2−u2−v2
G=/bardbl/Phi1v/bardbl2=R2−u2
R2−u2−v2
F=/Phi1u·/Phi1v=uv
R2−u2−v2.
15Technically speaking, K(p) and H(p) could, in principle, depend on the parametrization /Phi1ofS,
but we can show that they are, in fact, independent of /Phi1.

<<<PAGE 443>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 416
416 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
From Exercise 23 of Section 7.5, we know that
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl2=EG−F2=(R2−v2)(R2−u2)−u2v2
(R2−u2−v2)2
=R4−R2u2−R2v2
(R2−u2−v2)2=R2
(R2−u2−v2)=W.
Now a direct calculation shows that
/Phi1uu=R2−v2
(R2−u2−v2)3/2k
/Phi1vv=R2−u2
(R2−u2−v2)3/2k
/Phi1uv=uv
(R2−u2−v2)3/2k.
Furthermore,
N=Tu×Tv
/bardblTu×Tv/bardbl=Tu×Tv√
W
=√
R2−u2−v2
R·/parenleftbiggu√
R2−u2−v2i+v√
R2−u2−v2j+k/parenrightbigg
=1
R/parenleftBig
ui+vj+/radicalbig
R2−u2−v2k/parenrightBig
.
Thus,
/lscript=N·/Phi1uv=1
R/parenleftbiggR2−v2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg
n=N·/Phi1vv=1
R/parenleftbiggR2−u2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg
m=N·/Phi1uv=1
R/parenleftbigguv
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg
.
Therefore,
/lscriptn−m2=1
R2/parenleftbigg(R2−v2)(R2−u2)−u2v2
(R2−u2−v2)2/parenrightbigg
=1
R2−u2−v2.
Dividing this by Wyields K=1/R2. Thus, the Gauss curvature does not change from
point to point on the hemisphere; that is, it is constant. This conforms to our intuition
that the sphere is perfectly symmetrical and that its curvature is everywhere equal.Hence, the mean curvature should also be constant. This is veriﬁed by the following

<<<PAGE 444>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 417
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life 417
calculation:
H=G/lscript+En−2Fm
2W
=1
2W/braceleftbigg/parenleftbiggR2−u2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg1
R/parenleftbiggR2−v2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbiggR2−v2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg1
R/parenleftbiggR2−u2
R2−u2−v2/parenrightbigg
−2u2v2
(R2−u2−v2)2/bracerightbigg
=1
W/braceleftbiggR
R2−u2−v2/bracerightbigg
=1
R.▲
Surfaces of Constant Curvature
Surfaces of constant Gauss and mean curvature are of great interest to mathemati-
cians. It was known in the nineteenth century that the only closed and bounded smoothsurfaces with “no boundary” and with constant Gauss curvature were spheres. In thetwentieth century, the Russian mathematician Alexandrov showed that the only closedand bounded smooth surfaces without a boundary that do not intersect themselves andthat have constant mean curvature must also be spheres. Mathematicians believed thatAlexandrov’ s result held even if the surface wasallowed to intersect itself, but no one
could ﬁnd a proof. In 1984, Professor Henry Wente (Toledo, Ohio) startled the worldby ﬁnding a self-intersecting torus of constant mean curvature.
Surfaces of constant mean curvature are physically relevant and occur throughout
nature. Soap bubble formations have constant nonzero mean curvature (see Figure 7.7.1),and soap ﬁlm formations (containing no air) have constant mean curvature zero (seeFigures 7.7.2 and 7.7.3).
ﬁgure 7.7.1 Soap bubble
formation; H=constant.
ﬁgure 7.7.2 A helicoid, H=0 .In the early nineteenth century, the French mathematician Delaunay discovered all
surfaces of revolution that have constant mean curvature: the cylinder, sphere, catenoid,unduloid, and nodoid. The catenoid exists as a soap ﬁlm surface spanning two circularcontours.
Optimal Shapes in Nature
Throughout the ages, people have speculated on why things are shaped the way theyare. Why are the earth and the stars “round” and not cubical? Why are life forms shapedthe way they are?
ﬁgure 7.7.3 A soap ﬁlm, H=0 ,
spanning two circular wires; this
one is the catenoid.

<<<PAGE 445>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 418
418 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
ﬁgure 7.7.4 Surfaces of
revolution of constant mean
curvature as unicellulars.
In 1917, the British natural philosopher D’Arcy Thompson published a provocative
work entitled On Growth and Form, in which he investigated the forces behind the
creation of living forms in nature. He wrote:
In an organism, great or small, it is not merely the nature of the motions of the living
substance which we must interpret in terms of force (according to kinetics), but also theconformation of the organism itself, whose permanence or equilibrium is explained by theinteraction or balance of forces, as described in statics.
Surprisingly, Thompson discovered allof Delaunay’ s surfaces in the form of unicellular
organisms (see Figure 7.7.4). The constant mean curvature of these organisms can be
explained by minimum principles similar to those described in the Historical Note inSection 3.3. In 1952, Watson and Crick determined that the structure of DNA is that of adouble helix, a discovery that set the stage for the genetic revolution. We know from soapﬁlms, as in Figure 7.7.2, that nature likes helicoid forms, and nature tends to repeat pat-terns. A better understanding of the scientiﬁc principles underlying life may ultimatelyhelp mathematics play a more prominent role in this area of theoretical biology.
Curvature and Physics
The theory of curved surfaces, initiated by Gauss, has had a profound effect on physics.Gauss realized that the Gauss curvature K of a surface depended only on the measure ofdistance on the surface itself; that is, curvature was intrinsic to the surface. This is not
true of the mean curvature H. Thus, beings “living” on the surface would be able to tell
that the surface was curving, without any reference to an “external” world. Gauss himselffound this mathematical result to be so striking that he named it theorema egregium,o r
“remarkable theorem.” Gauss’ theory was generalized by his student Bernhard Riemannton-dimensional surfaces for which one could describe a notion of curvature.
Recall that Newton created the idea of a gravitational force acting over vast galactic
distances, pulling galaxies together as well as pushing them apart (see Figure 7.7.5). Inthe early 1900s, Albert Einstein used Riemann’ s ideas to develop the general theory of
relativity, a theory of gravitation that eliminated the need to consider forces (as Newtondid) acting over great distances. Einstein’ s theory explained the bending of light by thesun, black holes, the expansion of the universe, the formation of galaxies, and the BigBang itself. For most applications, including the dynamics of our solar system, Newton’ stheory sufﬁces and is commonly used today by NASA to plan space missions, as we sawin Section 4.1. But for cosmological applications on the grand scale, Einstein’ s theoryreplaced that of Isaac Newton, published in his Principia in 1687.
As a testament to his genius, and despite the astounding success of this theory,
Newton was nevertheless disturbed by questions about how this gravitational force

<<<PAGE 446>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 419
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life 419
ﬁgure 7.7.5 The Andromeda
Galaxy. It will collide with the
Milky Way in roughly 2 billionyears.
acted. He could give no other explanation than to say, “I have not been able to deduce
from phenomena the reason for these properties of gravitation, and I do not inventhypotheses; for anything which cannot be deduced from phenomena should be calledan hypothesis.” Moreover, in a letter to his friend, Richard Bentley, Newton wrote:
That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter, so that one body may act
upon another at a distance, through which their action may be conveyed from one toanother, is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no man, who has in philosophicalmatters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall into it.
Newton coined the term action at a distance (which means “force acting at a dis-
tance”) to describe the mysterious effect of gravitation over large distances. This effect
is as difﬁcult to understand today as it was in Newton’ s time.
Johann Bernoulli found it difﬁcult to believe in the concept of a force that acts through
a vacuum of space over distances of even hundreds of millions of miles. He viewedthis force as a concept revolting to minds unaccustomed to accepting any principle inphysics, save those that are incontestable and evident. Additionally, Leibniz consideredgravitation to be an incorporeal and inexplicable power, philosophically void.
ﬁgure 7.7.6 Albert Einstein (1879–
1955) at his desk in the Patent
Ofﬁce, Bern, 1905.It was perhaps Albert Einstein’ s greatest inspiration (see Figure 7.7.6) to replace
Newton’ s model of gravitation with a model that would have thrilled the early Greeks—a
geometric model of gravitation. In Einstein’ s theory, the concept of a force acting throughgreat distances has been replaced by the curvature of a space–time
16world. As the quote
at the beginning of the chapter illustrates, W . K. Clifford had a premonition of events tocome! In order to elucidate Einstein’ s scheme, we shall present an oversimpliﬁed modelthat conveys some of his basic ideas.
We represent space by a surface that we imagine as an originally ﬂat trampoline (the
vacuum state), which is at some point strongly deformed by the weight of a giganticsteel ball (the sun). A tiny steel ball rolling on the trampoline is our planet Earth (seeFigure 7.7.7)
If we roll the small steel ball across the ﬂat trampoline, it will travel in a straight-line
path. However, if we now place the gigantic steel ball in the center, it will cause the
16Space–time is locally like R4with three space coordinates and one time coordinate.

<<<PAGE 447>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 420
420 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
(b) (c) (a)
ﬁgure 7.7.7 (a) A particle on a taut trampoline moves in a straight line. (b) A heavy steel ball
distorts the trampoline. (c) A particle on the distorted trampoline follows a curved path.
trampoline to bend, or “curve,” even “far away” from the large ball. If we then give
our little ball a push, it will no longer travel in a straight line but in a curved path. The
big ball affects the trajectory of the little ball by curving the space around it. With just
the right push, the little ball might even orbit the big one for a while. This trampoline
model explains how a large body could, by curving space, inﬂuence a small one over
great distance.
Einstein stated that space–time is curved by matter and energy. In this curved space–
time, even light rays are bent as they pass near massive objects like our sun. Thanks
to Gauss and Riemann, the curvature of space–time requires no external “universe” in
which it curves. Moreover, in Einstein’ s curved world, light travels along shortest paths
in space–time called geodesics . It is normally impossible to observe light rays close to
the bright Sun, but a solar eclipse provides a marvelous opportunity for such measure-
ments. Two British expeditions to New Guinea (under Eddington and Cottingham) and
to Sobral in northern Brazil used the solar eclipse of May 29, 1919, to observe whether
light rays coming from stars and passing close to the Sun were bent. Both expeditions
were able to conﬁrm Einstein’ s prediction, and Eddington later wrote,
Oh leave the Wise our measures to collate;
One thing, at least, is certain: LIGHT has WEIGHT.
One thing is certain, and the rest debate:
Light-rays, when near the Sun, DO NOT GO STRAIGHT.
The equations that tell one how much space and time are curved by matter and energy
are known as Einstein’ s ﬁeld equations. A description of them is beyond the scope of
this book, but the mathematical kernel from which these equations arise is not; this
kernel is based on another remarkable result of the research of Gauss and Bonnet.
Gauss–Bonnet Theorem
In Example 2, we computed the Gauss curvature Kof the sphere x2+y2+z2=R2of
radius Rand found it to be the constant 1 /R2. The Gauss curvature Kis a scalar-valued
function over the surface, and as such we can integrate it over the surface. We wish to
consider a constant times this surface integral, namely,
1
2π/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SKd A.
For the sphere of radius R, this quantity becomes
1
2πR2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SdA=4πR2
2πR2=2.

<<<PAGE 448>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 421
7.7 Applications to Differential Geometry, Physics, and Forms of Life 421
ﬁgure 7.7.8 A deformed sphere.
1/2π/integraltext/integraltext
SKd A =2 .
ﬁgure 7.7.9 Gluing a handle to
a sphere to obtain a torus.
=Handle
+
Torus=
What Gauss and Bonnet discovered was that if Sisany“sphere-like” closed surface
(closed and bounded, but with no boundary, as in Figure 7.7.8), then
1
2π/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SKd A=2
still holds.17
Thus, the integral
1
2π/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SKd A
always equals the integer 2, and is therefore a topological invariant of the surface. That
the integral of curvature should be an interesting quantity should be already clear from
the discussion at the end of Section 7.1.
Now consider a torus, or doughnut. The torus can be considered as coming from the
sphere by cutting out two discs and gluing in a handle (see Figure 7.7.9).
Moreover, we can continue this process adding 1, 2, 3, . . . , ghandles to the sphere.
Ifghandles are attached, we call the resulting surface a surface of genus g,a si n
Figure 7.7.10. Notice that the torus has genus 1.
If two surfaces have a different genus, they are topologically distinct, and thus can-
not be obtained from one another by bending or stretching. Interestingly, even two
surfaces with the same genus can sit in space in quite different and complex ways, as
in Figure 7.7.11. Astonishingly, even though the integral (or total curvature) given by
17Roughly speaking, this means that Scan be obtained from the sphere by bending and stretching (like
with a balloon) but not tearing (the balloon bursts!).

<<<PAGE 449>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 422
422 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
ﬁgure 7.7.10 A sphere with 0, 1,
2, 3 handles attached.
ﬁgure 7.7.11 Two manifestations
of a surface SinR3of genus 2.
Simple double doughnut Baker’s pretzel
(1/2π)/integraltext/integraltext
SKd A depends on the genus, it does not depend on how the surface sits in
space (and thus not on K).
ﬁgure 7.7.12 David Hilbert
(1862–1943) was a leading
mathematician of his time.Gauss and Bonnet proved that
1
2π/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SKd A=2−2g.
Thus, for the sphere ( g=0), it is always 2 (already veriﬁed); for the torus, it is always
0 (see Exercise 10).
There is something even more remarkable connected to the theorem of Gauss–
Bonnet, observed by the great German mathematician David Hilbert (Figure 7.7.12).
Hilbert observed that the Gauss–Bonnet theorem is, in effect, a two-dimensional
version of Einstein’ s ﬁeld equations. In the physics literature, this fact is known as
Hilbert’ s action principle in general relativity.18Not surprisingly, similar geometric
ideas are being employed by contemporary researchers in an effort to unify gravity and
quantum mechanics—to “quantize” gravity, so to speak.
18See C. Misner, K. Thorne, and A. Wheeler, Gravitation , Freeman, New Y ork, 1972.

<<<PAGE 450>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 423
Review Exercises for Chapter 7 423
exercises
1.The helicoid can be described by
/Phi1(u,v)=(ucosv,usinv,bv), where b/negationslash=0.
Show that H=0 and that K=−b2/(b2+u2)2.I n
Figures 7.7.1 and 7.7.5, we see that the helicoid is
actually a soap ﬁlm surface. Surfaces in which H=0
are called minimal surfaces.
2.Consider the saddle surface z=xy.Show that
K=−1
(1+x2+y2)2,
and that
H=−xy
(1+x2+y2)3/2.
3.Show that /Phi1(u,v)=(u,v, log cos v−log cos u) has
mean curvature zero (and is thus a minimal surface; seeExercise 1).
4.Find the Gauss curvature of the elliptic paraboloid
z=x2
a2+y2
b2.
5.Find the Gauss curvature of the hyperbolic paraboloid
z=x2
a2−y2
b2.
6.Compute the Gauss curvature of the ellipsoid
x2
a2+y2
a2+z2
c2=1.7.After ﬁnding Kin Exercise 6, integrate Kto show that:
1
2π/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SKd A =2.
8.Find the curvature Kof:
(a) the cylinder /Phi1(u,v)=(2 cos v, 2 sin v,u)
(b) the surface /Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,u2)
9.Show that Enneper’ s surface
/Phi1(u,v)=/parenleftbigg
u−u3
3+uv2,v−v3
3+u2v,u2−v2/parenrightbigg
is a minimal surface ( H=0).
10. Consider the torus Tgiven in Exercise 4, Section 7.4.
Compute its Gauss curvature and verify the theorem ofGauss–Bonnet. [H
INT: Show that
/bardblTθ×Tφ/bardbl2=(R+cosφ)2and
K=cosφ/(R+cosφ).]
11. Let/Phi1(u,v)=(u,h(u) cosv,h(u) sinv),h>0, be a
surface of revolution. Show that
K=−h/prime/prime/h{1+(h/prime)2}2.
12. A parametrization /Phi1of a surface Sis said to be
conformal (see Section 7.4), provided that E=G,F=
0. Assume that /Phi1conformally parametrizes S.19Show
that if HandKvanish identically, then Smust be part
of a plane in R3.
review exercises for chapter 7
1.Integrate f(x,y,z)=xyzalong the following paths:
(a)c(t)=(etcost,etsint,3 ) ,0 ≤t≤2π
(b)c(t)=(cost, sint,t), 0≤t≤2π
(c)c(t)=3
2t2i+2t2j+tk,0≤t≤1
(d)c(t)=ti+(1/√
2)t2j+1
3t3k,0≤t≤12.Compute the integral of falong the path cin each of the
following cases:
(a) f(x,y,z)=x+y+yz;c(t)=(sint, cos t,t),
0≤t≤2π
(b) f(x,y,z)=x+cos2z;c(t)=(sint, cos t,t),
0≤t≤2π
19Gauss proved that conformal parametrization of a surface always exists. The result of this exercise remains valid even if /Phi1is not conformal,
but the proof is more difﬁcult.

<<<PAGE 451>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 424
424 Integrals Over Paths and Surfaces
(c) f(x,y,z)=x+y+z;c(t)=(t,t2,2
3t3),
0≤t≤1
3.Compute each of the following line integrals:
(a)/integraltext
C(sinπx)dy−(cosπy)dz, where Cis the triangle
whose vertices are (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1),
in that order
(b)/integraltext
C(sinz)dx+(cos z)dy−(xy)1/3dz, where Cis
the path c(θ)=(cos3θ, sin3θ,θ), 0≤θ≤7π/2
4.IfF(x) is orthogonal to c/prime(t) at each point on the curve
x=c(t), what can you say about/integraltext
cF·ds?
5.Find the work done by the forceF(x,y)=(x
2−y2)i+2xyj in moving a particle
counterclockwise around the square with corners(0, 0), ( a,0 ) ,( a,a), (0, a),a>0.
6.A ring in the shape of the curve x2+y2=a2is formed
of thin wire weighing |x|+|y|grams per unit length at
(x,y). Find the mass of the ring.
7.Find a parametrization for each of the following surfaces:
(a)x2+y2+z2−4x−6y=12
(b)2x2+y2+z2−8x=1
(c) 4 x2+9y2−2z2=8
8.Find the area of the surface deﬁned by/Phi1:(u,v)/mapsto→(x,y,z), where
x=h(u,v)=u+v, y=g(u,v)=u,
z=f(u,v)=v;
0≤u≤1, 0≤v≤1. Sketch.
9.Write a formula for the surface area of/Phi1:(r,θ)/mapsto→(x,y,z), where
x=rcosθ, y=2rsinθ, z=r;
0≤r≤1, 0≤θ≤2π. Describe the surface.
10. Suppose z=f(x,y) and
(∂f/∂x)2+(∂f/∂y)2=c,c>0. Show that the area of
the graph of flying over a region Din the xyplane is√1+ctimes the area of D.
11. Compute the integral of f(x,y,z)=x2+y2+z2over
the surface in Review Exercise 8.
12. Find/integraltext/integraltext
Sfd S in each of the following cases:
(a) f(x,y,z)=x;Sis the part of the plane
x+y+z=1 in the positive octant deﬁned by
x≥0,y≥0,z≥0(b) f(x,y,z)=x2;Sis the part of the plane x=z
inside the cylinder x2+y2=1
(c) f(x,y,z)=x;Sis the part of the cylinder
x2+y2=2xwith 0 ≤z≤/radicalbig
x2+y2
13. Compute the integral of f(x,y,z)=xyzover the
rectangle with vertices (1, 0, 1), (2, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1), and( 2 ,1 ,0 ) .
14. Compute the integral of x+yover the surface of the
unit sphere.
15. Compute the surface integral of xover the triangle with
vertices (1, 1, 1), (2, 1, 1), and (2, 0, 3).
16. A paraboloid of revolution Sis parametrized by
/Phi1(u,v)=(ucosv,usinv,u2), 0≤u≤2, 0≤v≤2π.
(a) Find an equation in x,y, and zdescribing the
surface.
(b) What are the geometric meanings of the parameters
uandv?
(c) Find a unit vector orthogonal to the surface at
/Phi1(u,v).
(d) Find the equation for the tangent plane at
/Phi1(u0,v0)=(1, 1, 2) and express your answer in the
following two ways:
(i) parametrized by uandv; and
(ii) in terms of x,y, and z.
(e) Find the area of S.
17. Letf(x,y,z)=xeycosπz.
(a)Compute F=∇ f.
(b)Evaluate/integraltext
CF·ds, where
c(t)=(3 cos4t, 5 sin7t,0 ) ,0 ≤t≤π.
18. LetF(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS,
where Sis the upper hemisphere of the unit sphere
x2+y2+z2=1.
19. LetF(x,y,z)=xi+yj+zk. Evaluate/integraltext
cF·ds, where
c(t)=(et,t,t2), 0≤t≤1.
20. LetF=∇ ffor a given scalar function. Let c(t)b ea
closed curve, that is, c(b)=c(a). Show that/integraltext
cF·ds=0.
21. Consider the surface /Phi1(u,v)=(u2cosv,u2sinv,u).
Compute the unit normal at u=1,v=0. Compute the
equation of the tangent plane at this point.

<<<PAGE 452>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:26 425
Review Exercises for Chapter 7 425
22. LetSbe the part of the cone z2=x2+y2with zbetween
1 and 2 oriented by the normal pointing out of the cone.
Compute/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where F(x,y,z)=(x2,y2,z2).
23. LetF=xi+x2j+yzkrepresent the velocity ﬁeld of a
ﬂuid (velocity measured in meters per second). Computehow many cubic meters of ﬂuid per second are crossingthexyplane through the square 0 ≤x≤1, 0≤y≤1.
24. Show that the surface area of the part of the sphere
x2+y2+z2=1 lying above the rectangle
[−a,a]×[−a,a], where 2 a2<1, in the xyplane is
A=2/integraldisplaya
−asin−1/parenleftbigg
a√
1−x2/parenrightbigg
dx.
25. LetSbe a surface and Ca closed curve bounding S.
Verify the equality
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× F)·dS=/integraldisplay
CF·ds
ifFis a gradient ﬁeld (use Review Exercise 20).
26. Calculate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where F(x,y,z)=(x,y,−y) and
Sis the cylindrical surface deﬁned by x2+y2=1,
0≤z≤1, with normal pointing out of the cylinder.
27. LetSbe the portion of the cylinder x2+y2=4 between
the planes z=0 and z=x+3. Compute the following:
(a)/integraltext/integraltext
Sx2dS
(b)/integraltext/integraltext
Sy2dS
(c)/integraltext/integraltext
Sz2dS28. Let/Gamma1be the curve of intersection of the plane
z=ax+by, with the cylinder x2+y2=1. Find all
values of the real numbers aandbsuch that a2+b2=1
and
/integraldisplay
/Gamma1yd x+(z−x)dy−yd z=0.
29. A circular helix that lies on the cylinder x2+y2=R2
with pitch pmay be described parametrically by
x=Rcosθ, y=Rsinθ, z=pθ,θ≥0.
A particle slides under the action of gravity (which actsparallel to the zaxis) without friction along the helix. If
the particle starts out at the height z
0>0, then when it
reaches the height z,0≤z<z0, along the helix, its
speed is given by
ds
dt=/radicalbig
(z0−z)2g,
where sis arc length along the helix, gis the constant of
gravity, and tis time.
(a) Find the length of the part of the helix between the
planes z=z0andz=z1,0≤z1<z0.
(b) Compute the time T0it takes the particle to reach the
plane z=0.

<<<PAGE 453>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 454>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 427
8
The Integral Theorems
of Vector Analysis
From a long view of the history of mankind---seen from, say, ten thousand years from
now---there can be little doubt that the most signiﬁcant event of the nineteenth century willbe judged as Maxwell's discovery of the laws of electrodynamics. The American Civil Warwill pale into provincial insigniﬁcance in comparison with this important scientiﬁc event ofthe same decade. ---Richard Feynman
The Special Theory of Relativity owes its origins to Maxwell's Equations...
---Albert Einstein
We are now prepared to tie together vector differential calculus and
vector integral calculus. This will be done by means of the important the-
orems of Green, Gauss, and Stokes. We shall also point out some of thephysical applications of these theorems to the study of gravitation, elec-tricity, and magnetism.
The basic integral theorems in vector analysis had their origins in ap-
plications. For example, Green’s theorem, discovered about 1828, arosein connection with potential theory (this includes gravitational and elec-trical potentials). Gauss’ theorem—the divergence theorem—arose inconnection with the study of capillarity (this theorem should be jointlycredited to the Russian mathematician Ostrogradsky, who discoveredthe theorem around the same time as Gauss). Stokes’ theorem was ﬁrstsuggested in a letter to Stokes from the physicist Lord Kelvin in 1850 andwas used by Stokes on the examination for the Smith Prize in 1854.
427

<<<PAGE 455>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 428
428 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
8.1Green’s Theorem
Green’ s theorem relates a line integral along a closed curve Cin the plane R2to a
double integral over the region enclosed by C. This important result will be generalized
in the following sections to curves and surfaces in R3. We shall be referring to line
integrals around curves that are the boundaries of elementary regions (see Section 5.3).
To understand the ideas in this section, you may also need to refer to Section 7.2.
Simple and Elementary Regions and Their Boundaries
A simple closed curve Cthat is the boundary of an elementary region has two ori-
entations—counterclockwise (positive) and clockwise (negative). We denote Cwith
the counterclockwise orientation as C+, and with the clockwise orientation as C−
(Figure 8.1.1).
The boundary Cof a y-simple region can be decomposed into bottom and top
portions, C1andC2, and (if applicable) left and right vertical portions, B1and B2.
Following Figure 8.1.2, we write,
C+=C+
1+B+
2+C−
2+B−
1,
where the pluses denote the curves oriented in the direction of left to right or bottomto top, and the minuses denote the curves oriented from right to left or from top tobottom.
We can make a similar decomposition of the boundary of an x-simple region into
left and right portions, and upper and lower horizontal portions (if applicable)(Figure 8.1.3).
Similarly, the boundary of a simple region has twodecompositions: one into upper
and lower halves, the other into left and right halves.
Positive orientation Negative orientationC+−C
(a) (b)ﬁgure 8.1.1 (a) Positive orientation
ofC,and (b) negative orientation
ofC.
ﬁgure 8.1.2 Two examples
showing how to break the
positively oriented boundary of a
y-simple region Dinto oriented
components.
x xy
xy
y = φ  (x)
12
y = φ  (x)1 y = φ  (x)y = φ  (x)2
ab a bC−2
B−
1C+1+C1C−2
B+
2B+
2DDC   = C  + B   + C   + B+ + 1+
2−2−
1 C   = C  + B   + C   + + 1+
2−2

<<<PAGE 456>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 429
8.1 Green’s Theorem 429
xy
x = y (y)21x =y (y)
cd
C−1C+2
B+
1B−
2C   = C  + B   + C   + B+ + 2− − +
1 2 1
ﬁgure 8.1.3 An example showing how to break
the positively oriented boundary of an x-simple
region Dinto oriented components.
Green’s Theorem
We shall now prove two lemmas in preparation for Green’ s theorem.
Lemma 1LetDbe a y-simple region and let Cbe its boundary. Suppose
P:D→Ris of class C1. Then
/integraldisplay
C+Pd x=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂P
∂ydx dy.
(The left-hand side denotes the line integral/integraltext
C+Pd x+Qd y , where Q=0.)
proof Suppose Dis described by
a≤x≤b φ1(x)≤y≤φ2(x).
We decompose C+by writing C+=C+
1+B+
2+C−
2+B−
1(see Figure 8.1.2). By
Fubini’ s theorem, we can evaluate the double integral as an iterated integral and then
use the fundamental theorem of calculus:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂P
∂y(x,y)dx dy=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplayφ2(x)
φ1(x)∂P
∂y(x,y)dy dx
=/integraldisplayb
a[P(x,φ2(x))−P(x,φ1(x))]dx.
However, because C+
1can be parametrized by x/mapsto→(x,φ1(x)),a≤x≤b, and C+
2can
be parametrized by x/mapsto→(x,φ2(x)),a≤x≤b,w eh a v e
/integraldisplayb
aP(x,φ1(x))dx=/integraldisplay
C+
1P(x,y)dx
and
/integraldisplayb
aP(x,φ2(x))dx=/integraldisplay
C+
2P(x,y)dx.

<<<PAGE 457>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 430
430 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Thus, by reversing orientations,
−/integraldisplayb
aP(x,φ2(x))dx=/integraldisplay
C−
2P(x,y)dx.
Hence,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂P
∂ydx dy=−/integraldisplay
C+
1Pd x−/integraldisplay
C−
2Pd x.
Because xis constant on B+
2andB−
1,w eh a v e
/integraldisplay
B+
2Pd x=0=/integraldisplay
B−
1Pd x,
so
/integraldisplay
C+Pd x=/integraldisplay
C+
1Pd x+/integraldisplay
B+
2Pd x+/integraldisplay
C−
2Pd x+/integraldisplay
B−
1Pd x=/integraldisplay
C+
1Pd x+/integraldisplay
C−
2Pd x.
Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂P
∂ydx dy=−/integraldisplay
C+
1Pd x−/integraldisplay
C−
2Pd x=−/integraldisplay
C+Pd x.■
We now prove the analogous lemma with the roles of xandyinterchanged.
Lemma 2LetDbe an x-simple region with boundary C. Then if Q:D→R
isC1,
/integraldisplay
C+Qd y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂Q
∂xdx dy.
The negative sign does not occur here, because reversing the role of xandycorresponds
to a change of orientation for the plane.
proof Suppose Dis given by
ψ1(y)≤x≤ψ2(y), c≤y≤d.
Using the notation of Figure 8.1.3, and noting that yis constant on B+
1andB−
2,w eh a v e
/integraldisplay
C+Qd y=/integraldisplay
C−
1+B+
1+C+
2+B−
2Qd y=/integraldisplay
C+
2Qd y+/integraldisplay
C−
1Qd y ,
where C+
2is the curve parametrized by y/mapsto→(ψ2(y),y),c≤y≤d, and C+
1is the
curve y/mapsto→(ψ1(y),y),c≤y≤d. Applying Fubini’ s theorem and the fundamental

<<<PAGE 458>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 431
8.1 Green’s Theorem 431
ﬁgure 8.1.4 The correct
orientation for the boundary of a
region D.15
D
C
theorem of calculus, we obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∂Q
∂xdx dy=/integraldisplayd
c/integraldisplayψ2(y)
ψ1(y)∂Q
∂xdx dy=/integraldisplayd
c[Q(ψ2(y),y)−Q(ψ1(y),y)]dy
=/integraldisplay
C+
2Qd y−/integraldisplay
C+
1Qd y=/integraldisplay
C+
2Qd y+/integraldisplay
C−
1Qd y=/integraldisplay
C+Qd y.
■
Adding the results of Lemmas 1 and 2 proves the following important theorem.
Theorem 1 Green’s Theorem LetDbe a simple region and let Cbe its
boundary. Suppose P:D→RandQ:D→Rare of class C1. Then
/integraldisplay
C+Pd x+Qd y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy.
The correct (positive) orientation for the boundary curves of region Dcan be re-
membered by the following device: If you walk along the curve C with the correct
orientation, the region D will be on your left (see Figure 8.1.4).
Historical NoteGeorge Green
George Green was born in Nottingham England in 1793 and died in 1841. No
picture of him is known to exist. Little is known about his early life before the ageof 30 other than that he was a self-taught man, who developed a passion formathematics at an early age. In 1833, at age 40, Green enrolled as a student inCambridge. Amazingly, five years earlier, he had published (at his own expense)his first and most famous work “An Essay on the Application of MathematicalAnalysis to the Theories of Electricity and Magnetism.” Here he proved a theoremsimilar to the Green’s Theorem of this section and also introduced other veryimportant mathematical concepts such as Green’s functions, now so ubiquitousin mathematical analysis. He was the first person to create a theory of electricityand magnetism, a theory that later formed the basis of the work of Maxwell andothers.

<<<PAGE 459>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 432
432 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
D
C
21
124 3
CD
D D
D = 1D 2D3D D4ﬁgure 8.1.5 Green's theorem applies to
D=D1∪D2∪D3∪D4.
Generalizing Green’s Theorem
Green’ s theorem actually applies to any “decent” region in R2. For instance, Green’ s
theorem applies to regions that are not simple, but that can be broken up into pieces,
each of which is simple. An example is shown in Figure 8.1.5. The region Dis an
annulus; its boundary consists of two curves C=C1+C2with the indicated orien-
tations. (Note that for the inner region the correct orientation to ensure the validity ofGreen’ s theorem is clockwise; the device in Figure 8.1.4 still works for remembering
the orientation!) If Theorem 1 is applied to each of the regions D
1,D2,D3, and D4and
the results are summed, the equality of Green’ s theorem will be obtained for Dand its
boundary curve C. This works because the integrals along the interior lines in opposite
directions cancel. This trick, in fact, shows that Green’ s theorem holds for virtually allregions with reasonable boundaries that one is likely to encounter (see Exercise 16).
Let us use the notation ∂Dfor the oriented curve C
+, that is, the boundary curve of
Doriented in the sense as described by the device in Figure 8.1.4. Then we can write
Green’ s theorem as
/integraldisplay
∂DPd x+Qd y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy.
Green’ s theorem is very useful because it relates a line integral around the boundary of
a region to an area integral over the interior of the region, and in many cases it is easier toevaluate the line integral than the area integral or vice versa. For example, if we know that
Pvanishes on the boundary, we can immediately conclude that/integraltext/integraltext
D(∂P/∂y)dx dy=0
even though ∂P/∂yneed not vanish on the interior. (Can you construct such a Pon the
unit square?)
example 1 Verify Green’ s theorem for P(x,y)=xandQ(x,y)=xy, where Dis the unit disc
x2+y2≤1.
solution We do this by evaluating both sides in Green’ s theorem directly. The boundary of Dis
the unit circle parametrized by x=cost,y=sint,0≤t≤2π, and so
/integraldisplay
∂DPd x+Qd y=/integraldisplay2π
0[(cos t)(−sin t)+costsintcost]dt
=/bracketleftbiggcos2t
2/bracketrightbigg2π
0+/bracketleftbigg
−cos3t
3/bracketrightbigg2π0
=0.

<<<PAGE 460>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 433
8.1 Green’s Theorem 433
On the other hand,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dyd xd y ,
which is also zero by symmetry. Thus, Green’ s theorem is veriﬁed in this case. ▲
Areas
We can use Green’ s theorem to obtain a formula for the area of a region bounded by a
simple closed curve.
Theorem 2 Area of a Region IfCis a simple closed curve that bounds a
region to which Green’ s theorem applies, then the area of the region Dbounded
byC=∂Dis
A=1
2/integraldisplay
∂Dxdy−yd x.
proof LetP(x,y)=− y,Q(x,y)=x; then by Green’ s theorem we have
1
2/integraldisplay
∂Dxdy−yd x=1
2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg∂x
∂x−∂(−y)
∂y/bracketrightbigg
dx dy
=1
2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D[1+1]dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy=A.■
example 2 Leta>0. Compute the area (see Figure 8.1.6) of the region enclosed by the hypocycloid
deﬁned by x2/3+y2/3=a2/3using the parametrization
x=acos3θ, y=asin3θ,0 ≤θ≤2π.
xy
(−a, 0)
(0, −a)(a, 0)(0, a)
( )a
2,
2a
22
ﬁgure 8.1.6 The hypocycloid x=acos3θ,y=asin3θ,0≤θ≤2π.

<<<PAGE 461>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 434
434 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
solution From the preceding box, and using the trigonometric identities cos2θ+sin2θ=
1, sin 2θ =2 sinθcosθ, and sin2φ=(1−cos 2φ )/2, we get
A=1
2/integraldisplay
∂Dxdy−yd x
=1
2/integraldisplay2π
0[(acos3θ)(3asin2θcosθ)−(asin3θ)(−3 acos2θsinθ)]dθ
=3
2a2/integraldisplay2π
0(sin2θcos4θ+cos2θsin4θ)dθ=3
2a2/integraldisplay2π
0sin2θcos2θdθ
=3
8a2/integraldisplay2π
0sin22θdθ=3
8a2/integraldisplay2π
0/parenleftbigg1−cos 4θ
2/parenrightbigg
dθ
=3
16a2/integraldisplay2π
0dθ−3
16a2/integraldisplay2π
0cos 4θ dθ=3
8πa2.
▲
Vector Form Using the Curl
The statement of Green’ s theorem can be neatly rewritten in the language of vector
ﬁelds. As we will see, this points the way to one possible generalization to R3.
Theorem 3 Vector Form of Green’s Theorem LetD⊂R2be a region
to which Green’ s theorem applies, let ∂Dbe its (positively oriented) boundary,
and let F=Pi+Qjbe a C1vector ﬁeld on D.Then
/integraldisplay
∂DF·ds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(curl F)·kdA=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(∇× F)·kdA
(see Figure 8.1.7).
This result follows from Theorem 1 and the fact that ( ∇× F)·k=∂Q/∂x−∂P/∂y.
We ask you to supply the details in Exercise 22.
xyz
DF(x, y)∂Dk
(x, y)ﬁgure 8.1.7 The vector form of Green’s
theorem.

<<<PAGE 462>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 435
8.1 Green’s Theorem 435
example 3 LetF=(xy2,y+x). Integrate ( ∇×F)·kover the region in the ﬁrst quadrant bounded
by the curves y=x2andy=x.
solution Method 1. We ﬁrst compute the curl
∇× F=/parenleftbigg
0, 0,∂F2
∂x−∂F1
∂y/parenrightbigg
=(1−2xy)k.
Thus, ( ∇× F)·k=1−2xy. This can be integrated over the given region D(see
Figure 8.1.8) using an iterated integral as follows:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(∇× F)·kdx dy=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplayx
x2(1−2xy)dy dx =/integraldisplay1
0[y−xy2]|x
x2dx
=/integraldisplay1
0[x−x3−x2+x5]dx=1
2−1
4−1
3+1
6=1
12.
xy
y = x
(0, 0)(1, 1)
2 y = xﬁgure 8.1.8 The region bounded by the curves y=x2
and y=x.
Method 2. Here we use Theorem 3 to obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(∇× F)·kdx dy=/integraldisplay
∂DF·ds.
The line integral of Falong the curve y=xfrom left to right is
/integraldisplay1
0F1dx+F2dy=/integraldisplay1
0(x3+2x)dx=1
4+1=5
4.
Along the curve y=x2we get
/integraldisplay1
0F1dx+F2dy=/integraldisplay1
0x5dx+(x+x2)(2xd x)=1
6+2
3+1
2=4
3.
Thus, remembering that the integral along y=xis to be taken from right to left, as in
Figure 8.1.8,
/integraldisplay
∂DF·ds=4
3−5
4=1
12. ▲

<<<PAGE 463>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 436
436 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Vector Form Using the Divergence
There is another form of Green’ s theorem that can be generalized to R3.
Theorem 4 Divergence Theorem in the Plane LetD⊂R2be a region
to which Green’ s theorem applies and let ∂Dbe its boundary. Letndenote the
outward unit normal to ∂D.Ifc:[a,b]→R2,t/mapsto→c(t)=(x(t),y(t)) is a
positively oriented parametrization of ∂D,nis given by
n=(y/prime(t),−x/prime(t))/radicalbig
[x/prime(t)]2+[y/prime(t)]2
(see Figure 8.1.9) .LetF=Pi+Qjbe a C1vector ﬁeld on D.Then
/integraldisplay
∂DF·nds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdivFdA.
proof Recall that c/prime(t)=(x/prime(t),y/prime(t)) is tangent to ∂D, and note that n·c/prime=0.
Thus, nis normal to the boundary. The sign of nis chosen to make it correspond to
theoutward (rather than the inward) direction. By the deﬁnition of the line integral (see
Section 7.2),
/integraldisplay
∂DF·nds=/integraldisplayb
aP(x(t),y(t))y/prime(t)−Q(x(t),y(t))x/prime(t)/radicalbig
[x/prime(t)]2+[y/prime(t)]2/radicalbig
[x/prime(t)]2+[y/prime(t)]2dt
=/integraldisplayb
a[P(x(t),y(t))y/prime(t)−Q(x(t),y(t))x/prime(t)]dt
=/integraldisplay
∂DPdy−Qd x.
By Green’ s theorem, this equals
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg∂P
∂x+∂Q
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdivFdA.
■
Dn
ﬁgure 8.1.9 nis the outward unit normal to ∂D.

<<<PAGE 464>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 437
8.1 Green’s Theorem 437
example 4 LetF=y3i+x5j. Compute the integral of the normal component of Faround the unit
square.
solution This can be done using the divergence theorem. Indeed
/integraldisplay
∂DF·nds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdivFdA.
But div F=0, and so the integral is zero. ▲
exercises
1.LetDbe the triangle in the xyplane with vertices at
(−1, 1), (1, 0), and (3, 2). Describe the boundary ∂Das
a piecewise smooth curve, oriented counterclockwise.2.LetDbe the region in the xyplane lying between the
curves y=x2+4 and y=2x2. Describe the boundary
∂Das a piecewise smooth curve, oriented
counterclockwise.
In Exercises 3 to 6, verify Green’ s theorem for the indicated region D and boundary ∂D, and functions P and Q.
3.D=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1], P(x,y)=− y,
Q(x,y)=x
4.D=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1], P(x,y)=x,Q(x,y)=y
5.D=[−1, 1] ×[−1, 1], P(x,y)=x−y,
Q(x,y)=x+y
[HINT: Use 3 and 4.]
6.D=/bracketleftbig
0,π
2/bracketrightbig
×/bracketleftbig
0,π
2/bracketrightbig
,P(x,y)=sinx,
Q(x,y)=cosy
7.LetCbe the closed, piecewise smooth curve formed by
traveling in straight lines between the points ( −2, 1),
(−2,−3), (1, −1), (1, 5), and back to ( −2, 1), in that
order. Use Green’ s theorem to evaluate the integral:
/integraldisplay
C(2xy)dx+(xy2)dy
8.A particle travels across a ﬂat surface, moving due east
for 3 m, then due north for 4 m, and then returns to itsorigin. A force ﬁeld acts on the particle, given byF(x,y)=(3x+4y
2)i+(10xy)j. (Here we assume that
jpoints north.) Use Green’ s theorem to ﬁnd the work
done on the particle by F.
9.Evaluate/integraltext
Cyd x−xdy, where Cis the boundary of the
square [−1, 1] ×[−1, 1] oriented in the
counterclockwise direction, using Green’ s theorem.
10. Find the area of the disc Dof radius Rusing Green’ s
theorem.
11. Verify Green’ s theorem for the disc Dwith center (0, 0)
and radius Rand the functions:(a)P(x,y)=xy2,Q(x,y)=− yx2
(b)P(x,y)=x+y,Q(x,y)=y
(c)P(x,y)=xy=Q(x,y)
(d)P(x,y)=2y,Q(x,y)=x
12. Using the divergence theorem, show that/integraltext
∂DF·nds=0, where F(x,y)=yi−xjandDis the
unit disc. Verify this directly.
13. Find the area bounded by one arc of the cycloid
x=a(θ−sinθ),y=a(1−cosθ), where a>0, and
0≤θ≤2π, and the xaxis (use Green’ s theorem).
14. Under the conditions of Green’ s theorem, prove that
(a)/integraldisplay
∂DPQ dx +PQ dy =
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg
Q/parenleftbigg
∂P
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
+P/parenleftbigg
∂Q
∂x−∂Q
∂y/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
dx dy
(b)/integraldisplay
∂D/parenleftbigg
Q∂P
∂x−P∂Q
∂x/parenrightbigg
dx+/parenleftbigg
P∂Q
∂y−Q∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dy
=2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg
P∂2Q
∂x∂y−Q∂2P
∂x∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy
15. Evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
C(2x3−y3)dx+(x3+y3)dy,
where Cis the unit circle, and verify Green’ s theorem
for this case.

<<<PAGE 465>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 438
438 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
16. Prove the following generalization of Green’ s theorem:
LetDbe a region in the xyplane with boundary a ﬁnite
number of oriented simple closed curves. Suppose thatby means of a ﬁnite number of line segments parallel tothe coordinate axes, Dcan be decomposed into a ﬁnite
number of simple regions D
iwith the boundary of each
Dioriented counterclockwise (see Figure 8.1.5). Then if
PandQare of class C1onD,/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftBig∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightBig
dx dy=/integraldisplay
∂DPd x+Qd y ,
where ∂Dis the oriented boundary of D.(HINT: Apply
Green’ s theorem to each Di.)
17. Verify Green’ s theorem for the integrand of Exercise 15(that is, with P=2x
3−y3andQ=x3+y3) and the
annular region Ddescribed by a≤x2+y2≤b, with
boundaries oriented as in Figure 8.1.5.
18. LetDbe a region for which Green’ s theorem holds.
Suppose fis harmonic; that is,
∂2f
∂x2+∂2f
∂y2=0
onD. Prove that/integraldisplay
∂D∂f
∂ydx−∂f
∂xdy=0.
19. (a)Verify the divergence theorem for F=xi+yjand
Dthe unit disc x2+y2≤1.
(b)Evaluate the integral of the normal component of
2xyi−y2jaround the ellipse deﬁned by
x2/a2+y2/b2=1.
20. LetP(x,y)=− y/(x2+y2) and
Q(x,y)=x/(x2+y2). Assuming Dis the unit disc,
investigate why Green’ s theorem fails for this PandQ.
21. Use Green’ s theorem to evaluate/integraltext
C+(y2+x3)dx+
x4dy, where C+is the perimeter of the square [0, 1] ×
[0, 1] in the counterclockwise direction.22. Verify Theorem 3 by showing that(∇× F)·k=∂Q/∂x−∂P/∂y.
23. Use Theorem 2 to compute the area inside the ellipse
x2/a2+y2/b2=1.
24. Use Theorem 2 to recover the formula A=1
2/integraltextb
ar2dθ
for a region in polar coordinates.
25. Sketch the proof of Green’ s theorem for the regionshown in Figure 8.1.10.
D
ﬁgure 8.1.10 Prove
Green’s theorem for
this region.
26. Prove the identity
/integraldisplay
∂Dφ∇φ·nds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(φ∇2φ+∇φ·∇φ)dA.
27. Use Green’ s theorem to ﬁnd the area of one loop of the
four-leafed rose r=3 sin 2θ .(HINT:
xd y−yd x=r2dθ.)
28. Show that if Cis a simple closed curve that bounds a
region to which Green’ s theorem applies, then the areaof the region Dbounded by Cis
A=/integraldisplay
∂Dxdy=−/integraldisplay
∂Dyd x.
Show how this implies Theorem 2.
Exercises 29 to 37 illustrate the application of Green’ s theorem to partial differential equations. (Further applications aregiven in the Internet supplement.) They are particularly concerned with solutions to Laplace’ s equation ,that is, with
harmonic functions. For these exercises, let D be an open region in R
2with boundary ∂D. Let u :D∪∂D→Rbe a
continuous function that is of class C2on D. Suppose p∈D and the closed discs B ρ=Bρ(p)of radius ρcentered at pare
contained in D for 0<ρ≤R. Deﬁne I (ρ)by
I(ρ)=1
ρ/integraldisplay
∂Bρud s.
29. Show that limit ρ→0I(ρ)=2πu(p).
30. Letndenote the outward unit normal to ∂Bρand∂u/∂n=∇u·n. Show that
/integraldisplay
∂Bρ∂u
∂nds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bρ∇2ud A.

<<<PAGE 466>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 439
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 439
31. Using Exercise 30, show that
I/prime(ρ)=(1/ρ)/integraltext/integraltext
Bρ∇2ud A.
32. Suppose usatisﬁes Laplace’ s equation: ∇2u=0o n D.
Use the preceding exercises to show that
u(p)=1
2πR/integraldisplay
∂BRud s.
(This expresses the fact that the value of a harmonic
function at a point is the average of its values on thecircumference of any disc centered about it.)
33. Use Exercise 32 to show that if uis harmonic (i.e., if
∇2u=0), then u(p) can be expressed as an area integral
u(p)=1
πR2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
BRud A.
34. Suppose uis a harmonic function deﬁned on D(i.e.,
∇2u=0o n D) and that uhas a local maximum (or
minimum) at a point pinD.
(a)Show that umust be constant on some disc centered
atp.(HINT: Use the results of Exercise 25.)
(b) Suppose that Dis path-connected [i.e., for any
points pandqinD, there is a continuous path
c: [0, 1] →Dsuch that c(0)=pandc(1)=q] and
that for some pthe maximum or minimum at pis
absolute; thus, u(q)≤u(p)o r u(q)≥u(p) for
every qinD. Show that umust be constant on D.
(The result in this Exercise is called a strong
maximum orminimum principle for harmonic
functions. Compare this with Exercises 46 to 50 inSection 3.3.)35. A function is said to be subharmonic onDif∇2u≥0
everywhere in D. It is said to be superharmonic if
∇2u≤0.
(a) Derive a strong maximum principle for
subharmonic functions.
(b) Derive a strong minimum principle for
superharmonic functions.
36. Suppose Dis the disc {(x,y)|x2+y2<1}andCis
the circle {(x,y)|x2+y2=1}. In the Internet
supplement, we shall show that if fis a continuous
real-valued function on C, then there is a continuous
function uonD∪Cthat agrees with fonCand is
harmonic on D. That is, fhas a harmonic extension to
the disc. Assuming this, show the following:
(a) If qis a nonconstant continuous function on D∪C
that is subharmonic (but not harmonic) on D, then
there is a continuous function uonD∪Cthat is
harmonic on Dsuch that uagrees with qonCand
q<ueverywhere on D.
(b) The same assertion holds if “subharmonic” is
replaced by “superharmonic” and “ q<u”b y
“q>u.”
37. LetDbe as in Exercise 36. Let f:D→Rbe
continuous. Show that a solution to the equation∇
2u=0 satisfying u(x)=f(x) for all x∈∂Dis
unique.
38. Use Green’ s theorem to prove the change of variablesformula in the following special case:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
du dv
for a transformation ( u,v)/mapsto→(x(u,v),y(u,v)).
8.2Stokes’ Theorem
Stokes’ theorem relates the line integral of a vector ﬁeld around a simple closed curve
CinR3to an integral over a surface Sfor which Cis the boundary. In this regard it is
very much like Green’ s theorem.
Stokes’ Theorem for Graphs
Let us begin by recalling a few facts from Chapter 7. Consider a surface Sthat is the
graph of a function f(x,y), so that Sis parametrized by
⎧
⎨
⎩x=u
y=v
z=f(u,v)=f(x,y)

<<<PAGE 467>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 440
440 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
for (u,v) in some domain Din the plane. The integral of a vector function Fover S
was developed in Section 7.6 as
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg
F1/parenleftbigg
−∂z
∂x/parenrightbigg
+F2/parenleftbigg
−∂z
∂y/parenrightbigg
+F3/bracketrightbigg
dx dy, (1)
where F=F1i+F2j+F3k.
In Section 8.1, we ﬁrst assumed that the regions Dunder consideration were simple;
while this was used in our proof of Green’ s theorem, we noted there that the theorem
is valid for a wider class of regions. In this section we assume that Dis a region whose
boundary is a simple closed curve and to which Green’ s theorem applies. Green’ s theoreminvolves choosing an orientation on the boundary of D, as was explained in Section 8.1.
The choice of orientation that validates Green’ s theorem will be called positive. Recall
that if Dis simple, then the positive orientation is the counterclockwise one.
Suppose that c:[a,b]→R
2,c(t)=(x(t),y(t)) is a parametrization of ∂Din the
positive direction. Then we deﬁne the boundary curve ∂Sto be the oriented simple
closed curve that is the image of the mapping p:t/mapsto→(x(t),y(t),f(x(t),y(t))) with
the orientation induced by p(Figure 8.2.1).
To remember this orientation (i.e., the positive direction) on ∂S, imagine that you
are an “observer” walking along the boundary of the surface with the normal as yourupright direction; you are moving in the positive direction if the surface is on your left.This orientation on ∂Sis often called the orientation induced by an upward normal n.
Theorem 5 Stokes’ Theorem for Graphs LetSbe the oriented surface
deﬁned by a C2function z=f(x,y), where ( x,y)∈D, a region to which
Green’ s theorem applies, and let Fbe a C1vector ﬁeld on S.Then if ∂Sdenotes
the oriented boundary curve of Sas just deﬁned, we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
ScurlF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× F)·dS=/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds.
Remember that/integraltext
∂SF·dsis the integral around ∂Sof the tangential component of F,
while/integraltext/integraltext
SG·dSis the integral over SofG·n, the normal component of G(see Sec-
tions 7.2 and 7.6). Thus, Stokes’ theorem says that the integral of the normal component
of the curl of a vector ﬁeld Fover a surface S is equal to the integral of the tangential
component of Faround the boundary ∂S.
xyz
∂DDn
∂SSﬁgure 8.2.1 The induced orientation on ∂S:
As you walk around the boundary, the
surface should be on your left.

<<<PAGE 468>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 441
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 441
proof IfF=F1i+F2j+F3k, then
curlF=/parenleftbigg∂F3
∂y−∂F2
∂z/parenrightbigg
i+/parenleftbigg∂F1
∂z−∂F3
∂x/parenrightbigg
j+/parenleftbigg∂F2
∂x−∂F1
∂y/parenrightbigg
k.
Therefore, we use formula (1) to write
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
ScurlF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg∂F3
∂y−∂F2
∂z/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
−∂z
∂x/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂F1
∂z−∂F3
∂x/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
−∂z
∂y/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂F2
∂x−∂F1
∂y/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
dA. (2)
On the other hand,
/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds=/integraldisplay
pF·ds=/integraldisplay
pF1dx+F2dy+F3dz,
where p:[a,b]→R3,p(t)=(x(t),y(t),f(x(t),y(t))) is the orientation-preserving
parametrization of the oriented simple closed curve ∂Sdiscussed earlier. Thus,
/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds=/integraldisplayb
a/parenleftbigg
F1dx
dt+F2dy
dt+F3dz
dt/parenrightbigg
dt. (3)
By the chain rule,
dz
dt=∂z
∂xdx
dt+∂z
∂ydy
dt.
Substituting this expression into equation (3), we obtain
/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds=/integraldisplayb
a/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg
F1+F3∂z
∂x/parenrightbiggdx
dt+/parenleftbigg
F2+F3∂z
∂y/parenrightbiggdy
dt/bracketrightbigg
dt
=/integraldisplay
c/parenleftbigg
F1+F3∂z
∂x/parenrightbigg
dx+/parenleftbigg
F2+F3∂z
∂y/parenrightbigg
dy (4)
=/integraldisplay
∂D/parenleftbigg
F1+F3∂z
∂x/parenrightbigg
dx+/parenleftbigg
F2+F3∂z
∂y/parenrightbigg
dy.
Applying Green’ s theorem to equation (4) yields (we are assuming that Green’ s theorem
applies to D)
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg∂(F2+F3∂z/∂y)
∂x−∂(F1+F3∂z/∂x)
∂y/bracketrightbigg
dA.
Now we use the chain rule, remembering that F1,F2, and F3are functions of x,y, and
zand that zis a function of xandy, to obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg∂F2
∂x+∂F2
∂z∂z
∂x+∂F3
∂x∂z
∂y+∂F3
∂z∂z
∂x∂z
∂y+F3∂2z
∂x∂y/parenrightbigg
−/parenleftbigg∂F1
∂y+∂F1
∂z∂z
∂y+∂F3
∂y∂z
∂x+∂F3
∂z∂z
∂y∂z
∂x+F3∂2z
∂y∂x/parenrightbigg/bracketrightbigg
dA.
Because mixed partials are equal, the last two terms in each parenthesis cancel eachother, and we can rearrange terms to obtain the integral of equation (2), which completesthe proof.
■

<<<PAGE 469>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 442
442 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
example 1 LetF=yezi+xezj+xyezk. Show that the integral of Faround an oriented simple
closed curve Cthat is the boundary of a surface Sis 0. (Assume Sis the graph of a
function, as in Theorem 5.)
solution Indeed,/integraltext
CF·ds=/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS, by Stokes’ theorem. But we compute
∇× F=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleijk
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
yezxezxyez/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=0,
and so/integraltext
CF·ds=0. Alternatively, we can observe that F=∇ (xyez), so its integral
around a closed curve is zero. ▲
example 2 Use Stokes’ theorem to evaluate the line integral
/integraldisplay
C−y3dx+x3dy−z3dz,
where Cis the intersection of the cylinder x2+y2=1 and the plane x+y+z=1,
and the orientation on Ccorresponds to counterclockwise motion in the xyplane.
solution The curve Cbounds the surface Sdeﬁned by the equation z=1−x−y=f(x,y)
for (x,y) in the set D={(x,y)|x2+y2≤1}(Figure 8.2.2). We set F=− y3i+
x3j−z3k, which has curl ∇× F=(3x2+3y2)k. Then, by Stokes’ theorem, the line
integral is equal to the surface integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× F)·dS.
But∇× Fhas only a kcomponent. Thus, by formula (1) we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× F)·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(3x2+3y2)dx dy.
y
xx2+y2=1
(0, 1, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
z
ﬁgure 8.2.2 The curve Cis the intersection of the
cylinder x2+y2=1 and the plane x+y+z=1.

<<<PAGE 470>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 443
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 443
This integral can be evaluated by changing to polar coordinates. Doing this, we get
3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(x2+y2)dx dy=3/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay2π
0r2·rdθdr=6π/integraldisplay1
0r3dr=6π
4=3π
2.
Let us verify this result by directly evaluating the line integral
/integraldisplay
C−y3dx+x3dy−z3dz.
We can parametrize the curve ∂Dby the equations
x=cost, y=sint, z=0, 0 ≤t≤2π.
The curve Cis therefore parametrized by the equations
x=cost, y=sint, z=1−sint−cost,0 ≤t≤2π.
Thus,
/integraldisplay
C−y3dx+x3dy−z3dz
=/integraldisplay2π
0[(−sin3t)(−sint)+(cos3t)(cos t)
−(1−sint−cost)3(−cost+sint)]dt
=/integraldisplay2π
0(cos4t+sin4t)dt−/integraldisplay2π
0(1−sint−cost)3(−cost+sint)dt.
The second integrand is of the form u3du, where u=1−sint−cost, and thus the
integral is equal to
1
4[(1−sint−cost)4]2π
0=0.
Hence, we are left with
/integraldisplay2π
0(cos4t+sin4t)dt.
This integral can be evaluated using formulas (18) and (19) of the table of integrals.
We can also proceed as follows. Using the trigonometric identities
sin2t=1−cos 2t
2, cos2t=1+cos 2t
2,
substituting and squaring these expressions, we reduce the preceding integral to
1
2/integraldisplay2π
0(1+cos22t)dt=π+1
2/integraldisplay2π
0cos22td t.
Again using the identity cos22t=(1+cos 4t )/2, we ﬁnd
π+1
4/integraldisplay2π
0(1+cos 4t )dt=π+1
4/integraldisplay2π
0dt+1
4/integraldisplay2π
0cos 4td t
=π+π
2+0=3π
2.▲

<<<PAGE 471>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 444
444
The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
(0, 1, 0)
S
“Mistaken” boundary of 
S
y
x
z
ﬁgure
8.2.3
The surface
S
is a portion of a sphere.
Stokes’ Theorem for Parametrized Surfaces
To simplify the proof of Stokes’ theorem given earlier, we assumed that the surface
S
could be described as the graph of a function
z
=
f
(
x
,
y
), (
x
,
y
)
∈
D
, where
D
is
some region to which Green’ s theorem applies. However, without too much more effort
we can obtain a
more general theorem
for oriented parametrized surfaces
S
. The main
complication is in the deﬁnition of
∂
S
.
Suppose
/Phi1
:
D
→
R
3
is a parametrization of a surface
S
and
c
(
t
)
=
(
u
(
t
),
v
(
t
)) is a
parametrization of
∂
D
. We might be tempted to deﬁne
∂
S
as the curve parametrized by
t
/mapsto→
p
(
t
)
=
/Phi1
(
u
(
t
),
v
(
t
)). However, with this deﬁnition,
∂
S
might not be the boundary
of
S
in any reasonable geometric sense.
For example, we would conclude that the boundary of the unit sphere
S
parametrized
by spherical coordinates in
R
3
is half of the great circle on
S
lying in the
xz
plane, but
clearly in a geometric sense
S
is a smooth surface (no points or cusps) with no boundary
or edge at all (see Figure 8.2.3 and Exercise 20). Thus, this great circle is in some sense
the “mistaken” boundary of
S
.
We can get around this difﬁculty by assuming that
/Phi1
is one-to-one on all of
D
.
Then the image of
∂
D
under
/Phi1
, namely,
/Phi1
(
∂
D
), will be the geometric boundary of
S
=
/Phi1
(
D
). If
c
(
t
)
=
(
u
(
t
),
v
(
t
)) is a parametrization of
∂
D
in the positive direction,
we deﬁne
∂
S
to be the oriented simple closed curve that is the image of the mapping
p
:
t
/mapsto→
/Phi1
(
u
(
t
),
v
(
t
)), with the orientation of
∂
S
induced by
p
(see Figure 8.2.1).
Theorem
6 Stokes’ Theorem: Parametrized Surfaces
Let
S
be an ori-
ented surface deﬁned by a one-to-one parametrization
/Phi1
:
D
⊂
R
2
→
S
, where
D
is a region to which Green’ s theorem applies. Let
∂
S
denote the oriented boundary
of
S
and let
F
be a
C
1
vector ﬁeld on
S
. Then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
=
/integraldisplay
∂
S
F
·
d
s
.
If
S
has no boundary, and this includes surfaces such as the sphere, then the integral
on the left is zero (see Exercise 25).
This is proved in the same way as Theorem 5.
example
3
Let
S
be the surface shown in Figure 8.2.4, with the indicated orientation. Let
F
=
y
i
−
x
j
+
e
xz
k
. Evaluate
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
.

<<<PAGE 472>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 445
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 445
S
x2 + y2 = 1x
y
z
n
ﬁgure 8.2.4 This surface Sis a portion of a sphere
sitting on top of the circle x2+y2=1. It does not
include the disc x2+y2<1 in the xyplane.
solution This surface could be parametrized using spherical coordinates based at the center of
the sphere. However, we need not explicitly ﬁnd /Phi1in order to solve this problem.
By Theorem 6,/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS=/integraltext
∂SF·ds, and so if we parametrize ∂Sbyx(t)=
cost,y(t)=sint,0≤t≤2π, we determine
/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds=/integraldisplay2π
0/parenleftBig
ydx
dt−xdy
dt/parenrightBig
dt=/integraldisplay2π
0(−sin2t−cos2t)dt=−/integraldisplay2π
0dt=−2π
and therefore/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS=−2π.▲
The Curl as Circulation per Unit Area
Let us now use Stokes’ theorem to justify the physical interpretation of ∇× Fin terms
of paddle wheels that was proposed in Chapter 4. Paraphrasing Theorem 6, we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(curl F)·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(curl F)·dS=/integraldisplay
∂SF·ds=/integraldisplay
∂SFTds,
where FTis the tangential component of F. This says that the integral of the normal
component of the curl of a vector ﬁeld over an oriented surface Sis equal to the line
integral of Falong ∂S, which in turn is equal to the path integral of the tangential
component of Fover∂S.
Suppose Vrepresents the velocity vector ﬁeld of a ﬂuid. Consider a point P and a
unit vector n. Let Sρdenote the disc of radius ρand center P , which is perpendicular to
n. By Stokes’ theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SρcurlV·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SρcurlV·ndS=/integraldisplay
∂SρV·ds,
where ∂Sρhas the orientation induced by n(see Figure 8.2.5).
By the mean-value theorem for integrals (Exercise 16, Section 7.6), there is a point
Qi n Sρsuch that/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SρcurlV·ndS=[curl V(Q)·n]A(Sρ),
where A(Sρ)=πρ2is the area of Sρand curl V(Q) is the value of curl Vat Q. Thus,
limit
ρ→01
A(Sρ)/integraldisplay
∂SρV·ds=limit
ρ→01
A(Sρ)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sρ(curl V)·dS
=limit
ρ→0curlV(Q)·n=curlV(P)·n.

<<<PAGE 473>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 446
446 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Pn
∂SrSrrﬁgure 8.2.5 A normal ninduces an orientation on
the boundary ∂Sρof the disc Sρ.
ﬁgure 8.2.6 The intuitive
meaning of the possible signs of/integraltext
CV·ds.
V   ds   >  0
C . V   ds   <  0  . V   ds   =  0  .V
VV
C C C
∫C∫C∫
Thus,1
curlV(P)·n=limit
ρ→01
A(Sρ)/integraldisplay
∂SρV·ds. (5)
Let us pause to consider the physical meaning of/integraltext
CV·dswhen Vis the velocity ﬁeld
of a ﬂuid. Suppose, for example, that Vpoints in the direction tangent to the oriented
curve C(Figure 8.2.6). Then clearly/integraltext
CV·ds>0, and particles on Ctend to rotate
counterclockwise. If Vis pointing in the opposite direction, then/integraltext
CV·ds<0 and
particles tend to rotate clockwise. If Vis perpendicular to C, then particles don’t rotate
onCat all and/integraltext
CV·ds=0. In general,/integraltext
CV·ds, being the integral of the tangential
component of V, represents the net amount of turning of the ﬂuid in a counterclockwise
direction around C. We therefore refer to/integraltext
CV·dsas the circulation ofVaround C
(see Figure 8.2.7).
These results allow us to see just what curl Vmeans for the motion of a ﬂuid. The
circulation/integraltext
∂SρV·dsis the net velocity of the ﬂuid around ∂Sρ, so that (curl V)·n
represents the turning or rotating effect of the ﬂuid around the axis n.
Circulation and Curl The dot product of curl V(P) with a unit vector n,
namely, curl V(P)·n, equals the circulation of Vper unit area at P on a surface
perpendicular to n.
1Some informal texts adopt equation (5) as the deﬁnition of the curl, and use it to “prove” Stokes’
theorem. However, this raises the danger of circular reasoning, for to show that equation (5) really
deﬁnes a vector “curl V(P)” requires Stokes’ theorem, or some similar argument.

<<<PAGE 474>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 447
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 447
ﬁgure 8.2.7 Circulation of a
vector ﬁeld (velocity ﬁeld of a
ﬂuid): (a) Circulation about Cis
zero; (b) nonzero circulationabout C(“whirlpool”).Motion
of fluidparticles
CV
VMotionof fluid
particles
CV
V(x, y, z)
(x, y, z)
(a) (b)
Observe that the magnitude of curl V(P)·nis maximized when n=curlV//bardblcurl V/bardbl
(evaluated at P). Therefore, the rotating effect at P is greatest about the axis that is
parallel to curl V//bardblcurl V/bardbl. Thus, curl Vis aptly called the vorticity vector.
We can use these ideas to compute the curl in cylindrical coordinates.
example 4 Let the unit vectors er,eθ,ezassociated with cylindrical coordinates be as shown in
Figure 8.2.8. Let F=Frer+Fθeθ+Fzez. (The subscripts here denote components of
F, not partial derivatives.) Find a formula for the ercomponent of ∇× Fin cylindrical
coordinates.
xyz
re
θ zreθez
ﬁgure 8.2.8 Orthonormal vectors er,eθ, and ez
associated with cylindrical coordinates. The vector er
is parallel to the line labeled r.
solution LetSbe the surface shown in Figure 8.2.9.
xyz
e
θr
dθz Sz+dz
ﬁgure 8.2.9 A surface element in cylindrical
coordinates.

<<<PAGE 475>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 448
448 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
The area of Sisrdθdzand the unit normal is er. The integral of Faround the edges
ofSis approximately
[Fθ(r,θ,z)−Fθ(r,θ,z+dz)]rdθ+[Fz(r,θ+dθ,z)−Fz(r,θ,z)]dz
≈−∂Fθ
∂zdzr dθ+∂Fz
∂θdθdz.
Thus, the circulation per unit area is this expression divided by rdθdz, namely,
1
r∂Fz
∂θ−∂Fθ
∂z.
According to the previous box, this must be the ercomponent of the curl. ▲
Gradient, Divergence, and Curl in Cylindrical
and Spherical Coordinates
By similar arguments to Example 4, we ﬁnd that the curl in cylindrical coordinates is
given by
∇× F=1
r/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglee
rreθez
∂
∂r∂
∂θ∂
∂z
FrrFθFz/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
We can ﬁnd other important vector quantities expressed in different coordinate systems.
For example, the chain rule shows that the gradient in cylindrical coordinates is
∇f=∂f
∂rer+1
r∂f
∂θeθ+∂f
∂zez,
and in Section 8.4 we will establish related techniques that give the following formulafor the divergence in cylindrical coordinates:
∇·F=1
r/bracketleftbigg∂
∂r(rFr)+∂Fθ
∂θ+∂
∂z(rFz)/bracketrightbigg
.
Corresponding formulas for gradient, divergence, and curl in spherical coordinates are
∇f=∂f
∂ρeρ+1
ρ∂f
∂φeφ+1
ρsinφ∂f
∂θeθ
∇·F=1
ρ2∂
∂ρ(ρ2Fρ)+1
ρsinφ∂
∂φ(sinφFφ)+1
ρsinφ∂Fθ
∂θ
and
∇× F=/bracketleftbigg1
ρsinφ∂
∂φ(sinφFθ)−1
ρsinφ∂Fφ
∂θ/bracketrightbigg
eρ
+/bracketleftbigg1
ρsinφ∂Fρ
∂θ−1
ρ∂
∂ρ(ρFθ)/bracketrightbigg
eφ+/bracketleftbigg1
ρ∂
∂ρ(ρFφ)−1
ρ∂Fρ
∂φ/bracketrightbigg
eθ,
where eρ,eφ,eθare as shown in Figure 8.2.10 and where F=Fρeρ+Fφeφ+Fθeθ.xyz
r θeθ
eφφρeρ
ﬁgure 8.2.10 Orthonormal
vectors eρ,eφ, and eθ
associated with spherical
coordinates.

<<<PAGE 476>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 449
8.2 Stokes’ Theorem 449
Faraday’s Law
Vector calculus plays an essential role in the theory of electromagnetism. The next
example shows how Stokes’ theorem applies.
example 5 LetEandHbe time-dependent electric and magnetic ﬁelds, respectively, in space. Let
Sbe a surface with boundary C. We deﬁne
/integraldisplay
CE·ds=voltage around C,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SH·dS=magnetic ﬂux across S.
Faraday’s law (see Figure 8.2.11) states that the voltage around C equals the negative
rate of change of magnetic ﬂux through S. Show that Faraday’ s law follows from the
following differential equation (one of the Maxwell equations):
∇× E=−∂H
∂t.
CE
H
(magnet)
Eﬁgure 8.2.11 Faraday’s law.
solution Assume that −∂H/∂t=∇× Eholds. By Stokes’ theorem,
/integraldisplay
CE·ds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× E)·dS.
Assuming that we can move ∂/∂tunder the integral sign, we get
−∂
∂t/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SH·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S−∂H
∂t·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× E)·dS=/integraldisplay
CE·ds
and so
/integraldisplay
CE·ds=−∂
∂t/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SH·dS,
which is Faraday’ s law. ▲
Falling Cats and Stokes’ Theorem
Have you ever wondered how a falling cat can right itself? Released from a restingposition with its feet above its head, the cat is able to execute a 180
◦reorientation and
land safely on its feet. This well-known phenomenon has fascinated people for manyyears—especially in cities like New Y ork, where cats have been known to survive fallsof 8 to 30 stories!
There have been many incorrect explanations as to how cats are able to right them-
selves, including the idea that it has to do with how the cat twirls its tail. This cannotbe right because Manx cats, which have no tails, can also perform this feat!
ﬁgure 8.2.12
The falling cat
rights itself bywriggling itsbody parts.We observe, as in Figure 8.2.12, that the cat achieves this net change in orientation by
wriggling, to create changes in its internal shape or conﬁguration. On the surface, this

<<<PAGE 477>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 450
450 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
provides a seeming contradiction; because the cat is dropped from a resting position,
it has zero angular momentum at the beginning of the fall and hence, according toa basic law of physics called conservation of angular momentum, the cat has zero
angular momentum throughout the duration of its fall.
2Amazingly, the cat has effectively
changed its angular position while maintaining zero angular momentum!
The exact process by which this occurs is subtle; intuitive reasoning can lead one
astray and, as we have indicated, many false explanations have been offered throughoutthe history of trying to solve this mystery.
3Recently, new and interesting insights have
been discovered using geometric methods that, in fact, are related to curvature (seeSection 7.7).
4
The way that curvature and geometry are related to the falling cat phenomenon is
not easy to explain in full detail, but we can explain a similar phenomenon that is easyto understand. Interestingly, Stokes’ theorem is the key to understanding these types of
phenomena.
exercises
1.LetSbe the portion of the plane 2 x+3y+z=5 lying
between the points ( −1, 1, 4), (2, 1, −2), (2, 3, −8), and
(−1, 3, 2). Find parameterizations for both the surface S
and its boundary ∂S. Be sure that their respective
orientations are compatible with Stokes’ theorem.2.LetSbe the portion of the surface z=x2+y2lying
between the points (0, 0, 0), (2, 0, 4), (0, 2, 4), and
(2, 2, 8). Find parameterizations for both the surface S
and its boundary ∂S. Be sure that their respective
orientations are compatible with Stokes’ theorem.
In Exercises 3 to 6, verify Stokes’ theorem for the given surface S and boundary ∂S, and vector ﬁelds F.
3.S={(x,y,z):x2+y2+z2=1, z≥0}
(oriented as a graph)
∂S={(x,y):x2+y2=1}
F=xi+yj+zk
4.Sas in (1), and F=yi+zj+xk
5.S={(x,y,z):z=1−x2−y2,z≥0}
(oriented as a graph)
∂S={(x,y):x2+y2=1}
F=zi+xj+(2zx+2xy)k6.Sas in (3), and F=z2i+xj+y2k
7.LetCbe the closed, piecewise smooth curve formed by
traveling in straight lines between the points (0, 0, 0),(2, 0, 4), (3, 2, 6), (1, 2, 2), and back to the origin, inthat order. (Thus the surface Slying interior to Cis
contained in the plane z=2x.) Use Stokes’ theorem to
evaluate the integral:
/integraldisplay
C(zcosx)dx+(x2yz)dy+(yz)dz
2We saw an instance of the law of conservation of angular momentum in Section 4.1, Exercise 26.
3Another favorite fallacious argument, showing that a cat cannot turn itself over(!), is this: “Accept from
physics that angular momentum is the moment of inertia times angular velocity [moments of inertia
are discussed in Section 6.3]. But the angular momentum of the cat is zero, so the angular velocitymust also be zero. Because angular velocity is the rate of change of the angular position, the angularposition is constant. Thus, the cat cannot turn itself over.” What is wrong? This argument ignores thefact that the cat changes its shape, and hence its moment of inertia, during the fall.
4See T. R. Kane and M. Scher, “A Dynamical Explanation of the Falling Cat Phenomenon,” Int. J. Solids
Struct., 5 (1969): 663–670. See also R. Montgomery, “Isoholonomic Problems and Some Applications,”
Commun. Math. Phys., 128 (1990): 565–592; R. Montgomery, “How Much Does a Rigid Body Rotate?
A Berry’ s Phase from the 18thCentury,” Am. J. Phys., 59 (1991b): 394–398. See also J. E. Marsden
and J. Ostrowski, “Symmetries in Motion: Geometric Foundations of Motion Control,” Nonlinear Sci-
ence Today (1998), http://link.springer-ny.com; R. Batterman, “Falling Cats, Parallel Parking, and Po-
larized Light,” Philos. Soc. Arch. (2002); http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/documents/disk0/00/00/05/83,
http://www.its.caltech.edu/∼mleok/falling cats.htm, and references therein.

<<<PAGE 478>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 451
8.2
Stokes’ Theorem
451
8.
Let
C
be the closed, piecewise smooth curve formed by
traveling in straight lines between the points (0, 0, 0),
(2, 1, 5), (1, 1, 3), and back to the origin, in that order.
Use Stokes’ theorem to evaluate the integral:
/integraldisplay
C
(
xyz
)
dx
+
(
xy
)
dy
+
(
x
)
dz
9.
Redo Exercise 9 of Section 7.6 using Stokes’ theorem.
10.
Redo Exercise 10 of Section 7.6 using Stokes’ theorem.
11.
Verify Stokes’ theorem for the upper hemisphere
z
=
/radicalbig
1
−
x
2
−
y
2
,
z
≥
0, and the radial vector ﬁeld
F
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
x
i
+
y
j
+
z
k
.
12.
Let
S
be a surface with boundary
∂
S
, and suppose
E
is
an electric ﬁeld that is perpendicular to
∂
S
. Show that
the induced magnetic ﬂux across
S
is constant in time.
(
H
INT
: Use Faraday’ s law.)
13.
Let
S
be the capped cylindrical surface shown in
Figure 8.2.13.
S
is the union of two surfaces,
S
1
and
S
2
,
where
S
1
is the set of (
x
,
y
,
z
) with
x
2
+
y
2
=
1,
0
≤
z
≤
1, and
S
2
is the set of (
x
,
y
,
z
) with
x
2
+
y
2
+
(
z
−
1)
2
=
1,
z
≥
1. Set
F
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
(
zx
+
z
2
y
+
x
)
i
+
(
z
3
yx
+
y
)
j
+
z
4
x
2
k
. Compute
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
.(
H
INT
: Stokes’ theorem holds for this
surface.)
x
S
1
S
2
z
1
y
ﬁgure
8.2.13
The capped cylinder is the
union of
S
1
and
S
2
.
14.
Let
c
consist of straight lines joining (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0),
and (0, 0, 1) and let
S
be the triangle with these vertices.
Verify Stokes’ theorem directly with
F
=
yz
i
+
xz
j
+
xy
k
.
15.
Evaluate the integral
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
, where
S
is the
portion of the surface of a sphere deﬁned by
x
2
+
y
2
+
z
2
=
1 and
x
+
y
+
z
≥
1, and where
F
=
r
×
(
i
+
j
+
k
),
r
=
x
i
+
y
j
+
z
k
.
16.
Show that the calculation in Exercise 15 can be
simpliﬁed by observing that
/integraltext
∂
S
F
·
d
r
=
/integraltext
∂/Sigma1
F
·
d
r
for
any other surface
/Sigma1
. By picking
/Sigma1
appropriately,
/integraltext/integraltext
/Sigma1
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
may be easy to compute. Show that this
is the case if
/Sigma1
is taken to be the portion of the plane
x
+
y
+
z
=
1 inside the circle
∂
S
.
17.
Calculate the surface integral
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
, where
S
is the hemisphere
x
2
+
y
2
+
z
2
=
1,
x
≥
0, and
F
=
x
3
i
−
y
3
j
.
18.
Find
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
, where
S
is the ellipsoid
x
2
+
y
2
+
2
z
2
=
10 and
F
is the vector ﬁeld
F
=
(sin
xy
)
i
+
e
x
j
−
yz
k
.
19.
Let
F
=
y
i
−
x
j
+
zx
3
y
2
k
. Evaluate
/integraltext/integraltext
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
n
dA
, where
S
is the surface deﬁned by
x
2
+
y
2
+
z
2
=
1,
z
≤
0.
20.
A hot-air balloon has the truncated spherical shape
shown in Figure 8.2.14. The hot gases escape through
the porous envelope with a velocity vector ﬁeld
V
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=∇×
/Phi1
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
where
/Phi1
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=−
y
i
+
x
j
.
If
R
=
5, compute the volume ﬂow rate of the gases
through the surface.
y
x
R
4
R
z
ﬁgure
8.2.14
A hot-air balloon.
21.
Prove that Faraday’ s law implies
∇×
E
=−
∂
H
/∂
t
.
22.
Let
S
be a surface and let
F
be perpendicular to the
tangent to the boundary of
S
. Show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
=
0
.
What does this mean physically if
F
is an electric ﬁeld?

<<<PAGE 479>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 452
452
The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
23.
Consider two surfaces
S
1
,
S
2
with the same boundary
∂
S
. Describe with sketches how
S
1
and
S
2
must be
oriented to ensure that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
1
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
2
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
.
24.
For a surface
S
and a ﬁxed vector
v
, prove that
2
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
v
·
n
dS
=
/integraldisplay
∂
S
(
v
×
r
)
·
d
s
,
where
r
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
(
x
,
y
,
z
).
25.
Argue informally that if
S
is a closed surface, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
∇×
F
)
·
d
S
=
0
(see Exercise 23). (A
closed surface
is one that forms
the boundary of a region in space; thus, for example, a
sphere is a closed surface.)
26.
If
C
is a closed curve that is the boundary of a surface
S
,
and
f
and
g
are
C
2
functions, show that
(a)
/integraldisplay
C
f
∇
g
·
d
s
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
∇
f
×∇
g
)
·
d
S
(b)
/integraldisplay
C
(
f
∇
g
+
g
∇
f
)
·
d
s
=
0
27.
(a) If
C
is a closed curve that is the boundary of a
surface
S
, and
v
is a constant vector, show that
/integraldisplay
C
v
·
d
s
=
0
.
(b) Show that this is true even if
C
is not the boundary
of a surface
S
.
28.
Show that
/Phi1
:
D
→
R
3
,
D
=
[0,
π
]
×
[0, 2
π
],
/Phi1
(
φ
,
θ
)
=
(cos
θ
sin
φ
, sin
θ
sin
φ
, cos
φ
), which
parametrizes the unit sphere, takes the boundary of
D
to half of a great circle on
S
.
29.
Verify Theorem 6 for the helicoid
/Phi1
(
r
,
θ
)
=
(
r
cos
θ
,
r
sin
θ
,
θ
), (
r
,
θ
)
∈
[0, 1]
×
[0,
π/
2],
and the vector ﬁeld
F
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
(
z
,
x
,
y
).
30.
Prove Theorem 6.
31.
Let
F
=
x
2
i
+
(2
xy
+
x
)
j
+
z
k
. Let
C
be the circle
x
2
+
y
2
=
1 and
S
the disc
x
2
+
y
2
≤
1 within the
plane
z
=
0.
(a) Determine the ﬂux of
F
out of
S
.
(b) Determine the circulation of
F
around
C
.
(c) Find the ﬂux of
∇×
F
. Verify Stokes’ theorem
directly in this case.
32.
Let
S
be a surface with boundary
∂
S
, and suppose that
E
is an electric ﬁeld that is perpendicular to
∂
S
. Use
Faraday’ s law to show that the induced magnetic ﬂux
across
S
is constant in time.
33.
Integrate
∇×
F
,
F
=
(3
y
,
−
xz
,
−
yz
2
) over the portion
of the surface 2
z
=
x
2
+
y
2
below the plane
z
=
2, both
directly and by using Stokes’ theorem.
34.
Amp` ere’s law
states that if the electric current density is
described by a vector ﬁeld
J
and the induced magnetic
ﬁeld is
H
, then the circulation of
H
around the boundary
C
of a surface
S
equals the integral of
J
over
S
(i.e., the
total current crossing
S
). See Figure 8.2.15. Show that
this is implied by the steady-state
Maxwell equation
∇×
H
=
J
.
Current 
I 
= 
flux
of 
J
 
H
J
H
ﬁgure
8.2.15
Ampère’s law.
35.
Faraday’ s law relates the line integral of the electric ﬁeld
around a loop
C
to the surface integral of the rate of
change of the magnetic ﬁeld over a surface
S
with
boundary
C
. Regarding the equation
∇×
E
=−
∂
H
/∂
t
as the basic equation, Faraday’ s law is a consequence of
Stokes’ theorem, as we have seen in Example 4.
Suppose we are given electric and magnetic ﬁelds
in space that satisfy
∇×
E
=−
∂
H
/∂
t
. Suppose
C
is
the boundary of the M¨ obius band shown in Figures 7.6.3
and 7.6.4. Because the M¨ obius band cannot be oriented,
Stokes’ theorem does not apply. What becomes of
Faraday’ s law? What do you guess
/integraltext
C
E
·
d
s
equals?
36.
(a) If in spherical coordinates, we write
e
r
=
α
i
+
β
j
+
γ
k
, ﬁnd
α
,
β
, and
γ.
(b) Find similar formulas for
e
φ
and
e
θ
.

<<<PAGE 480>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 453
8.3 Conservative Fields 453
8.3Conservative Fields
We saw in Section 7.2 that for a gradient force ﬁeld F=∇ f, line integrals of Fwere
evaluated as follows:
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=f(c(b))−f(c(a)).
The value of the integral depends only on the endpoints c(b) and c(a) of the path. In
other words, if we used another path with the same endpoints, we would still get the
same answer. This leads us to say that the integral is path-independent.
Gradient ﬁelds are important in many physical problems. For example, if V=− f
represents a potential energy (gravitational, electrical, and so on), then Frepresents a
force.5Consider the example of a particle of mass min the ﬁeld of the earth; in this
case, we take fto be GmM/rorV=−GmM/r, where Gis the gravitational constant,
Mis the mass of the earth, and ris the distance from the center of the earth. The
corresponding force is F=−(GmM/r3)r=−(GmM/r2)n, where nis the unit radial
vector. Note that Ffails to be deﬁned at the point r=0.
When Are Vector Fields Gradients?
We wish to characterize those vector ﬁelds that can be written as a gradient. Our task issimpliﬁed considerably by Stokes’ theorem.
Theorem 7 Conservative Fields LetFbe a C1vector ﬁeld deﬁned on R3,
except possibly for a ﬁnite number of points. The following conditions on Fare
all equivalent:
(i) For any oriented simple closed curve C,/integraltext
CF·ds=0.
(ii) For any two oriented simple curves C1andC2that have the same endpoints,
/integraldisplay
C1F·ds=/integraldisplay
C2F·ds.
(iii) Fis the gradient of some function f; that is, F=∇ f(and if Fhas one or
more exceptional points where it fails to be deﬁned, fis also undeﬁned there).
(iv)∇× F=0.
A vector ﬁeld satisfying one (and, hence, all) of the conditions (i)–(iv) is called
aconservative vector ﬁeld.6
5If the minus sign is used, then Visdecreasing in the direction F.
6In the plane R2, exceptional points are not allowed (see Exercise 16). Theorem 7 can be proved in the
same way if Fis deﬁned and is of class C1only on an open convex set in R2orR3. (A set Dis convex
if P, Q ∈Dimplies the line joining P and Q also belongs to D.)

<<<PAGE 481>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 454
454 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
ﬁgure 8.3.1 Constructing (a) an
oriented simple closed curve
c1−c2from (b) two oriented
simple curves.c = c  − c
c (a) = c  (a)1
2c (b) = c  (b)1 2
12c2
c1
(a) (b)
proof We shall establish the following chain of implications, which will prove the
theorem:
(i)⇒(ii)⇒(iii)⇒(iv)⇒(i).
First we show that condition (i) implies condition (ii). Suppose c1andc2are para-
metrizations representing C1andC2, with the same endpoints. Construct the closed
curve cobtained by ﬁrst traversing c1and then −c2(Figure 8.3.1), or, symbolically, the
curve c=c1−c2. Assuming cis simple, condition (i) gives
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay
c1F·ds−/integraldisplay
c2F·ds=0,
and so condition (ii) holds. (If cis not simple, an additional argument, omitted here, is
needed.)
Next, we prove that condition (ii) implies condition (iii). Let Cbe any oriented simple
curve joining a point such as (0, 0, 0) to ( x,y,z), and suppose Cis represented by the
parametrization c[if (0, 0, 0) is the exceptional point of F, we can choose a different
starting point for cwithout affecting the argument]. Deﬁne f(x,y,z)t ob e/integraltext
cF·ds.B y
hypothesis (ii), f(x,y,z) is independent of C. We shall show that F=grad f. Indeed,
choose cto be the path shown in Figure 8.3.2, so that
f(x,y,z)=/integraldisplayx
0F1(t,0 ,0 ) dt+/integraldisplayy
0F2(x,t,0 )dt+/integraldisplayz
0F3(x,y,t)dt,
where F=(F1,F2,F3).
It follows from the fundamental theorem of calculus that ∂f/∂z=F3. We can repeat
this processing using two other paths from (0, 0, 0) to ( x,y,z) [for example, by drawing
the lines from (0, 0, 0) to (0, y,0 )t o( x,y,0 )t o( x,y,z)], and we can similarly show
that∂f/∂x=F1and∂f/∂y=F2(see Exercise 26). Thus, ∇f=F.
Third, condition (iii) implies condition (iv), because, as proved in Section 4.4,
∇×∇ f=0.
xyz
(x, 0, 0) (x, y, 0)(x, y, z)
(0, 0, 0)ﬁgure 8.3.2 A path joining (0, 0, 0) to ( x,y,z).

<<<PAGE 482>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 455
8.3 Conservative Fields 455
nC
S
n
nﬁgure 8.3.3 A surface Sspanning a curve C.
Finally, let crepresent a closed curve Cand let Sbe any surface whose boundary is
c(ifFhas exceptional points, choose Sto avoid them). Figure 8.3.3 indicates that we
can probably always ﬁnd such a surface; however, a formal proof of this would require
the development of more sophisticated mathematical ideas than we can present here.
By Stokes’ theorem,
/integraldisplay
CF·ds=/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(∇× F)·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S(curl F)·ndS.
Because ∇× F=0, this integral vanishes, so that condition (iv) ⇒condition (i). ■
Physical Interpretations of/integraltext
CF·ds
We have already seen that one interpretation of the line integral is as the work done by F
in moving a particle along C. A second interpretation is the notion of circulation, which
we encountered at the end of the last section. Recall that in this case, we think of Fas
the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid; that is, to each point P in space, Fassigns the velocity vector
of the ﬂuid at P (in the last section, Fwas designated V). Take Cto be a closed curve,
and let /Delta1sbe a small directed chord of C. Then F·/Delta1sis approximately the tangential
component of Ftimes/bardbl/Delta1s/bardbl. The circulation/integraltext
CF·dsis the net tangential component
around C. A small paddle wheel placed in the ﬂuid would rotate if it is centered at a
point where Fvanishes and if the circulation of the ﬂuid is nonzero, or/integraltext
CF·ds/negationslash=0
for small loops C(see Figure 8.3.4).
There is a similar interpretation in electromagnetic theory: If Frepresents an electric
ﬁeld, then a current will ﬂow around a loop Cif/integraltext
CF·ds/negationslash=0.
By Theorem 7, a ﬁeld Fhas no circulation if and only if curl F=∇× F=0. Hence,
a vector ﬁeld Fwith curl F=0is called irrotational . We have therefore proved that a
vector ﬁeld in R3is irrotational if and only if it is a gradient ﬁeld for some function ,
that is ,if and only if F=∇ f. The function fis called a potential forF.
curl F 
C ﬁgure 8.3.4/integraltext
CF·ds/negationslash=0 implies that a paddle
wheel in a ﬂuid with velocity ﬁeld Fwill rotate
around its axis.

<<<PAGE 483>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 456
456 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
example 1 Consider the vector ﬁeld FonR3deﬁned by
F(x,y,z)=yi+(zcosyz+x)j+(ycosyz)k.
Show that Fis irrotational and ﬁnd a scalar potential for F.
solution We compute ∇× F:
∇× F=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
yx +zcosyz y cosyz/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=(cos yz−yzsinyz−cosyz+yzsinyz)i+(0−0)j+(1−1)k
=0i+0j+0k=0,
soFis irrotational. Thus, a potential exists by Theorem 7. We can ﬁnd it in several ways.
Method 1. By the technique used to prove that condition (ii) implies condition (iii)
in Theorem 7, we can set
f(x,y,z)=/integraldisplay
x
0F1(t,0 ,0 ) dt+/integraldisplayy
0F2(x,t,0 )dt+/integraldisplayz
0F3(x,y,t)dt
=/integraldisplayx
00dt+/integraldisplayy
0xd t+/integraldisplayz
0ycosyt dt
=0+xy+sinyz=xy+sinyz.
We easily verify that ∇f=F, as required:
∇f=∂f
∂xi+∂f
∂yj+∂f
∂zk=yi+(x+zcosyz)j+(ycosyz)k.
Method 2. Because we know that fexists, we know that we can solve the system
of equations
∂f
∂x=y,∂f
∂y=x+zcosyz,∂f
∂z=ycosyz,
forf(x,y,z). These are equivalent to the simultaneous equations
(a) f(x,y,z)=xy+h1(y,z)
(b) f(x,y,z)=sinyz+xy+h2(x,z)
(c) f(x,y,z)=sinyz+h3(x,y)
for functions h1,h2,h3independent of x,y, and z(respectively). When h1(y,z)=
sinyz,h2(x,z)=0, and h3(x,y)=xy, the three equations agree and so yield a
potential for F. However, we have only guessed at the values of h1,h2, and h3. To derive
the formula for fmore systematically, we note that because f(x,y,z)=xy+h1(y,z)
and∂f/∂z=ycosyz, we ﬁnd that
∂h1(y,z)
∂z=ycosyz

<<<PAGE 484>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 457
8.3 Conservative Fields 457
or
h1(y,z)=/integraldisplay
ycosyz dz+g(y)=sinyz+g(y).
Therefore, substituting this back into equation (a), we get
f(x,y,z)=xy+sinyz+g(y);
but by equation (b),
g(y)=h2(x,z).
Because the right side of this equation is a function of xandzand the left side is a
function of yalone, we conclude that they must equal some constant C. Thus,
f(x,y,z)=xy+sinyz+C
and we have determined fup to a constant. ▲
example 2 A mass Mat the origin in R3exerts a force on a mass mlocated at r=(x,y,z)
with magnitude GmM/r2and directed toward the origin. Here, Gis the gravitational
constant, which depends on the units of measurement, and r=/bardblr/bardbl=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2.
If we remember that −r/ris a unit vector toward the origin, then we can write the force
ﬁeld as
F(x,y,z)=−GmM r
r3.
Show that Fis irrotational and ﬁnd a scalar potential for F. (Notice that Fis not deﬁned
at the origin, but Theorem 7 still applies, because it allows an exceptional point.)
solution First let us verify that ∇×F=0. Referring to formula 10 in the table of vector identities
in Section 4.4, we get
F=−GmM/bracketleftbigg
∇/parenleftbigg1
r3/parenrightbigg
×r+1
r3∇× r/bracketrightbigg
.
But∇(1/r3)=− 3r/r5(see Exercise 38, Section 4.4), and so the ﬁrst term vanishes,
because r×r=0. The second term vanishes, because
∇× r=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleij k
∂
∂x∂
∂y∂
∂z
xyz/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=/parenleftbigg∂z
∂y−∂y
∂z/parenrightbigg
i+/parenleftbigg∂x
∂z−∂z
∂x/parenrightbigg
j+/parenleftbigg∂y
∂x−∂x
∂y/parenrightbigg
k=0.
Hence, ∇× F=0 (for r/negationslash=0).
If we recall the formula ∇(rn)=nrn−2r(again, see Exercise 38, Section 4.4), then
we can read off a scalar potential for Fby inspection. We have F=− ∇ V, where
V(x,y,z)=−GmM/ris called the gravitational potential energy.
[We observe in passing that by Theorem 3 of Section 7.2, the work done by Fin
moving a particle of mass mfrom a point P 1to a point P 2is given by
V(P1)−V(P2)=GmM/parenleftbigg1
r2−1
r1/parenrightbigg
,
where r1is the radial distance of P 1from the origin, with r2similarly deﬁned.] ▲

<<<PAGE 485>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 458
458 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
The Planar Case
By the same proof, Theorem 7 is also true for C1vector ﬁelds FonR2. In this case, we re-
quire that Fhasnoexceptional points; that is, Fis smooth everywhere (see Exercise 16).
Notice, however, that the conclusion might still hold even if there are exceptional points,
an example being ( xi+yj)/(x2+y2)3/2. An example where the conclusion does not
hold is ( −yi+xj)/(x2+y2), as shown in Exercise 16.
IfF=Pi+Qj, then
∇× F=/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
k.
Sometimes ∂Q/∂x−∂P/∂yis called the scalar curl ofF. Therefore, the condition
∇× F=0 reduces to
∂P
∂y=∂Q
∂x.
Thus, we have:
Corollary 1Fis aC1vector ﬁeld on R2of the form Pi+Qjthat satisﬁes
∂P/∂y=∂Q/∂x, then F=∇ ffor some fonR2.
We emphasize again that this corollary can be false if Ffails to be of class C1at even
a single point (an example is given in Exercise 16). In R3, however, as already noted,
exceptions at single points are allowed (see Theorem 7).
example 3 (a) Determine whether the vector ﬁeld
F=exyi+ex+yj
is a gradient ﬁeld.
(b) Repeat part (a) for
F=(2xcosy)i−(x2siny)j.
solution (a) Here P(x,y)=exyandQ(x,y)=ex+y, and so we compute
∂P
∂y=xexy,∂Q
∂x=ex+y.
These are not equal, and so Fcannot have a potential function.
(b) In this case, we ﬁnd
∂P
∂y=−2xsiny=∂Q
∂x,
and so Fhas a potential function f. To compute fwe solve the equations
∂f
∂x=2xcosy,∂f
∂y=−x2siny.
Thus, f(x,y)=x2cosy+h1(y) and f(x,y)=x2cosy+h2(x).Ifh1andh2are the
same constant, then both equations are satisﬁed, and so f(x,y)=x2cosyis a potential
forF. ▲

<<<PAGE 486>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 459
8.3 Conservative Fields 459
example 4 Letc: [1, 2] →R2be given by x=et−1,y=sin(π/t). Compute the integral
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplay
c2xcosyd x−x2sinyd y,
where F=(2xcosy)i−(x2siny)j.
solution The endpoints are c(1)=(1, 0) and c(2)=(e, 1). Because ∂(2xcosy)/∂y=
∂(−x2siny)/∂x,Fis irrotational and hence a gradient vector ﬁeld (as we saw in Ex-
ample 3). Thus, by Theorem 7, we can replace cby any piecewise C1curve having the
same endpoints, in particular, by the polygonal path from (1, 0) to ( e,0 )t o( e, 1). Thus,
the line integral must be equal to
/integraldisplay
cF·ds=/integraldisplaye
12tcos 0 dt+/integraldisplay1
0−e2sintd t=(e2−1)+e2(cos 1 −1)
=e2cos 1−1.
Alternatively, using Theorem 3 of Section 7.2, we have
/integraldisplay
c2xcosyd x−x2sinyd y=/integraldisplay
c∇f·ds=f(c(2))−f(c(1))=e2cos 1−1,
because f(x,y)=x2cosyis a potential function for F. Evidently, this technique is
simpler than computing the integral directly. ▲
We conclude this section with a theorem that is quite similar in spirit to Theorem 7.
Theorem 7 was motivated partly as a converse to the result that curl ∇f=0for any C1
function f:R3→R—or, if curl F=0, then F=∇ f. We also know [formula (9) in
the table of vector identities in Section 4.4] that div(curl G)=0 for any C2vector ﬁeld
G. We can ask about the converse statement: If div F=0, is Fthe curl of a vector ﬁeld
G? The following theorem answers this in the afﬁrmative.
Theorem 8IfFis aC1vector ﬁeld on all of R3with div F=0, then there
exists a C1vector ﬁeld Gwith F=curlG.
The proof is outlined in Exercise 20. We should warn you at this point that, unlike the
Fin Theorem 7, the vector ﬁeld Fin Theorem 8 is not allowed to have an exceptional
point. For example, the gravitational force ﬁeld F=− (GmM r/r3) has the property
that div F=0, and yet there is no Gfor which F=curlG(see Exercise 29). Theorem
8 does not apply, because the gravitational force ﬁeld Fis not deﬁned at 0∈R3.
exercises
1.Determine which of the following vector ﬁelds Fin the
plane is the gradient of a scalar function f. If such an f
exists, ﬁnd it.
(a)F(x,y)=xi+yj
(b)F(x,y)=xyi+xyj
(c)F(x,y)=(x2+y2)i+2xyj2.Repeat Exercise 1 for the following vector ﬁelds:
(a)F(x,y)=(cos xy−xysinxy)i−(x2sinxy)j
(b)F(x,y)=(x/radicalbig
x2y2+1)i+(y/radicalbig
x2y2+1)j
(c)F(x,y)=(2xcosy+cosy)i−(x2siny+xsiny)j

<<<PAGE 487>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 460
460 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
3.For each of the following vector ﬁelds F, determine (i) if
there exists a function gsuch that ∇g=F, and (ii) if
there exists a vector ﬁeld Gsuch that curl G=F. (It is
not necessary to ﬁnd gorG.)
(a)F(x,y,z)=(4xz−x,−4yz,z−2y)
(b)F(x,y,z)=(exsiny,excosy,z2)
(c)F(x,y,z)=(log( z2+1)+y2,2xy,2xz
z2+1)
(d)F(x,y,z)=(x2+xsinz,ycosz−2xy,
cosz+sinz)
4.For each of the following vector ﬁelds F, determine (i) if
there exists a function gsuch that ∇g=F, and (ii) if
there exists a vector ﬁeld Gsuch that curl G=F. (It is
not necessary to ﬁnd gorG.)
(a)F(x,y,z)=(excosy,−exsiny,π)
(b)F(x,y,z)=/parenleftbigy
z2+4,x
z2+4,−2xyz
z4+8z2+16/parenrightbig
(c)F(x,y,z)=(x2y2z2,yex,xycosz)
(d)F(x,y,z)=(6z5y5,9x8z2,4x3y3)
5.Show that any two potential functions for a vector ﬁeld
onR3differ at most by a constant.
6.(a)LetF(x,y)=(xy,y2) and let cbe the path y=2x2
joining (0, 0) to (1, 2) in R2. Evaluate/integraltext
cF·ds.
(b)Does the integral in part (a) depend on the pathjoining (0, 0) to (1, 2)?
7.LetF(x,y,z)=(2xyz+sinx)i+x2zj+x2yk. Find a
function fsuch that F=∇ f.
8.Evaluate/integraltext
cF·ds, where c(t)=(cos5t, sin3t,t4),
0≤t≤π, and Fis as in Exercise 7.
9.Iff(x) is a smooth function of one variable, must
F(x,y)=f(x)i+f(y)jbe a gradient?
10. (a)Show that F=−r//bardblr/bardbl3is the gradient of
f(x,y,z)=1/r.
(b)What is the work done by the force F=−r//bardblr/bardbl3in
moving a particle from a point r0∈R3“to∞,”
where r(x,y,z)=(x,y,z)?
11. LetF(x,y,z)=xyi+yj+zk. Can there exist a
function fsuch that F=∇ f?
12. LetF=F1i+F2j+F3kand suppose each Fksatisﬁes
the homogeneity condition
Fk(tx,ty,tz)=tFk(x,y,z), k=1, 2, 3.
Suppose also ∇× F=0. Prove that F=∇ f, where
2f(x,y,z)=xF1(x,y,z)+yF2(x,y,z)+zF3(x,y,z).
[HINT: Use Review Exercise 31, Chapter 2.]13. LetF(x,y,z)=(exsiny)i+(excosy)j+z2k.
Evaluate the integral/integraltext
cF·ds, where
c(t)=(√t,t3,e x p√t), 0≤t≤1.
14. Let a ﬂuid have the velocity ﬁeld F(x,y,z)=
xyi+yzj+xzk. What is the circulation around the unit
circle in the xyplane? Interpret your answer.
15. The mass of the earth is approximately 6 ×1027g and
that of the sun is 330,000 times as much. Thegravitational constant is 6.7 ×10
−8cm3/s2·g. The
distance of the earth from the sun is about 1.5 ×1012cm.
Compute, approximately, the work necessary to increasethe distance of the earth from the sun by 1 cm.
16. (a) Show that/integraltext
C(xd y−yd x)/(x2+y2)=2π, where
Cis the unit circle.
(b) Conclude that the associated vector ﬁeld
[−y/(x2+y2)]i+[x/(x2+y2)]jis not a
conservative ﬁeld.
(c) Show, however, that ∂P/∂y=∂Q/∂x. Does this
contradict the corollary to Theorem 7? If not, whynot?
17. Determine if the following vector ﬁelds Fare gradient
ﬁelds. If there exists a fuction fsuch that ∇f=F,
ﬁnd f.
(a)F(x,y,z)=(2xyz,x2z,x2y)
(b)F(x,y)=(xcosy,xsiny)
(c)F(x,y,z)=(x2ey,xyz,ez)
(d)F(x,y)=(2xcosy,−x2siny)
18. Determine if the following vector ﬁelds Fare gradient
ﬁelds. If there exists a function fsuch that ∇f=F,
ﬁnd f.
(a)F(x,y)=(2x+y2−ysinx,2xyz+cosx)
(b)F(x,y,z)=(6x2z2,5x2y2,4y2z2)
(c)F(x,y)=(y3+1, 3xy2+1)
(d)F(x,y)=(xe(x2+y2)+2xy,ye(x2+y2)+4y3z,y4)
19. Show that the following vector ﬁelds are conservative.Calculate /integraltext
CF·dsfor the given curve.
(a)F=(xy2+3x2y)i+(x+y)x2j;Cis the curve
consisting of line segments from (1, 1) to (0, 2) to(3, 0).
(b)F=2x
y2+1i−2y(x2+1)
(y2+1)2j;Cis parametrized by
x=t3−1,y=t6−t,0≤t≤1.
(c)F=[cos ( xy2)−xy2sin (xy2)]i−2x2ysin (xy2)j;
Cis the curve ( et,et+1),−1≤t≤0.

<<<PAGE 488>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 461
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 461
20. Prove Theorem 8. [H INT: Deﬁne G=G1i+G2j+G3k
by
G1(x,y,z)=/integraldisplayz
0F2(x,y,t)dt−/integraldisplayy
0F3(x,t,0 )dt
G2(x,y,z)=−/integraldisplayz
0F1(x,y,t)dt
andG3(x,y,z)=0.]
21. Is each of the following vector ﬁelds the curl of some
other vector ﬁeld? If so, ﬁnd the vector ﬁeld.
(a)F=xi+yj+zk
(b)F=(x2+1)i+(z−2xy)j+yk
22. LetF=xzi−yzj+yk. Verify that ∇·F=0. Find a G
such that F=∇× G.
23. Repeat Exercise 22 for F=y2i+z2j+x2k.
24. LetF=xeyi−(xcosz)j−zeyk. Find a Gsuch that
F=∇× G.
25. LetF=(xcosy)i−(siny)j+(sinx)k. Find a Gsuch
thatF=∇× G.
26. By using different paths from (0, 0, 0) to ( x,y,z), show
that the function fdeﬁned in the proof of Theorem 7 for
“condition (ii) implies condition (iii)” satisﬁes∂f/∂x=F
1and∂f/∂y=F2.27. LetFbe the vector ﬁeld on R3given by F=− yi+xj.
(a)Show that Fis rotational, that is, Fis not
irrotational.
(b)Suppose Frepresents the velocity vector ﬁeld of a
ﬂuid. Show that if we place a cork in this ﬂuid, itwill revolve in a plane parallel to the xyplane, in a
circular trajectory about the zaxis.
(c)In what direction does the cork revolve?
28. LetGbe the vector ﬁeld on R3\{zaxis} deﬁned by
G=−y
x2+y2i+x
x2+y2j.
(a) Show that Gis irrotational.
(b) Show that the result of Exercise 27(b) holds for G
also.
(c)How can we resolve the fact that the trajectories ofFandGare both the same (circular about the zaxis)
yetFis rotational and Gis not? [H
INT: The property
of being rotational is a local condition, that is, aproperty of the ﬂuid in the neighborhood of a point.]
29. LetF=−(GmM r/r3) be the gravitational force ﬁeld
deﬁned on R3\{0}.
(a) Show that div F=0.
(b) Show that F/negationslash=curlGfor any C1vector ﬁeld Gon
R3\{0}.
8.4Gauss’ Theorem
Gauss’ theorem states that the ﬂux of a vector ﬁeld out of a closed surface equals the
integral of the divergence of that vector ﬁeld over the volume enclosed by the surface.The result parallels Stokes’ theorem and Green’ s theorem in that it relates an integralover a closed geometric object (curve or surface) to an integral over a contained region(surface or volume).
Elementary Regions and Their Boundaries
We shall begin by asking you to review the various elementary regions in space thatwere introduced when we considered the volume integral; these regions are illustrated inFigures 5.5.2 and 5.5.4. As these ﬁgures indicate, the boundary of an elementary regioninR
3is a surface made up of a ﬁnite number (at most six, at least two) of surfaces that
can be described as graphs of functions from R2toR. This kind of surface is called a
closed surface. The surfaces S1,S2,...,SNcomposing such a closed surface are called
itsfaces.
example 1 The cube in Figure 8.4.1(a) is an elementary region, and in fact a symmetric elementaryregion, with six rectangles composing its boundary. The sphere in Figure 8.4.1(b) is theboundary of a solid ball, which is also a symmetric elementary region.

<<<PAGE 489>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 462
462
The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
S
1
S
1
S
2
(a)
(b)
S
2
S
4
S
5
S
3
S
6
ﬁgure
8.4.1
(a) Symmetric elementary
regions and (b) the surface
S
i
composing
their boundaries.
▲
Closed surfaces can be oriented in two ways. The outward orientation makes the
normal point outward into space, and the inward orientation makes the normal point
into the bounded region (Figure 8.4.2).
Outward normal
Inward normal
ﬁgure
8.4.2
Two possible
orientations for a closed surface.
Suppose
S
is a closed surface oriented in one of these two ways and
F
is a vector
ﬁeld on
S
. Then, as we deﬁned it in Section 7.6,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
F
·
d
S
=
/summationdisplay
i
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
i
F
·
d
S
.
If
S
is given the outward orientation, the integral
/integraltext/integraltext
S
F
·
d
S
measures the total ﬂux of
F
outward across
S
. That is, if we think of
F
as the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid,
/integraltext/integraltext
S
F
·
d
S
indicates the amount of ﬂuid leaving the region bounded by
S
per unit time. If
S
is given
the inward orientation, the integral
/integraltext/integraltext
S
F
·
d
S
measures the total ﬂux of
F
inward across
S
.
We recall another common way of writing these surface integrals, a way that explicitly
speciﬁes the orientation of
S
. Let the orientation of
S
be given by a unit normal vector
n
(
x
,
y
,
z
) at each point of
S
. Then we have the oriented integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
F
·
d
S
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
F
·
n
)
dS
,
that is, the integral of the normal component of
F
over
S
. In the remainder of this section,
if
S
is a closed surface enclosing a region
W
, we adopt the default convention that
S
=
∂
W
is given the outward orientation, with outward unit normal
n
(
x
,
y
,
z
) at each point
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
∈
S
. Furthermore, we denote the surface with the opposite (inward) orientation
by
∂
W
op
. Then the associated unit normal direction for this orientation is
−
n
. Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂
W
F
·
d
S
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
(
F
·
n
)
dS
=−
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
[
F
·
(
−
n
)]
dS
=−
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂
W
op
F
·
d
S
.
example
2
The unit cube
W
given by
0
≤
x
≤
1, 0
≤
y
≤
1, 0
≤
z
≤
1
is a symmetric elementary region in space (see Figures 8
.
4
.
3 and 5
.
5
.
5).
We write the faces as
S
1
:
z
=
0, 0
≤
x
≤
1, 0
≤
y
≤
1
S
2
:
z
=
1, 0
≤
x
≤
1, 0
≤
y
≤
1
S
3
:
x
=
0, 0
≤
y
≤
1, 0
≤
z
≤
1
S
4
:
x
=
1, 0
≤
y
≤
1, 0
≤
z
≤
1
S
5
:
y
=
0, 0
≤
x
≤
1, 0
≤
z
≤
1
S
6
:
y
=
1, 0
≤
x
≤
1, 0
≤
z
≤
1
.

<<<PAGE 490>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 463
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 463
n3=−i
n5=−jn2=k
n1=−k
n4=i
n6=j
ﬁgure 8.4.3 The outward orientation on the
cube.
From Figure 8 .4.3, we see that
n2=k=−n1,
n4=i=−n3,
n6=j=−n5,
and so for a continuous vector ﬁeld F=F1i+F2j+F3k,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·ndS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1F3dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2F3dS−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S3F1dS
+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S4F1dS−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S5F2dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S6F2dS.▲
Gauss’ Theorem
We have now come to the last of the three central theorems of this chapter. This theorem
relates surface integrals to volume integrals; in other words, the theorem states that if W
is a region in R3, then the ﬂux of a vector ﬁeld Foutward across the closed surface ∂W
is equal to the integral of div Fover W. We begin by assuming that Wis a symmetric
elementary region (Figure 5.5.5).
Theorem 9 Gauss’ Divergence Theorem LetWbe a symmetric elemen-
tary region in space .Denote by ∂Wthe oriented closed surface that bounds W.
LetFbe a smooth vector ﬁeld deﬁned on W.Then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(∇·F)dV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WF·dS
or, alternatively,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(div F)dV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W(F·n)dS.

<<<PAGE 491>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 464
464 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
proof IfF=Pi+Qj+Rk, then by deﬁnition, the divergence of Fis given by
divF=∂P/∂x+∂Q/∂y+∂R/∂z, so we can write (using additivity of the volume
integral)
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WdivFdV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂P
∂xdV+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂Q
∂ydV+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂R
∂zdV.
On the other hand, the surface integral in question is
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WF·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W(Pi+Qj+Rk)·ndS
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WPi·ndS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WQj·ndS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WRk·ndS.
The theorem will follow if we establish the three equalities
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WPi·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂P
∂xdV, (1)
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WQj·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂Q
∂ydV, (2)
and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WRk·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂R
∂zdV. (3)
We shall prove equation (3); the other two equalities can be proved in an analogous
fashion.
Because Wis a symmetric elementary region, there is a pair of functions
z=g1(x,y), z=g2(x,y),
with common domain an elementary region Din the xyplane, such that Wis the set of
all points ( x,y,z) satisfying
g1(x,y)≤z≤g2(x,y), ( x,y)∈D.
By reduction to iterated integrals, we have
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂R
∂zdV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg/integraldisplayz=g2(x,y)
z=g1(x,y)∂R
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
dx dy,
and so, by the fundamental theorem of calculus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂R
∂zdV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D[R(x,y,g2(x,y))−R(x,y,g1(x,y))]dx dy. (4)
The boundary of Wis a closed surface whose top S2is the graph of z=g2(x,y),
where ( x,y)∈D, and whose bottom S1is the graph of z=g1(x,y), (x,y)∈D. The
four other sides of ∂Wconsist of surfaces S3,S4,S5, and S6, whose normals are always
perpendicular to the zaxis. (See Figure 8.4.4. Note that some of the other four sides

<<<PAGE 492>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 465
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 465
S1S3S4
S5S6S2 z /H11005 g2(x, y)
z /H11005 g1(x, y)
ﬁgure 8.4.4 A symmetric elementary region
Wfor which/integraltext/integraltext
∂WRk·dS=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
W(∂R/∂z)dV .
The four sides of ∂W, which are S3,S4,S5,S6
have normals perpendicular to the zaxis.
might be absent; for instance, if Wis a solid ball and ∂Wis a sphere.) By deﬁnition,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WRk·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1Rk·n1dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2Rk·n2dS+6/summationdisplay
i=3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SiRk·nidS.
Because the normal niis perpendicular to kon each of S3,S4,S5,S6,w eh a v e k·n=0
along these faces, and so the integral reduces to
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WRk·nds=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1Rk·dS1+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2Rk·dS2. (5)
The surface S1is deﬁned by z=g1(x,y), and
dS1=/parenleftbigg∂g1
∂xi+∂g1
∂yj−k/parenrightbigg
dx dy
(the negative of the general formula for dSfor graphs from Section 7.6, because the
normal is downward pointing). Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1Rk·dS1=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DR(x,y,g1(x,y))dx dy. (6)
Similarly, for the top face S2,
dS2=/parenleftbigg
−∂g2
∂xi−∂g2
∂yj+k/parenrightbigg
dx dy.
Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2Rk·dS2=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DR(x,y,g2(x,y))dx dy. (7)
Substituting equations (6) and (7) into equation (5) and then comparing with equation (4),
we obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∂R
∂zdV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WR(k·n)dS.
The remaining equalities, (1) and (2), can be established in the same way to complete
the proof. ■

<<<PAGE 493>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 466
466 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
n1
 S1
Wn2S2
ﬁgure 8.4.5 A more general region to which Gauss’
theorem applies.
Generalizing Gauss’ Theorem
The reader should note that the proof of Gauss’ theorem is similar to that of Green’ s
theorem. By the procedure used in Exercise 16 of Section 8.1, we can extend Gauss’theorem to any region that can be broken up into symmetric elementary regions. Thisincludes all regions of interest to us. An example of a region to which Gauss’ theo-rem applies is the region between two closed surfaces, one inside the other. The sur-face of this region consists of two pieces oriented as shown in Figure 8.4.5. We shallapply the divergence theorem to such a region when we prove Gauss’ law in Theo-rem 10.
example
3 Consider F=2xi+y2j+z2k. Let Sbe the unit sphere deﬁned by x2+y2+z2=1.
Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·ndS.
solution By Gauss’ theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(div F)dV,
where Wis the ball bounded by the sphere. The integral on the right is
2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(1+y+z)dV=2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WdV+2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WydV+2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WzdV.
By symmetry, we can argue that/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
WydV=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
WzdV=0 (see Exercise 21, Section
6.3). Thus, because a sphere of radius Rhas volume 4π R3/3,
2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(1+y+z)dV=2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WdV=8π
3.
Y ou can convince yourself that direct computation of/integraltext/integraltext
SF·ndS proves
unwieldy. ▲
example 4 Use the divergence theorem to evaluate
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W(x2+y+z)dS,
where Wis the solid ball x2+y2+z2≤1.

<<<PAGE 494>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 467
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 467
solution To apply Gauss’ divergence theorem, we ﬁnd a vector ﬁeld F=F1i+F2j+F3konW
with F·n=x2+y+z. At any point ( x,y,z)∈∂W, the outward unit normal nto∂W
is
n=xi+yj+zk,
because on ∂W,x2+y2+z2=1 and the radius vector r=xi+yj+zkis normal to
the sphere ∂W(Figure 8.4.6).
xi+yjyy+zk
(0, 1, 0)
y
xz
(0, 0, 1)
(1, 0, 0)(x, y, z)
ﬁgure 8.4.6 nis the unit normal to ∂W, the
boundary of the ball W.
Therefore, if Fis the desired vector ﬁeld, then
F·n=F1x+F2y+F2z.
We set
F1x=x2, F2y=y, F3z=z
and solve for F1,F2, and F3to ﬁnd that F=xi+j+k. Computing div F,w eg e t
divF=1+0+0=1.
Thus, by Gauss’ divergence theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W(x2+y+z)dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WdV=volume ( W)=4
3π. ▲
The Divergence as the Flux per Unit Volume
The physical meaning of divergence is that at a point P , div F(P) is the rate of net outward
ﬂux at P per unit volume. This follows from Gauss’ theorem and the mean-value theorem
for integrals: If Wρis a ball in R3of radius ρcentered at P , then there is a point Q ∈Wρ
such that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WρF·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WρdivFdV=divF(Q)·volume ( Wρ)
and so
divF(P)=limit
ρ→0divF(Q)=limit
ρ→01
V(Wρ)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WρF·ndS.

<<<PAGE 495>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 468
468 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
This is analogous to the limit formulation of the curl given at the end of Section 8.2.
Thus, if div F(P)>0, we consider P to be a source, for there is a net outward ﬂow near
P . If div F(P)<0, P is called a sink forF.
AC1vector ﬁeld Fdeﬁned on R3is said to be divergence-free if div F=0. If Fis
divergence-free, we have/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=0 for all closed surfaces S. The converse can also
be demonstrated readily using Gauss’ theorem: If/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=0 for all closed surfaces
S, then Fis divergence-free. If Fis divergence-free, we thus see that the ﬂux of Facross
any closed surface Sis 0, so that if Fis the velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid, the net amount of
ﬂuid that ﬂows out of any region will be 0. Thus, exactly as much ﬂuid must ﬂow intothe region as ﬂows out (in unit time). A ﬂuid with this property is therefore describedasincompressible.
example
5 Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where F(x,y,z)=xy2i+x2yj+ykandSis the surface of the
cylinder x2+y2=1, bounded by the planes z=1 and z=− 1, and including the
portions x2+y2≤1 when z=±1.
solution We can compute this integral directly, but it is easier to use the divergence theorem.
Now Sis the boundary of the region Wgiven by x2+y2≤1,−1≤z≤1. Thus,/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
W(div F)dV. Moreover,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(div F)dV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(x2+y2)dx dy dz =/integraldisplay1
−1/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay
x2+y2≤1(x2+y2)dx dy/parenrightbigg
dz
=2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
x2+y2≤1(x2+y2)dx dy.
Before evaluating the double integral, we note that the surface integral satisﬁes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WF·ndS=2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
x2+y2≤1(x2+y2)dx dy>0.
This means that/integraltext/integraltext
∂WF·dS, the net ﬂux of Fout of the cylinder, is positive.
We change variables to polar coordinates to evaluate the double integral:
x=rcosθ, y=rsinθ,0 ≤r≤1, 0 ≤θ≤2π.
Hence, we have ∂(x,y)/∂(r,θ)=randx2+y2=r2. Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
x2+y2≤1(x2+y2)dx dy=/integraldisplay2π
0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay1
0r3dr/parenrightbigg
dθ=1
2π.
Therefore,/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
WdivFdV=π. ▲
Gauss’ Law
As we remarked earlier, Gauss’ divergence theorem can be applied to regions in spacemore general than symmetric elementary regions. To conclude this section, we shall usethis observation in the proof of the following important results.

<<<PAGE 496>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 469
8.4
Gauss’ Theorem
469
Theorem
10 Gauss’ Law
Let
M
be a symmetric elementary region in
R
3
.
Then if (0, 0, 0)
/negationslash∈
∂
M
,w eh a v e
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂
M
r
·
n
r
3
dS
=
/braceleftbigg
4
π
if (0, 0, 0)
∈
M
0 if (0, 0, 0)
/negationslash∈
M
,
where
r
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=
x
i
+
y
j
+
z
k
and
r
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
=/bardbl
r
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
/bardbl=
/radicalbig
x
2
+
y
2
+
z
2
.
proof of Gauss’ law
First suppose (0, 0, 0)
/negationslash∈
M
. Then
r
/
r
3
is a
C
1
vector ﬁeld
on
M
and
∂
M
, and so by the divergence theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂
M
r
·
n
r
3
dS
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
M
∇
·
/parenleftBig
r
r
3
/parenrightBig
dV
.
But
∇
·
(
r
/
r
3
)
=
0 for
r
/negationslash=
0, as you can easily verify (see Exercise 38, Section 4.4).
Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂
M
r
·
n
r
3
dS
=
0
.
Now let us suppose (0, 0, 0)
∈
M
. We can no longer use the preceding method,
because
r
/
r
3
is not smooth on
M
, due to the zero denominator at
r
=
(0, 0, 0). Because
(0, 0, 0)
∈
M
and (0, 0, 0)
/negationslash∈
∂
M
, there is an
ε>
0 such that the ball
N
of radius
ε
centered at (0, 0, 0) is contained completely inside
M
. Let
W
be the region between
M
and
N
. Then
W
has boundary
∂
N
∪
∂
M
=
S
. But the orientation on
∂
N
induced by the
outward
normal on
W
is the opposite of that obtained from
N
(see Figure 8.4.7).
Now
∇
·
(
r
/
r
3
)
=
0o n
W
, and so, by the divergence theorem applied to the (nonele-
mentary) region
W
,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S
r
·
n
r
3
dS
=
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W
∇
·
/parenleftBig
r
r
3
/parenrightBig
dV
=
0
.
N
W
(0, 0, 0)
n
M
n
N
M
ﬁgure
8.4.7
Induced outward orientation on
S
;
W
is
M
minus the ball
N
.

<<<PAGE 497>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 470
470 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Because
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·n
r3dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Mr·n
r3dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Nr·n
r3dS,
where nis the outward normal to S,w eh a v e
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Mr·n
r3dS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Nr·n
r3dS.
However, on ∂N,n=−r/randr=ε, because ∂Nis a sphere of radius ε, so that
−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Nr·n
r3dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Nε2
ε4dS=1
ε2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂NdS.
But/integraltext/integraltext
∂NdS=4πε2, the surface area of the sphere of radius ε. This proves the
result. ■
example 6 Gauss’ law has the following physical interpretation. The potential due to a point charge
Qat (0, 0, 0) is given by
φ(x,y,z)=Q
4πr=Q
4π/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,
and the corresponding electric ﬁeld is
E=− ∇ φ=Q
4π/parenleftBigr
r3/parenrightBig
.
Thus, Theorem 10 states that the total electric ﬂux/integraltext/integraltext
∂ME·dS(i.e., the ﬂux of Eout
of a closed surface ∂M) equals Qif the charge lies inside Mand zero otherwise. Note
that even if (0, 0, 0) /negationslash∈M,Ewill still be nonzero onM.
For a continuous charge distribution described by a charge density ρin a region W,
the ﬁeld Eis related to the density ρby
divE=∇·E=ρ.
Thus, by Gauss’ theorem,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WE·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WρdV=Q;
that is, the ﬂux out of a surface is equal to the total charge inside. ▲
Divergence in Spherical Coordinates
We next use Gauss’ theorem to derive the formula
divF=1
ρ2∂
∂ρ(ρ2Fρ)+1
ρsinφ∂
∂φ(sinφFφ)+1
ρsinφ∂Fθ
∂θ(8)
for the divergence of a vector ﬁeld Fin spherical coordinates, which was stated in
Section 8.2. (Again, the subscripts here denote components, notpartial derivatives.)

<<<PAGE 498>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 471
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 471
φ dφρdφρd
ρ φsindθ
ρsin dθφy
xz
ρρsin dθφ
θW
ﬁgure 8.4.8 Inﬁnitesimal volume
determined by dρ,dθ,dφat (ρ ,θ,φ).
The method is to use the formula
divF(P)=limit
W→P1
V(W)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WF·ndS, (9)
where Wis a region with volume V(W), which shrinks down to a point P(in the main
text we use a ball, but we can use regions of any shape). Let Wbe the shaded region in
Figure 8.4.8.
For the two faces orthogonal to the radial direction, the surface integral in equation (9)
is, approximately,
Fρ(ρ+dρ,φ,θ)×(area of outer face) −Fρ(ρ,φ,θ)×(area of inner face)
≈Fρ(ρ+dρ,φ,θ)(ρ+dρ)2sinφdφdθ−Fρ(ρ,φ,θ)ρ2sinφdφdθ
≈∂
∂ρ(Fρρ2sinφ)dρdφdθ (10)
by the one-variable mean-value theorem. Dividing by the volume of the region W,
namely, ρ2sinφdρdφdθ, we see that the contribution to the right-hand side of equation
(9) is
1
ρ2∂
∂ρ(ρ2Fρ) (11)
for these faces. Likewise, the contribution from the faces orthogonal to the φdirection
is
1
ρsinφ∂
∂φ(sinφFφ), and for the θdirection,1
ρsinφ∂Fθ
∂θ.
Substituting (11) and these expressions in equation (9) and taking the limit gives
equation (8).
Maxwell’s Equations and the Prediction of Radio
Waves: The Communication Revolution Begins
We now discuss Maxwell’ s equations, which govern the propagation of electromagnetic
ﬁelds. The form of these equations depends on the physical units one is employing, and
changing units introduces factors like 4π and the velocity of light. We shall choose the
system in which Maxwell’ s equations are simplest.

<<<PAGE 499>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 472
472 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
LetEandHbeC1functions of (t ,x,y,z) that are vector ﬁelds for each t.They
satisfy (by deﬁnition) Maxwell’s equation with charge density ρ(t,x,y,z) and current
density J(t,x,y,z) when the following conditions hold:
∇·E=ρ(Gauss’ law), (12)
∇·H=0 (no negative sources), (13)
∇× E+∂H
∂t=0(Faraday’ s law), (14)
and
∇× H−∂E
∂t=J(Amp` ere’ s law). (15)
Of these laws, equations (4) and (6) were described in integral form in Sections 8.2 and
8.4; historically, they arose in these forms as physically observed laws. Amp` ere’ s lawwas mentioned for a special case in Section 7.2, Example 12.
Physically, we interpret Eas the electric ﬁeld andHas the magnetic ﬁeld. According
to the preceding equations, as time tprogresses, these ﬁelds interact with each other,
and with any charges and currents that are present. For example, the propagation ofelectromagnetic waves (TV signals, radio waves, light from the sun, etc.) in a vacuumis governed by these equations with J= 0 and ρ=0 .
Because ∇·H=0, we can apply Theorem 8 (from Section 8.3) to conclude that
H=∇× Afor some vector ﬁeld A. (We are assuming that His deﬁned on all of R
3for
each time t.) The vector ﬁeld Ais not unique, and we can use A/prime=A+∇ fequally
well for any function f(t,x,y,z), because ∇×∇ f=0. (This freedom in the choice
ofAis called gauge freedom.) For any such choice of A, we have, by equation (6),
0=∇× E+∂H
∂t=∇× E+∂
∂t∇× A
=∇× E×∇×∂A
∂t
=∇×/parenleftbigg
E+∂A
∂t/parenrightbigg
.
Applying Theorem 7 (from Section 8.3), there is a real-valued function φonR3such that
E+∂A
∂t=− ∇ φ.
Substituting this equation and H=∇× Ainto equation (7), and using the vector identity
(whose proof we leave as an exercise)
∇× (∇× A)=∇(∇·A)−∇2A,
we get
J=∇× H−∂E
∂t=∇× (∇× A)−∂
∂t/parenleftbigg
−∂A
∂t−∇φ/parenrightbigg
=∇(∇·A)−∇2A+∂2A
∂t2+∂
∂t(∇φ).

<<<PAGE 500>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 473
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 473
Thus,
∇2A−∂2A
∂t2=−J+∇(∇·A)+∂
∂t(∇φ).
That is,
∇2A−∂2A
∂t2=−J+∇/parenleftbigg
∇·A+∂φ
∂t/parenrightbigg
. (16)
Again using the equation E+∂A/∂t=− ∇ φand the equation ∇·E=ρ, we obtain
ρ=∇·E=∇·/parenleftbigg
−∇φ−∂A
∂t/parenrightbigg
=− ∇2φ−∂(∇·A)
∂t.
That is,
∇2φ=−ρ−∂(∇·A)
∂t. (17)
Now let us exploit the freedom in our choice of A. We impose the “condition”
∇·A+∂φ
∂t=0. (18)
We must be sure we can do this. Supposing we have a given A0and a corresponding φ0,
can we choose a new A=A0+∇fand then a new φsuch that ∇·A+∂φ/∂t =0?
With this new A, the new φisφ0−∂f/∂t; we leave veriﬁcation as an exercise for the
reader. Condition (10) on fthen becomes
0=∇·(A0+∇f)=∂(φ0−∂f/∂t)
∂t=∇·A0+∇2f+∂φ0
∂t−∂2f
∂t2
or
∇2f−∂2f
∂t2=−/parenleftbigg
∇·A0+∂φ0
∂t/parenrightbigg
. (19)
Thus, to be able to choose Aandφsatisfying ∇·A+∂φ/∂t =0, we must be able
to solve equation (11) for f.We can indeed do this under general conditions, although
we do not prove it here. Equation (11) is called the inhomogeneous wave equation.
If we accept that Aandφcan be chosen to satisfy ∇·A+∂φ/∂t =0, then equations
(8) and (9) for Aandφbecome
∇2A−∂2A
∂t2=−J;( 8/prime)
∇2φ−∂2φ
∂t2=−ρ. (9/prime)
Conversely, if Aandφsatisfy the equations ∇·A+∂φ/∂t =0,∇2φ−∂2φ/∂t2=
−ρ, and∇2A−∂2A/∂t2=− J, then E=− ∇ φ−∂A/∂tandH=∇× Asatisfy
Maxwell’ s equations. This procedure then “reduces” Maxwell’ s equations to a study of
the wave equation.7
7There are variations on this procedure. For further details, see, for example, Differential Equations of
Applied Mathematics, by G. F . D. Duff and D. Naylor, Wiley, New Y ork, 1966, or books on electromag-
netic theory, such as Classical Electrodynamics, by J. D. Jackson, Wiley, New Y ork, 1962.

<<<PAGE 501>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 474
474 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Since the eighteenth century, solutions to the wave equation have been well studied
(one learns these in most courses on differential equations). To indicate the wavelike
nature of the solutions, for example, observe that for any function f,
φ(t,x,y,z)=f(x−t)
solves the wave equation ∇2φ−(∂2φ/∂t2)=0. This solution just propagates the graph
offlike a wave; thus, we might conjecture that solutions of Maxwell’ s equations are
wavelike in nature. Historically, all of this was Maxwell’ s great achievement, and it soonled to Hertz’ s discovery of radio waves.
Mathematics again shows its uncanny ability not only to describe but to predict
natural phenomena.
exercises
In Exercises 1 to 4, verify the divergence theorem for the given region W , boundary ∂W oriented outward, and vector ﬁeld F.
1.W=[0, 1]×[0, 1]×[0, 1]
F=xi+yj+zk
2.Was in Exercise 1, and F=zyi+xzj+xyk
3.W={(x,y,z):x2+y2+z2≤1} (the unit ball),
F=xi+yj+zk
4.Was in Exercise 3, and F=− yi+xj+zk
5.Use the divergence theorem to calculate the ﬂux of
F=(x−y)i+(y−z)j+(z−x)kout of the unit
sphere.
6.LetF=x3i+y3j+z3k. Evaluate the surface integral
ofFover the unit sphere.
7.Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
∂WF·dS, where F=xi+yj+zkandWis
the unit cube (in the ﬁrst octant). Perform the calculationdirectly and check by using the divergence theorem.
8.Repeat Exercise 7 for
(a)F=i+j+k
(b)F=x2i+x2j+z2k
9.LetF=yi+zj+xzk. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
∂WF·dSfor each of
the following regions W:
(a)x2+y2≤z≤1
(b)x2+y2≤z≤1 and x≥0
(c)x2+y2≤z≤1 and x≤0
10. Repeat Exercise 9 for F=(x−y)i+(y−z)j+
(z−x)k. [The solution to part (b) only is in the Study
Guide to this text.]11. Find the ﬂux of the vector ﬁeld F=(x−y2)i+yj+x3k
out of the rectangular solid [0, 1] ×[1, 2]×[1, 4].
12. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where F=3xy2i+3x2yj+z3k
andSis the surface of the unit sphere.
13. LetWbe the pyramid with top vertex (0, 0, 1), and base
vertices at (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (1, 1, 0). Let
Sbe the two-dimensional closed surface bounding W,
oriented outward from W. Use Gauss’ theorem to
calculate/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where:
F(x,y,z)=(x2y,3y2z,9z2x).
14. LetWbe the three-dimensional solid enclosed by the
surfaces x=y2,x=9,z=0, and x=z. Let Sbe the
boundary of W. Use Gauss’ theorem to ﬁnd the ﬂux of
F(x,y,z)=(3x−5y)i+(4z−2y)j+(8yz)kacross
S:/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS.
15. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
∂WF·ndA, where F(x,y,z)=
xi+yj−zkandWis the unit cube in the ﬁrst octant.
Perform the calculation directly and check by using thedivergence theorem.
16. Evaluate the surface integral/integraltext/integraltext
∂SF·ndA, where
F(x,y,z)=i+j+z(x2+y2)2kand∂Sis the surface
of the cylinder x2+y2≤1, 0≤z≤1.
17. Prove that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(∇f)·Fdx dy dz =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂WfF·ndS
−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf∇·Fdx dy dz .

<<<PAGE 502>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 475
8.4 Gauss’ Theorem 475
18. Prove the identity
∇·(F×G)=G·(∇× F)−F·(∇× G).
19. Show that/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
W(1/r2)dx dy dz =/integraltext/integraltext
∂W(r·n/r2)dS,
where r=xi+yj+zk.
20. Fix vectors v1,...,vk∈R3and numbers (“charges”)
q1,...,qk. Deﬁne the function φbyφ(x,y,z)=/summationtextk
i=1
qi/(4π/bardblr−vi/bardbl), where r=(x,y,z). Show that for a
closed surface SandE=− ∇ φ,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SE·dS=Q,
where Qis the total charge inside S. (Assume that
Gauss’ law from Theorem 10 applies and that none of
the charges are on S.)
21. Prove Green’s identities
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Wf∇g·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(f∇2g+∇f·∇g)dV
and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W(f∇g−g∇f)·ndS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(f∇2g−g∇2f)dV.
22. Suppose Fsatisﬁes div F=0 and curl F=0on all of
R3. Show that we can write F=∇ f, where ∇2f=0.
23. Letρbe a continuous function on R3such that
ρ(q)=0 except for qin some region W. Let q∈Wbe
denoted by q=(x,y,z). The potential ofρis deﬁned
to be the function
φ(p)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wρ(q)
4π/bardblp−q/bardbldV(q),
where /bardblp−q/bardblis the distance between pandq.
(a) Using the method of Theorem 10, show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W∇φ·ndS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WρdV
for those regions Wthat can be partitioned into a
ﬁnite union of symmetric elementary regions.
(b) Show that φsatisﬁes Poisson’s equation
∇2φ=−ρ.
[HINT: Use part (a).] (Notice that if ρis a charge density,
then the integral deﬁning φmay be thought of as the
sum of the potential at pcaused by point charges
distributed over Waccording to the density ρ.)24. Suppose Fis tangent to the closed surface S=∂Wof a
region W. Prove that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(div F)dV=0.
25. Use Gauss’ law and symmetry to prove that the electricﬁeld due to a charge Qevenly spread over the surface of
a sphere is the same outside the surface as the ﬁeld froma point charge Qlocated at the center of the sphere.
What is the ﬁeld inside the sphere?
26. Reformulate Exercise 25 in terms of gravitational ﬁelds.
27. Show how Gauss’ law can be used to solve part (b) ofExercise 29 in Section 8.3.
28. LetSbe a closed surface. Use Gauss’ theorem to show
that if Fis aC2vector ﬁeld, then we have/integraltext/integraltext
s(∇× F)·dS=0.
29. LetSbe the surface of region W. Show that
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sr·ndS=3 volume ( W).
Explain this geometrically.
30. For a steady-state charge distribution anddivergence-free current distribution, the electric andmagnetic ﬁelds E(x,y,z) and H(x,y,z) satisfy
∇× E=0,∇·H=0,∇·J=0,∇·E=ρ,
and ∇× H=J.
Hereρ=ρ(x,y,z) and J(x,y,z) are assumed to be
known. The radiation that the ﬁelds produce through asurface Sis determined by a radiation ﬂux density
vector ﬁeld, called the Poynting vector ﬁeld,
P=E×H.
(a)IfSis aclosed surface, show that the radiation
ﬂux—that is, the ﬂux of Pthrough S—is given by
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SP·dS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
VE·JdV,
where Vis the region enclosed by S.
(b) Examples of such ﬁelds are
E(x,y,z)=zj+yk and
H(x,y,z)=−xyi+xj+yzk.
In this case, ﬁnd the ﬂux of the Poynting vectorthrough the hemispherical shell shown inFigure 8.4.9. (Notice that it is an open surface.)

<<<PAGE 503>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 476
476 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
z
x2+y2 +z2= 25
y
x
ﬁgure 8.4.9 The surface for Exercise 30.
(c) The ﬁelds of part (b) produce a Poynting vector
ﬁeld passing through the toroidal surface shown in
Figure 8.4.10. What is the ﬂux through this torus?
xz
a
b y
ﬁgure 8.4.10 The surface for Exercise 30(c).
8.5Differential Forms
The theory of differential forms provides an elegant way of formulating Green’ s, Stokes’,
and Gauss’ theorems as one statement, the fundamental theorem of calculus . The birth
of the concept of a differential form is another dramatic example of how mathematics
speaks to mathematicians and drives its own development. These three theorems are, in
reality, generalizations of the fundamental theorem of calculus of Newton and Leibniz
for functions of one variable,
/integraldisplayb
af/prime(x)dx=f(b)−f(a)
to two and three dimensions.
Recall that Bernhard Riemann created the concept of n-dimensional spaces. If the
fundamental theorem of calculus was truly fundamental, then it should generalize to
arbitrary dimensions. But wait! The cross product, and therefore the curl, does not
generalize to higher dimensions, as we remarked in footnote 3, in Section 1.3. Thus,
some new idea is needed.
Recall that Hamilton searched for almost 15 years for his quaternions, which ulti-
mately led to the discovery of the cross product. What is the nonexistence of a cross
product in higher dimensions telling us? If the fundamental theorem of calculus is the
core concept, this suggests the existence of a mathematical language in which it can be
formulated in n-dimensions. In order to achieve this, mathematicians realized that they
were forced to move away from vectors and on to the discovery of dual vectors and an
entirely new mathematical object, a differential form. In this new language, all of the
theorems of Green, Stokes, and Gauss have the same elegant and extraordinarily simple
form.
Simply and very brieﬂy stated, an expression of the type Pd x+Qd y is a 1-form, or
adifferential one-form on a region in the xyplane, and Fd x d y is a 2-form. Analogously,
we can deﬁne the notion of an n-form. There is an operation d, which takes n-forms to
n+1-forms. It is like a generalized curl and has the property that for ω=Pd x+Qd y ,

<<<PAGE 504>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 477
8.5 Differential Forms 477
we have
dω=/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy
and so in this notation, Green’ s theorem becomes
/integraldisplay
∂Dω=/integraldisplay
Ddω,
which, interestingly, just switches the boundary operator ∂with the doperator. How-
ever, differential forms are more than just notation. They create a beautiful theory that
generalizes to n-dimensions.
In general, if Mis an oriented surface of dimension nwith an (n −1)-dimensional
boundary ∂Mand if ωis an (n −1)-form on M, then the fundamental theorem of
calculus (also called the generalized Stokes’ theorem) reads
/integraldisplay
∂Mω=/integraldisplay
Mdω.
A useful thing for you to contemplate at this stage is the sense in which the funda-
mental theorem of calculus becomes a special instance of this result.
In this section, we shall give a very elementary exposition of the theory of forms.
Because our primary goal is to show that the theorems of Green, Stokes, and Gauss can beuniﬁed under a single theorem, we shall be satisﬁed with less than the strongest possibleversion of these theorems. Moreover, we shall introduce forms in a purely axiomatic andnonconstructive manner, thereby avoiding the tremendous number of formal algebraicpreliminaries that are usually required for their construction. To the purist our approachwill be far from complete, but to the student it may be comprehensible. We hope thatthis will motivate some students to delve further into the theory of differential forms.
We shall begin by introducing the notion of a 0-form.
0-Forms
LetKbe an open set in R3.A0 - form onKis a real-valued function f:K→R. When
we differentiate fonce, it is assumed to be of class C1, and C2when we differentiate
twice.
Given two 0-forms f1and f2onK, we can add them in the usual way to get a new
0-form f1+f2or multiply them to get a 0-form f1f2.
example 1 f1(x,y,z)=xy+yzand f2(x,y,z)=ysinxzare 0-forms on R3:
(f1+f2)(x,y,z)=xy+yz+ysinxz
and
(f1f2)(x,y,z)=y2xsinxz+y2zsinxz.▲

<<<PAGE 505>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 478
478 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
1-Forms
Thebasic 1-forms are the expressions dx,dy, and dz. At present we consider these to
be only formal symbols. A 1-form ωon an open set Kis a formal linear combination
ω=P(x,y,z)dx+Q(x,y,z)dy+R(x,y,z)dz,
or simply
ω=Pd x+Qd y+ Rdz,
where P,Q, and Rare real-valued functions on K. By the expression Pd x we mean
the 1-form Pd x+ 0·dy+0·dz, and similarly for Qd y andRdz. Also, the order of
Pd x,Qd y , and Rdz is immaterial, and so
Pd x+Qd y+ Rdz=Rdz+Pd x+Qd y , etc.
Given two 1-forms ω1=P1dx+Q1dy+R1dzandω2=P2dx+Q2dy+R2dz,w e
can add them to get a new 1-form ω1+ω2deﬁned by
ω1+ω2=(P1+P2)dx+(Q1+Q2)dy+(R1+R2)dz,
and given a 0-form f, we can form the 1-form fω1deﬁned by
fω1=(fP1)dx+(fQ1)dy+(fR1)dz.
example 2 Letω1=(x+y2)dx+(zy)dy+(exyz)dzandω2=sinyd x+sinxdybe 1-forms.
Then
ω1+ω2=(x+y2+siny)dx+(zy+sinx)dy+(exyz)dz.
Iff(x,y,z)=x, then
fω2=xsinyd x+xsinxdy.▲
2-Forms
Thebasic 2-forms are the formal expressions dx dy, dy dz , and dzdx . These expressions
should be thought of as products of dxanddy,dyanddz, and dzanddx.
A2 -formηonKis a formal expression
η=Fd xd y +Gd yd z +Hd zd x ,
where F,G, and Hare real-valued functions on K. The order of Fd xd y ,Gd yd z , and
Hd zd x is immaterial; for example,
Fd xd y +Gd yd z +Hd zd x =Hd zd x +Fd xd y +Gd yd z , etc.
At this point it is useful to note that in a 2-form the basic 1-forms dx,dy, and dzalways
appear in cyclic pairs (see Figure 8.5.1), that is, dx dy, dy dz , and dzdx .dx
dydz
ﬁgure 8.5.1 The
cyclic order of dx,
dy,and dz.

<<<PAGE 506>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 479
8.5 Differential Forms 479
By analogy with 0-forms and 1-forms, we can add two 2-forms
ηi=Fidx dy+Gidy dz+Hidzdx ,
i=1 and 2, to obtain a new 2-form,
η1+η2=(F1+F2)dx dy+(G1+G2)dy dz+(H1+H2)dzdx.
Similarly, if fis a 0-form and ηis a 2-form, we can take the product
fη=(fF)dx dy+(fG)dy dz+(fH)dzdx.
Finally, by the expression Fd xd y we mean the 2-form Fd xd y +0·dy dz+0·dzdx .
example 3 The expressions
η1=x2dx dy+y3xd yd z +sinzy dz dx
and
η2=yd yd z
are 2-forms. Their sum is
η1+η2=x2dx dy+(y3x+y)dy dz+sinzy dz dx .
Iff(x,y,z)=xy, then
fη2=xy2dy dz. ▲
3-Forms
Abasic 3-form is a formal expression dx dy dz (in this speciﬁc cyclic order, as in
Figure 8.5.1). A 3-form νon an open set K⊂R3is an expression of the form ν=
f(x,y,z)dx dy dz , where fis a real-valued function on K.
We can add two 3-forms and we can multiply them by 0-forms in the obvious way.
There seems to be little difference between a 0-form and a 3-form, because both involve
a single real-valued function. But we distinguish them for a purpose that will becomeclear when we multiply and differentiate forms.
example
4 Letν1=yd xd yd z ,ν2=ex2dx dy dz , and f(x,y,z)=xyz. Then ν1+ν2=
(y+ex2)dx dy dz and fν1=y2xz dx dy dz .▲
Although we can add two 0-forms, two 1-forms, two 2-forms, or two 3-forms, we do
not need to add a k-form and a j-form if k/negationslash=j. For example, we shall not need to write
f(x,y,z)dx dy+g(x,y,z)dz.
Now that we have deﬁned these formal objects (forms), we can legitimately ask what
they are good for, how they are used, and, perhaps most important, what they mean. Theanswer to the ﬁrst question will become clear as we proceed, but we can immediatelydescribe how to use and interpret them.
A real-valued function on a domain KinR
3is a rule that assigns a real number
to each point in K. Differential forms are, in some sense, generalizations of the real-
valued functions we have studied in calculus. In fact, 0-forms on an open set Kare just
functions on K. Thus, a 0-form ftakes points in Kto real numbers.

<<<PAGE 507>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 480
480
The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
K
x
z
y
R
C
C
´
S
ﬁgure
8.5.2
The four geometric types
of subsets of an open set
K
⊂
R
3
to
which the theory of forms applies.
We should like to interpret differential
k
-forms (for
k
≥
1) not as functions on
points in
K
, but as functions on geometric objects such as curves and surfaces. Many
of the early Greek geometers viewed lines and curves as being made up of inﬁnitely
many points, and planes and surfaces as being made up of inﬁnitely many curves.
Consequently, there is at least some historical justiﬁcation for applying this geometric
hierarchy to the interpretation of differential forms.
Given an open subset
K
⊂
R
3
, we shall distinguish four types of subsets of
K
(see
Figure 8.5.2):
(i) points in
K
,
(ii) oriented simple curves and oriented simple closed curves,
C
,i n
K
,
(iii) oriented surfaces,
S
⊂
K
,
(iv) elementary subregions,
R
⊂
K
.
The Integral of 1-Forms Over Curves
We shall begin with 1-forms. Let
ω
=
P
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dx
+
Q
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dy
+
R
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dz
be a 1-form on
K
and let
C
be an oriented simple curve as in Figure 8.5.2. The real
number that
ω
assigns to
C
is given by the formula
/integraldisplay
C
ω
=
/integraldisplay
C
P
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dx
+
Q
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dy
+
R
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
dz
.
(1)
Recall (see Section 7.2) that this integral is evaluated as follows. Suppose that
c
:[
a
,
b
]
→
K
,
c
(
t
)
=
(
x
(
t
),
y
(
t
),
z
(
t
)) is an orientation-preserving parametrization
of
C
. Then
/integraldisplay
C
ω
=
/integraldisplay
c
ω
=
/integraldisplay
b
a
/bracketleftbigg
P
(
x
(
t
),
y
(
t
),
z
(
t
))
·
dx
dt
+
Q
(
x
(
t
),
y
(
t
),
z
(
t
))
·
dy
dt
+
R
(
x
(
t
),
y
(
t
),
z
(
t
))
·
dz
dt
/bracketrightbigg
dt
.
Theorem 1 of Section 7.2 guarantees that
/integraltext
C
ω
does not depend on the choice of the
parametrization
c
.
We can thus interpret a 1-form
ω
on
K
as a rule assigning a real number to each
oriented curve
C
⊂
K
; a 2-form
η
will similarly be seen to be a rule assigning a real
number to each oriented surface
S
⊂
K
; and a 3-form
ν
will be a rule assigning a real
number to each elementary subregion of
K
. The rules for associating real numbers with

<<<PAGE 508>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 481
8.5 Differential Forms 481
curves, surfaces, and regions are completely contained in the formal expressions we
have deﬁned.
example 5 Letω=xydx+y2dy+dzbe a 1-form on R3and let Cbe the oriented simple curve
inR3described by the parametrization c(t)=(t2,t3,1 ) ,0 ≤t≤1.Cis oriented by
choosing the positive direction of Cto be the direction in which c(t) traverses Cast
goes from 0 to 1. Then, by formula (1),
/integraldisplay
Cω=/integraldisplay1
0[t5(2t)+t6(3t2)+0]dt=/integraldisplay1
0(2t6+3t8)dt=13
21.
Thus, this 1-form ωassigns to each oriented simple curve and each oriented simple
closed curve CinR3the number/integraltext
Cω.▲
The Integral of 2-Forms Over Surfaces
A 2-form ηon an open set K⊂R3can similarly be interpreted as a function that
associates a real number with each oriented surface S⊂K. This is accomplished by
means of the notion of integration of 2-forms over surfaces. Let
η=F(x,y,z)dx dy+G(x,y,z)dy dz+H(x,y,z)dzdx
be a 2-form on K, and let S⊂Kbe an oriented surface parametrized by a function
/Phi1:D→R3,D⊂R2,/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)) (see Section 7.3).
Deﬁnition IfSis such a surface and ηis a 2-form on K, we deﬁne/integraltext/integraltext
Sηby the
formula
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sη=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SFd xd y +Gd yd z +Hd zd x
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/bracketleftbigg
F(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))·∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)
+G(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))·∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)
+H(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v))·∂(z,x)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg
du dv ,(2)
where
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂u∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u∂y
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂y
∂u∂y
∂v
∂z
∂u∂z
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,∂(z,x)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂z
∂u∂z
∂v
∂x
∂u∂x
∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
IfSis composed of several pieces S
i,i=1,...,k, as in Figure 8.4.4, each with
its own parametrization /Phi1i, we deﬁne
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sη=k/summationdisplay
i=1/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Siη.
We must verify that/integraltext/integraltext
Sηdoes not depend on the choice of parametrization /Phi1.
This result is essentially (but not obviously) contained in Theorem 4, Section 7.6.

<<<PAGE 509>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 482
482 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
example 6 Letη=z2dx dy be a 2-form on R3, and let Sbe the upper unit hemisphere in R3. Find/integraltext/integraltext
Sη.
solution Let us parametrize Sby
/Phi1(u,v)=(sinucosv, sinusinv, cos u),
where ( u,v)∈D=[0,π/2]×[0, 2π ]. By formula (2),
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sη=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dcos2u/bracketleftbigg∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)/bracketrightbigg
du dv ,
where
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecosucosv−sin usinv
cosusinv sinucosv/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=sinucosucos
2v+cosusinusin2v=sinucosu.
Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sη=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dcos2ucosusinud ud v
=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ/2
0cos3usinud ud v=/integraldisplay2π
0/bracketleftbigg
−cos4u
4/bracketrightbiggπ/2
0dv=π
2.▲
example 7 Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sxd yd z +yd xd y , where Sis the oriented surface described by the
parametrization x=u+v,y=u2−v2,z=uv, where ( u,v)∈D=[0, 1]×[0, 1].
solution By deﬁnition, we have
∂(y,z)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2u−2v
v u/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=2(u
2+v2);
∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle11
2u−2v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−2(u+v).
Consequently,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sxd yd z +yd xd y =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D[(u+v)(2)(u2+v2)+(u2−v2)(−2)( u+v)]du dv
=4/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D(v3+uv2)du dv =4/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(v3+uv2)du dv
=4/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbigg
uv3+u2v2
2/bracketrightbigg1
0dv=4/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg
v3+v2
2/parenrightbigg
dv
=/bracketleftbigg
v4+2v3
3/bracketrightbigg1
0=1+2
3=5
3.▲

<<<PAGE 510>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 483
8.5 Differential Forms 483
The Integral of 3-Forms Over Regions
Finally, we must interpret 3-forms as functions on the elementary subregions of K. Let
v=f(x,y,z)dx dy dz be a 3-form and let R⊂Kbe an elementary subregion of K.
Then to each such R⊂Kwe assign the number
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rv=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rf(x,y,z)dx dy dz , (3)
which is just the ordinary triple integral of fover R, as described in Section 5.5.
example 8 Suppose v=(x+z)dx dy dz andR=[0, 1]×[0, 1]×[0, 1]. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Rv.
solution We compute:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rv=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R(x+z)dx dy dz =/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0(x+z)dx dy dz
=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftbiggx2
2+zx/bracketrightbigg1
0dy dz=/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg1
2+z/parenrightbigg
dy dz=/integraldisplay1
0/parenleftbigg1
2+z/parenrightbigg
dz
=/bracketleftbiggz
2+z2
2/bracketrightbigg1
0=1.▲
The Algebra of Forms
We now discuss the algebra (or rules of multiplication) of forms that, together with
differentiation of forms, will enable us to state Green’ s, Stokes’, and Gauss’ theoremsin terms of differential forms.
Ifωis ak-form and ηis an l-form on K,0≤k+l≤3, there is a product called the
wedge product ω∧ηofωandηthat is a k+lform on K. The wedge product satisﬁes
the following laws:
(i) For each kthere is a zero k-form 0 with the property that 0 +ω=ωfor all k-
forms ωand 0∧η=0 for all l-forms ηif 0≤k+l≤3.
(ii) (Distributivity )I ffis a 0-form, then
(fω
1+ω2)∧η=f(ω1∧η)+(ω2∧η).
(iii) (Anticommutativity) ω∧η=(−1)kl(η∧ω).
(iv) (Associativity)I fω 1,ω2,ω3arek1,k2,k3forms, respectively, with k1+k2+k3≤3,
then
ω1∧(ω2∧ω3)=(ω1∧ω2)∧ω3.
(v) (Homogeneity with respect to functions)I f fis a 0-form, then
ω∧(fη)=(fω)∧η=f(ω∧η).
Notice that rules (ii) and (iii) actually imply rule (v).

<<<PAGE 511>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 484
484 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
(vi) The following multiplication rules for 1-forms hold:
dx∧dy=dx dy
dy∧dx=− dx dy=(−1)( dx∧dy)
dy∧dz=dy dz=(−1)( dz∧dy)
dz∧dx=dz dx =(−1)( dx∧dz)
dx∧dx=0,dy∧dy=0,dz∧dz=0
dx∧(dy∧dz)=(dx∧dy)∧dz=dx dy dz .
(vii) If fis a 0-form and ωis any k-form, then f∧ω=fω.
Using laws (i) to (vii), we can now ﬁnd a unique product of any l-formηand any k-form
ω,i f0≤k+l≤3.
example 9 Show that dx∧dy dz=dx dy dz .
solution By rule (vi), dy dz=dy∧dz. Therefore,
dx∧dy dz=dx∧(dy∧dz)=dx dy dz .▲
example 10 Ifω=xd x+yd yandη=zy dx+xzdy+xydz , ﬁndω∧η.
solution Computing ω∧η,t og e t
ω∧η=(xd x+yd y)∧(zy dx+xzdy+xydz )
=[(xd x+yd y)∧(zy dx )]+[(xd x+yd y)∧(xzdy )]
+[(xd x+yd y)∧(xydz )]
=xyz(dx∧dx)+zy2(dy∧dx)+x2z(dx∧dy)+xyz(dy∧dy)
+x2y(dx∧dz)+xy2(dy∧dz)
=− zy2dx dy+x2zd xd y −x2ydzd x +xy2dy dz
=(x2z−y2z)dx dy−x2ydzd x +xy2dy dz.▲
example 11 Ifω=xd x−yd yandη=xd yd z +zd xd y , ﬁndω∧η.
solution ω∧η=(xd x−yd y)∧(xd yd z +zd xd y )
=[(xd x−yd y)∧(xd yd z )]+[(xd x−yd y)∧(zd xd y )]
=(x2dx∧dy dz )−(xydy∧dy dz )+(xzdx∧dx dy)
−(yz dy∧dx dy)
=[x2dx∧(dy∧dz)]−[xydy∧(dy∧dz)]+[xzdx∧(dx∧dy)]
−[yz dy∧(dx∧dy)]
=x2dx dy dz −[xy(dy∧dy)∧dz]+[xz(dx∧dx)∧dy]
−[yz(dy∧dx)∧dy]
=x2dx dy dz −xy(0∧dz)+xz(0∧dy)+[yz(dy∧dy)∧dx]
=x2dx dy dz .▲
The last major step in the development of this theory is to show how to differentiate
forms. The derivative of a k-form is a ( k+1)-form if k<3, and the derivative of a

<<<PAGE 512>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 485
8.5 Differential Forms 485
3-form is always zero. If ωis ak-form, we shall denote the derivative of ωbydω. The
operation dhas the following properties:
(1) If f:K→Ris a 0-form, then
df=∂f
∂xdx+∂f
∂ydy+∂f
∂zdz.
(2) (Linearity) Ifω1andω2arek-forms, then
d(ω1+ω2)=dω1+dω2.
(3) If ωis ak-form and ηis an l-form,
d(ω∧η)=(dω∧η)+(−1)k(ω∧dη).
(4) d(dω)=0 and d(dx)=d(dy)=d(dz)=0 or, simply, d2=0.
Properties (1) to (4) provide enough information to allow us to uniquely differentiate
any form.
example 12 Letω=P(x,y,z)dx+Q(x,y,z)dybe a 1-form on some open set K⊂R3. Find dω.
solution d[P(x,y,z)dx+Q(x,y,z)dy]
=d[P(x,y,z)∧dx]+d[Q(x,y,z)∧dy] (using 2)
=(dP∧dx)+[P∧d(dx)]+(dQ∧dy)+[Q∧d(dy)] (using 3)
=(dP∧dx)+(dQ∧dy) (using 4)
=/parenleftbigg∂P
∂xdx+∂P
∂ydy+∂P
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧dx
+/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂xdx+∂Q
∂ydy+∂Q
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧dy (using 1)
=/parenleftbigg∂P
∂xdx∧dx/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂P
∂ydy∧dx/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂P
∂zdz∧dx/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂xdx∧dy/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂ydy∧dy/parenrightbigg
+/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂zdz∧dy/parenrightbigg
=−∂P
∂ydx dy+∂P
∂zdzdx+∂Q
∂xdx dy−∂Q
∂zdy dz
=/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy+∂P
∂zdzdx−∂Q
∂zdy dz.▲
example 13 Letfbe a 0-form. Using only differentiation rules (1) to (3) and the fact that d(dx)=
d(dy)=d(dz)=0, show that d(df)=0.
solution By rule (1),
df=∂f
∂xdx+∂f
∂ydy+∂f
∂zdz,
and so
d(df)=d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂xdx/parenrightbigg
+d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂ydy/parenrightbigg
+d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
.

<<<PAGE 513>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 486
486 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
Working only with the ﬁrst term, using rule (3), we get
d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂xdx/parenrightbigg
=d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x∧dx/parenrightbigg
=d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂x/parenrightbigg
∧dx+∂f
∂x∧d(dx)
=/parenleftbigg∂2f
∂x2dx+∂2f
∂y∂xdy+∂2f
∂z∂xdz/parenrightbigg
∧dx+0
=∂2f
∂y∂xdy∧dx+∂2f
∂z∂xdz∧dx
=−∂2f
∂y∂xdx dy+∂2f
∂z∂xdz dx.
Similarly, we ﬁnd that
d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂ydy/parenrightbigg
=∂2f
∂x∂ydx dy−∂2f
∂z∂ydy dz
and
d/parenleftbigg∂f
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
=−∂2f
∂x∂zdzdx+∂2f
∂y∂zdy dz.
Adding these up, we get d(df)=0 by the equality of mixed partial derivatives. ▲
example 14 Show that d(dx dy), d(dy dz ), and d(dzdx ) are all zero.
solution To prove the ﬁrst case, we use property (3):
d(dx dy )=d(dx∧dy)=[d(dx)∧dy−dx∧d(dy)]=0.
The other cases are similar. ▲
example 15 Ifη=F(x,y,z)dx dy+G(x,y,z)dy dz+H(x,y,z)dz dx , ﬁnd dη.
solution By property (2),
dη=d(Fd xd y )+d(Gd yd z )+d(Hd zd x ).
We shall compute d(Fd xd y ). Using property (3) again, we get
d(Fd xd y )=d(F∧dx dy) =dF∧(dx dy) +F∧d(dx dy).
By Example 14, d(dx dy) =0, so we are left with
dF∧(dx dy )=/parenleftbigg∂F
∂xdx+∂F
∂ydy+∂F
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧(dx∧dy)
=/bracketleftbigg∂F
∂xdx∧(dx∧dy)/bracketrightbigg
+/bracketleftbigg∂F
∂ydy∧(dx∧dy)/bracketrightbigg
+/bracketleftbigg∂F
∂zdz∧(dx∧dy)/bracketrightbigg
.

<<<PAGE 514>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 487
8.5 Differential Forms 487
Now
dx∧(dx∧dy)=(dx∧dx)∧dy=0∧dy=0,
dy∧(dx∧dy)=−dy∧(dy∧dx)
=−(dy∧dy)∧dx=0∧dx=0,
and
dz∧(dx∧dy)=(−1)2(dx∧dy)∧dz=dx dy dz .
Consequently,
d(Fd xd y )=∂F
∂zdx dy dz .
Analogously, we ﬁnd that
d(Gd yd z )=∂G
∂xdx dy dz and d(Hd zd x )=∂H
∂ydx dy dz .
Therefore,
dη=/parenleftbigg∂F
∂z+∂G
∂x+∂H
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy dz .▲
We have now developed all the concepts needed to reformulate Green’ s, Stokes’, and
Gauss’ theorems in the language of forms.
Theorem 11 Green's Theorem LetDbe an elementary region in the xy
plane, with ∂Dgiven the counterclockwise orientation. Suppose ω=P(x,y)dx+
Q(x,y)dyis a 1-form on some open set KinR3that contains D. Then
/integraldisplay
∂Dω=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddω.
Here dωis a 2-form on KandDis in fact a surface in R3parametrized by /Phi1:D→
R3,/Phi1(x,y)=(x,y, 0). Because PandQare explicitly notfunctions of z, then∂P/∂z
and∂Q/∂z=0, and by Example 12, dω=(∂Q/∂x−∂P/∂y)dx dy. Consequently,
Theorem 13 means nothing more than that
/integraldisplay
∂DPd x+Qd y=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/parenleftbigg∂Q
∂x−∂P
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy,
which is precisely Green’ s theorem. Hence, Theorem 13 holds. Likewise, we have the
following theorems.
Theorem 12 Stokes' Theorem LetSbe an oriented surface in R3with a
boundary consisting of a simple closed curve ∂S(Figure 8.5.3) oriented as the
boundary of S(see Figure 8.2.1) .Suppose that ωis a 1-form on some open set K
that contains S. Then
/integraldisplay
∂Sω=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sdω.

<<<PAGE 515>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 488
488 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
xy
z
SS
n
ﬁgure 8.5.3 An oriented surface to which Stokes' theorem
applies.
Theorem 13 Gauss’ Theorem LetW⊂R3be an elementary region with
∂Wgiven the outward orientation (see Section 8.4). If ηis a 2-form on some region
Kcontaining W, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Wη=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wdη.
The reader has probably noticed the strong similarity in the statements of these theo-
rems. In the vector-ﬁeld formulations, we used divergence for regions in R3(Gauss’ the-
orem) and the curl for surfaces in R3(Stokes’ theorem) and regions in R2(Green’ s
theorem). Here we just use the uniﬁed notion of the derivative of a differential form for
all three theorems; and, in fact, we can state all theorems as one by introducing a little
more terminology.
By an oriented 2-manifold with boundary inR3we mean a surface in R3whose
boundary is a simple closed curve with orientation as described in Section 8.2. By an
oriented 3-manifold inR3we mean an elementary region in R3(we assume its boundary,
which is a surface, is given the outward orientation discussed in Section 8.4). We call
the following uniﬁed theorem “Stokes’ theorem,” according to the current convention.
Theorem 14 General Stokes’ Theorem LetMbe an oriented k-manifold
inR3(k=2 or 3) contained in some open set K.Suppose ωis (k−1)-form on
K.Then
/integraldisplay
∂Mω=/integraldisplay
Mdω.
Here the integral is interpreted as a single, double, or triple integral, as is appropri-
ate. In fact, it is this form of Stokes’ theorem that generalizes to spaces of arbitrary
dimension.

<<<PAGE 516>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 489
8.5 Differential Forms 489
exercises
1.Evaluate ω∧ηif
(a)ω=2xd x+yd y
η=x3dx+y2dy
(b)ω=xd x−yd y
η=yd x+xd y
(c)ω=xd x+yd y+zdz
η=zd xd y +xd yd z +yd z d x
(d)ω=xydydz +x2dx dy
η=dx+dz
(e)ω=exyzdx dy
η=e−xyzdz
2.Prove that
(a1dx+a2dy+a3dz)∧(b1dy dz+b2dz dx +b3dx dy)
=/parenleftBigg3/summationdisplay
i=1aibi/parenrightBigg
dx dy dz .
3.Find dωin the following examples:
(a)ω=x2y+y3
(b)ω=y2cosxd y+xy dx +dz
(c)ω=xydy+(x+y)2dx
(d)ω=xd xd y +zd ydz +yd z d x
(e)ω=(x2+y2)dy dz
(f)ω=(x2+y2+z2)dz
(g)ω=−x
x2+y2dx+y
x2+y2dy
(h)ω=x2yd yd z
4.LetCbe the line segment from the point ( −2, 0, 1) to
(3, 6, 9). Let ω1=yd x+xd y+xydz ,
ω2=zd x+yd y+2xd z, and f(x,y,z)=xy.
Calculate the following:
(a)/integraldisplay
Cfω1 (b)/integraldisplay
Cfω2 (c)/integraldisplay
Cω1+ω2
5.LetCbe parameterized by c(t)=(t2+4t,t+1),
t∈[0,π]. Letω1=yd x+xd y,ω2=y2dx+x2dy,
and f(x,y)=x. Calculate the following:
(a)/integraldisplay
Cfω1 (b)/integraldisplay
Cfω2 (c)/integraldisplay
Cω1+ω26.LetV:K→R3be a vector ﬁeld deﬁned by
V(x,y,z)=G(x,y,z)i+H(x,y,z)j+F(x,y,z)k,
and let ηbe the 2-form on Kgiven by
η=Fd xd y +Gd yd z +Hd zd x .
Show that dη=(div V)dx dy dz .
7.IfV=A(x,y,z)i+B(x,y,z)j+C(x,y,z)kis a
vector ﬁeld on K⊂R3, deﬁne the operation Form 2:
Vector Fields →2-forms by
Form 2(V)=Ad ydz +Bd z d x +Cd xd y .
(a) Show that
Form 2(αV1+V2)=αForm 2(V1)+Form 2(V2),
where αis a real number.
(b) Show that Form 2(curl V)=dω, where
ω=Ad x+Bd y+Cd z .
8.Using the differential form version of Stokes’ theorem,
prove the vector ﬁeld version in Section 8.2. Repeat forGauss’ theorem.
9.Interpret Theorem 16 in the case k=1.
10. Letω=(x+y)dz+(y+z)dx+(x+z)dy, and let S
be the upper part of the unit sphere; that is, Sis the set of
(x,y,z) with x2+y2+z2=1 and z≥0.∂Sis the unit
circle in the xyplane. Evaluate/integraltext
∂Sωboth directly and
by Stokes’ theorem.
11. LetTbe the triangular solid bounded by the xyplane,
thexzplane, the yzplane, and the plane
2x+3y+6z=12. Compute
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂TF1dx dy+F2dy dz+F3dz dx
directly and by Gauss’ theorem, if
(a)F1=3y,F2=18z,F3=−12; and
(b)F1=z,F2=x2,F3=y.
12. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
Sω, where ω=zd xd y +xd yd z +yd z d x
andSis the unit sphere, directly and by Gauss’ theorem.
13. LetRbe an elementary region in R3. Show that the
volume of Ris given by the formula
v(R)=1
3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Rxd yd z +yd z d x +zd x d y .

<<<PAGE 517>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 490
490 The Integral Theorems of Vector Analysis
14. In Section 4.2, we saw that the length l(c) of a curve
c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)),a≤t≤b, was given by the
formula
l(c)=/integraldisplay
ds=/integraldisplayb
a/parenleftBigds
dt/parenrightBig
dt
where, loosely speaking,
(ds)2=(dx)2+(dy)2+(dz)2, that is,
ds
dt=/radicalbigg/parenleftBigdx
dt/parenrightBig2
+/parenleftBigdy
dt/parenrightBig2
+/parenleftBigdz
dt/parenrightBig2
.
Now suppose a surface Sis given in parametrized form
by/Phi1(u,v)=(x(u,v),y(u,v),z(u,v)), where(u,v)∈D. Show that the area of Scan be expressed as
A(S)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DdS,
where formally ( dS)2=(dx∧dy)2+(dy∧dz)2+
(dz∧dx)2, a formula requiring interpretation. [H INT:
dx=∂x
∂udu+∂x
∂vdv,
and similarly for dyanddz. Use the law of forms for the
basic 1-forms duanddv. Then dSturns out to be a
function times the basic 2-form du dv , which we can
integrate over D.]
review exercises for chapter 8
1.LetF=2yzi+(−x+3y+2)j+(x2+z)k. Evaluate/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× F)·dS, where Sis the cylinder x2+y2=a2,
0≤z≤1 (without the top and bottom). What if the top
and bottom are included?
2.LetWbe a region in R3with boundary ∂W. Prove the
identity
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂W[F×(∇× G)]·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W(∇× F)·(∇× G)dV
−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
WF·(∇×∇× G)dV.
3.LetF=x2yi+z8j−2xyzk. Evaluate the integral of F
over the surface of the unit cube.
4.Verify Green’ s theorem for the line integral
/integraldisplay
Cx2yd x+yd y,
when Cis the boundary of the region between the curves
y=xandy=x3,0≤x≤1.
5.(a) Show that F=(x3−2xy3)i−3x2y2jis a gradient
vector ﬁeld.
(b) Evaluate the integral of Falong the path
x=cos3θ,y=sin3θ,0≤θ≤π/2.
6.Can you derive Green’ s theorem in the plane fromGauss’ theorem?
7.(a)Show thatF=6xy(cos z)i+3x
2(cos z)j−3x2y(sinz)kis
conservative (see Section 8.3).(b)Find fsuch that F=∇ f.
(c)Evaluate the integral of Falong the curve
x=cos3θ,y=sin3θ,z=0, 0≤θ≤π/2.
8.Letr(x,y,z)=(x,y,z),r=/bardblr/bardbl. Show that
∇2(logr)=1/r2and∇2(rn)=n(n+1)rn−2.
9.Let the velocity of a ﬂuid be described byF=6xzi+x
2yj+yzk. Compute the rate at which
ﬂuid is leaving the unit cube.
10. LetF=x2i+(x2y−2xy)j−x2zk. Does there exist a
Gsuch that F=∇× G?
11. Letabe a constant vector and F=a×r[as usual,
r(x,y,z)=(x,y,z)]. Is Fconservative? If so, ﬁnd a
potential for it.
12. Show that the ﬁelds Fin (a) and (b) are conservative and
ﬁnd a function fsuch that F=Vf.
(a)F=/parenleftbig
y2exy2/parenrightbig
i+/parenleftbig
2yexy2/parenrightbig
j
(b)F=(siny)i+(xcosy)i+(ez)k
13. (a)Letf(x,y,z)=3xyez2. Compute ∇f.
(b)Letc(t)=(3 cos3t, sin2t,et), 0≤t≤π.
Evaluate
/integraldisplay
c∇f·ds.
(c)Verify directly Stokes’ theorem for gradient vectorﬁelds F=∇ f.

<<<PAGE 518>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:42 491
Review Exercises for Chapter 8 491
14. Using Green’ s theorem, or otherwise, evaluate/integraltext
Cx3dy−y3dx, where Cis the unit circle
(x2+y2=1).
15. Evaluate the integral/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS, where
F=xi+yj+3kand where Sis the surface of the unit
sphere x2+y2+z2=1.
16. (a) State Stokes’ theorem for surfaces in R3.
(b) Let Fbe a vector ﬁeld on R3satisfying ∇× F=0.
Use Stokes’ theorem to show that/integraltext
CF·ds=0
where Cis a closed curve.
17. Use Green’ s theorem to ﬁnd the area of the loop of the
curve x=asinθcosθ,y=asin2θ, for a>0 and
0≤θ≤π.
18. Evaluate/integraltext
Cyz dx+xzdy+xydz , where Cis the curve
of intersection of the cylinder x2+y2=1 and the
surface z=y2.
19. Evaluate/integraltext
C(x+y)dx+(2x−z)dy+(y+z)dz,
where Cis the perimeter of the triangle connecting
(2, 0, 0), (0, 3, 0), and (0, 0, 6), in that order.
20. Which of the following are conservative ﬁelds on R3?
For those that are, ﬁnd a function fsuch that F=∇ f.
(a)F(x,y,z)=3x2yi+x3j+5k
(b)F(x,y,z)=(x+z)i−(y+z)j+(x−y)k
(c)F(x,y,z)=2xy3i+x2z3j+3x2yz2k
21. Consider the following two vector ﬁelds in R3:
(i)F(x,y,z)=y2i−z2j+x2k
(ii)G(x,y,z)=(x3−3xy2)i+(y3−3x2y)j+zk
(a) Which of these ﬁelds (if any) are conservative on
R3? (That is, which are gradient ﬁelds?) Give
reasons for your answer.
(b) Find potential for the ﬁelds that are conservative.
(c) Let αbe the path that goes from (0, 0, 0) to (1, 1, 1)
by following edges of the cube 0 ≤x≤1,
0≤y≤1, 0≤z≤1 from (0, 0, 0) to (0, 0, 1) to
(0, 1, 1) to (1, 1, 1). Let βbe the path from (0, 0, 0)
to (1, 1, 1) directly along the diagonal of the cube.Find the values of the line integrals
/integraldisplay
αF·ds,/integraldisplay
αG·ds,/integraldisplay
βF·ds,/integraldisplay
βG·ds.22. Consider the constant vector ﬁeld
F(x,y,z)=i+2j−kinR3.
(a) Find a scalar ﬁeld φ(x,y,z)i nR3such that
∇φ=FinR3andφ( 0 ,0 ,0 ) =0.
(b) On the sphere /Sigma1of radius 2 about the origin, ﬁnd all
the points at which
(i)φis a maximum, and
(ii)φis a minimum.
(c) Compute the maximum and minimum values of φ
on/Sigma1.
23. LetFbe a C1vector ﬁeld and suppose
∇·F(x0,y0,z0)>0. Show that for a sufﬁciently small
sphere Scentered at ( x0,y0,z0), the ﬂux of Fout of Sis
positive.
24. LetB⊂R3be a planar region, and let O ∈R3be a
point. If we connect all points in Bto O, we get a cone,
sayC, with vertex O and base B.Show that
V olume ( C)=1
3area ( B)h,
where his the distance of O from the plane of B, using
the following steps.
h
BO
ﬁgure 8.R.1
1. Let O be the origin of the coordinate system. Deﬁne
r(x,y,z):=(x,y,z). Evaluate the ﬂux of rthrough
the boundary of C, that is,/integraltext/integraltext
∂Cr·ndA, where nis
the outward unit normal to ∂C.
2. Evaluate the total divergence/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
C∇·rdV.
3. Use Gauss’ theorem, which states that the total
divergence of a vector ﬁeld within a region enclosedby a surface is equal to the ﬂux of that vector ﬁeldthrough the surface:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
C∇·rdV=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Cr·ndA.

<<<PAGE 519>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 520>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 493
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
Some solutions requiring proofs may be incomplete or be omitted.
Chapter 1
Section 1.1
1.4; 17
3.(−104 +16a,−24−4b,−22+26c)
5.
−v
v − wwv + w
v
xy
7.
−v 
xy
v + w
v − wv wz
9.
1 23123y
xvwv - wv + w11. x=0,z=0,y∈R;x=0,y=0,z∈R;
y=0,x,z∈R;x=0,y,z∈R
13.{(2s,7s+2t,7t)|s∈R,t∈R}
15. l(t)=−i+(t−1)j−k
17. l(t)=(2t−1)i−j+(3t−1)k
19.{si+3sk−2tj|0≤s≤1, 0≤t≤1}
21. Y es.
23. 0
25. If (x,y,z) lies on the line, then x=2+t,y=−2+t,
andz=−1+t. Therefore,
2x−3y+z−2=4+2t+6−3t−1+t−2=7,
which is not zero. Hence, no ( x,y,z) satisﬁes both
conditions.
27. Y es.
29. The set of vectors of the form
v=pa+qb+rc,
where 0 ≤p≤1, 0≤q≤1, and 0 ≤r≤1.
31. All points of the form
(x0+t(x1−x0)+s(x2−x0),y0+t(y1−y0)
+s(y2−y0),z0+t(z1−z0)+s(z2−z0))
for real numbers tands.
33. If one vertex is placed at the origin and the two adjacentsides are uandv, the new triangle has sides bu,bv, and
b(u−v).
35. (1, 0, 1) +( 0 ,2 ,1 ) =( 0 ,2 ,0 ) +( 1 ,0 ,2 )
37. Two such lines (there are many others) are
x=1,y=t,z=tandx=1,y=t,z=−t.
Section 1.2
1.6
3.99◦
493

<<<PAGE 521>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 494
494 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
5.No, it is 75.7; it would be zero only if the vectors were
parallel.
7./bardblu/bardbl=√
5,/bardblv/bardbl=√
2,u·v=−3
9./bardblu/bardbl=√
11,/bardblv/bardbl=√
62,u·v=−14
11./bardblu/bardbl=√
14,/bardblv/bardbl=√
26,u·v=−17
13. b=5/4, c=−5/2
15. They point in opposite directions.
17. In Exercise 9, cos−1(−14/√
11√
62); in Exercise 10,
π/2; and in Exercise 11, cos−1(−17/√
14√
26).
19. x=3, 7
21.−4(−i+j+k)/3
23. 1/2
25. Any ( x,y,z) with x+y+z=0;
for example, (1, −1, 0) and (0, 1, −1).
27. Draw a right triangle. Label the two legs vandw, so that
the hypotenuse is v–w. By hypothesis, we have
/bardblv/bardbl2+/bardblw/bardbl2=/bardblv−w/bardbl2=/bardblv/bardbl2−2v·w+/bardblw/bardbl2.
This implies v·w=0, so vandware orthogonal.
29. i+4j,θ≈0.24 radian east of north
31. (a) 12:03 P.M. (b) 4.95 km
33.
F = 50 lb
F  = 50 sin (50 °) lb y
50°y
x
F  = 50 cos (50 °) lb x
35. (4.9, 4.9, 4.9) and ( −4.9, −4.9, 4.9) N.
37. (a)F=(3√
2i+3√
2j) (b) ≈0.322 radian or
18.4◦(c) 18√
2
39. Draw a rectangle. Label two of the nonparallel sides v
andw, so the two diagonals are v+wandv−w. Then
these diagonals are perpendicular if and only if0=(v+w)·(v−w)=/bardblv/bardbl
2−/bardblw/bardbl2, which holds if
and only if /bardblv/bardbl=/bardbl w/bardbl.Section 1.3
1./vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle121
301202/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−8,/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle301
121202/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=8
3.−3i+j+5k
5.√
35
7.10
9.±k
11.±(113i +17j−103k)/√23, 667
13. u+v=3i−3j+3k;u·v=6;/bardblu/bardbl=√
6;
/bardblv/bardbl=3; u×v=−3i+3k
15. (a)x+y+z−1=0
(b)x+2y+3z−6=0
(c) 5 x+2z=25
(d)x+2y−3z=13
17. Show (0, −2,−1)−(1, 4, 0) is parallel to
( 1 ,4 ,0 ) −(2, 10, 1), so that the three points lie on a line.
19. (a) The parallel planes Ax+By+Cz+D=0 and
σAx+σBy+σCz+D/prime=0 are identical when
D/prime=σDand otherwise never intersect.
(b) In a line.
21. The line x=t,y=2t,z=−5t.
23. (a) Do the ﬁrst by working out each side in coordinates,
and then use that and a×(b×c)=−(b×c)×a
to get the second.
(b) Use the identities in part (a) to write the quantity in
terms of inner products.
(c) Use the identities in part (a) and collect terms.
25. Compute the results of Cramer’ s rule and check that they
satisfy the equation.
27. v×w=(i+j)×(2j−k)=2(i×j)−i×k
+2(j×j)−j×k=(−1, 1, 2)
29. x−2y+3z+12=0
31. 4x−6y−10z=14
33. 10x−2y−2z=8
35. 10x−17y+z+25=0

<<<PAGE 522>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 495
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 495
37. For Exercise 25, note that (2, −3, 1) ·( 1 ,1 ,1 ) =0, and
so the line and plane are parallel and (2, −2,−1) does
not lie in the plane. For Exercise 26, the line and plane
are parallel and (1, −1, 2) does lie in the plane.
39.√
2/13
41. (a) Show that Msatisﬁes the geometric properties of
R×F. (b) 2√
3
43. Show that n1(N×a) and n2(N×b) have the same
magnitude and direction.
45. One method is to write out all terms in the left-hand sideand see that the terms involving λall cancel. Another
method is to ﬁrst observe that the determinant is linearin each row or column and that if any row or column isrepeated, the answer is zero. Then
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1 b1 c1
a2+λa1 b2+λb1 c2+λc1
a3 b3 c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1b1c1
a2b2c2
a3b3c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
+λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1b1c1
a1b1c1
a3b3c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1b1c1
a2b2c2
a3b3c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
Section 1.4
1.(ρ,θ,φ)=(4, 5π/3, 3π/ 4)
3.(a)
Cylindrical Rectangular
r θ zx y z
1 45◦1√
2/2√
2/2 1
2 π/2 −4 0 2 −4
0 45◦10 0 0 10
3 π/6 4 3√
3/2 3/2 4
1 π/6 0√
3/21
20
2 3π/4 −2 −√
2√
2 −2
Spherical
ρθ φ√
2 45◦45◦
2√
5 π/2 π−arccos (2√
5/5)
10 45◦0
5 π/6 arccos4
5
1 π/6 π/2
2√
2 3π/4 3π/4(b) Rectangular
xy z
2 1 −2
0 3 4
√
2 1 1
−2√
3 −2 3
Spherical
ρθ φ
3 arctan1
2π−arccos (2/3)
5 π/2 arccos (4/5)
2 arctan (√
2/2) π/3
5 7π/6 arccos3
5
Cylindrical
r θ z
√
5 arctan1
2−2
3 π/2 4√
3 arctan (√
2/2) 1
4 7π/6 3
5.(a) Rotation by πaround the zaxis.
(b) Reﬂection across the xyplane with a radial
expansion by a factor of 2.
(c) Rotation by π/2 about the zaxis together.
7.
y
xz
z = x  + y 2        2(a)
y
xz
x = 4(b)

<<<PAGE 523>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 496
496 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
y
xz
4x  + ( y – 2) = 42                  2(c)
y
xz
2x  + y = 42        2(d)
9.No; (ρ,θ,φ) and ( −ρ,θ+π,π−φ) represent the
same point.
11. r2+z2=R2
13. (a)eρ=(xi+yj+zk)//radicalbig
x2+y2+z2
=(xi+yj+zk)/ρ
eθ=(−yi+xj)//radicalbig
x2+y2=(−yi+xj)/r
eφ=(xzi+yzj−(x2+y2)k)/rρ
(b)eθ×j=− yk//radicalbig
x2+y2,eφ×j
=(xz/rρ)k+(r/ρ)i
15. (a) The length of xi+yj+zkis (x2+y2+z2)1/2=ρ.
(b) cos φ=z/(x2+y2+z2)1/2
(c) cos θ=x/(x2+y2)1/2
17. 0≤r≤a,0≤θ≤2πmeans that ( r,θ,z) is inside the
cylinder with radius acentered on the zaxis, and |z|≤b
means that it is no more than a distance bfrom the xy
plane.
19.−d/(6 cos φ)≤ρ≤d/2, 0≤θ≤2π, and
π−cos−1(1
3)≤φ≤π.
21. This is a surface whose cross section with each surface
z=cis a four-petaled rose. The petals shrink to zero as
|c|changes from 0 to 1.
Section 1.5
1.7
3.|x·y|=10 =√
5√
20=/bardblx/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl,s o |x·y|≤/bardbl x/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl is
true./bardblx+y/bardbl=3√
5=/bardblx/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl,s o/bardblx +y/bardbl≤/bardbl x/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl
is true.
5.|x·y|=5 <√
65=/bardblx/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl,s o|x ·y|≤/bardbl x/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl is true.
/bardblx+y/bardbl=√
28<√
5+√
13=/bardblx/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl,s o
/bardblx+y/bardbl≤/bardbl x/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardblis true.
7.We assume /bardblv/bardbl=/bardbl w/bardbl. Then /bardblv/bardbl2=/bardblw/bardbl2,s o
(v+w)·(v−w)= v·v−w·w=/bardblv/bardbl2−/bardblw/bardbl2=0.
9.AB=/bracketleftBigg−1−13
−11 1 3
−65 8/bracketrightBigg
, det A=−5, det B=−24,
detAB=120(=detAdetB), det ( A+B)=
−61(/negationslash=detA+detB)
11. B
13. HINT:F o rk =2 use the triangle inequality to show that
/bardblx1+x2/bardbl≤/bardbl x1/bardbl+/bardbl x2/bardbl; then for k=i+1 note that
/bardblx1+x2+···+ xi+1/bardbl≤/bardbl x1+x2+···+ xi/bardbl+/bardbl xi+1/bardbl.
15. (a) Check n=1 and n=2 directly. Then reduce an
n×ndeterminant to a sum of ( n−1)×(n−1)
determinants and use induction.
(b) The argument is similar to that for part (a). Suppose
the ﬁrst row is multiplied by λ. The ﬁrst term of the
sum will be λa11times an ( n−1)×(n−1)
determinant with no factors of λ. The other terms
obtained (by expanding across the ﬁrst row) aresimilar.
17. Not necessarily. Try A=/bracketleftBig0100/bracketrightBig
andB=/bracketleftBig1000/bracketrightBig
.
19. (a) The sum of two continuous functions and a scalar
multiple of a continuous function are continuous.
(b)(i) (α f+βg)·h=/integraldisplay1
0(αf+βg)(x)h(x)dx
=/integraldisplay1
0f(x)h(x)dx+β/integraldisplay1
0g(x)h(x)dx
=αf·h+βg·h
(ii) f·g=/integraldisplay1
0f(x)g(x)dx
=/integraldisplay1
0g(x)f(x)dx=g·f
In conditions (iii) and (iv), the integrand is a perfectsquare. Therefore, the integral is nonnegative andcan be 0 only if the integrand is 0 everywhere. If
f(x)/negationslash=0 for some x, then it would be positive in a
neighborhood of xby continuity, and the integral
would be positive.

<<<PAGE 524>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 497
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 497
21. Compute the matrix product in both orders and check
that you get the identity.
23. (det A)(det A−1)=det ( AA−1)=det ( I)=1
Review Exercises for Chapter 1
1.v+w=4i+3j+6k;3 v=9i+12j+15k;
6v+8w=26i+16j+38k;−2v=−6i−8j−10k;
v·w=4;v×w=9i+2j−7k.
Y our sketch should display v,w,3v,6v,8w,
6v+8w,v·was the projection of valong wandv×w
as a vector perpendicular to both vandw.
3.(a)l(t)=−i+(2+t)j−k
(b)l(t)=(3t−3)i+(t+1)j−tk
(c)−2x+y+2z=9
5.10x+4y−2z=26
7.(a) 0
(b) 5
(c)−10
9.(a)π/2
(b) 5/(2√
15)
(c)−10/(√
6√
17)
11.{sta+s(1−t)b|0≤t≤1 and 0 ≤s≤1}
13. Letv=(a1,a2,a3),w=(b1,b2,b3), and apply the
CBS inequality.
15. AB=/bracketleftBigg11 23 3
81 8 368 3/bracketrightBigg
,BA=/bracketleftBigg31 0 611 11 131 81 8/bracketrightBigg
17. The area is the absolute value of/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1a2
b1b2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1 a2
b1+λa1 b2+λa2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
(A multiple of one row of a determinant can be added to
another row without changing its value.) Y our sketchshould show two parallelograms with the same base andheight.
19. The cosines of the two parts of the angle are equal,because
a·v//bardbla/bardbl/bardblv/bardbl=( a·b+/bardbla/bardbl/bardblb/bardbl) //bardblv/bardbl=b ·v//bardblb/bardbl/bardblv/bardbl.
21. The triangle inequality gives
/bardblv/bardbl=/bardbl (v−w)+w/bardbl≤/bardbl v−w/bardbl+/bardbl w/bardbl, which implies
/bardblv/bardbl−/bardbl w/bardbl≤/bardbl v−w/bardbl. A similar argument gives
/bardblw/bardbl−/bardbl v/bardbl≤/bardbl v−w/bardbl.23. i×j=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleijk
100
010/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=k; etc.
25. (a)HINT: The length of the projection of the vector
connecting any pair of points, one on each line, onto
(a1×a2)//bardbla 1×a2/bardblisd.
(b)√
2
27. (a) Note that
1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle111
x1x2x3
y1y2y3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle10 0
x1x2−x1x3−x1
y1y2−y1y3−y1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex2−x1x3−x1
y2−y1y3−y1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
.
(b)1
2
29. (Plot omitted)
Rectangular Spherical
(a) (√
2/2,√
2/2, 1) (a) (√
2,π/4,π/4)
(b) (3√
3/2, 3/2, −4) (b) (5, π/6, arccos ( −4/5))
(c) (0, 0, 1) (c) (1, π/4, 0)
(d) (0, −2, 1) (d) (√
5, 3π/ 2, arccos (√
5/5))
(e) (0, 2, 1) (e) (√
5,π/2, arccos (√
5/5))
31. z=r2cos 2θ ; cosφ=ρsin2φcos 2θ
33.|x·y|=6 <√
98=/bardblx/bardbl/bardbly/bardbl; /bardblx+y/bardbl=√
33<√
14+√
7=/bardblx/bardbl+/bardbl y/bardbl
35. (a) The associative law for matrix multiplication may
be checked as follows:
[(AB)C]ij=n/summationdisplay
k=1(AB)ikCkj=n/summationdisplay
k=1n/summationdisplay
l=1AilBlkCkj
=n/summationdisplay
l=1Ai(BC)lj=[A(BC)]ij.
Use this with Ctaken to be a column vector.
(b) The matrix for the composition is the product
matrix.
37.Rnis spanned by the vectors e1,e2,...,en.I fv∈Rn,
then
Tv=T/bracketleftbiggn/summationdisplay
i=1(v·ei)ei/bracketrightbigg
=n/summationdisplay
i=1(v·ei)Tei.

<<<PAGE 525>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 498
498 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
Letaij=(Tej·ei), so that
Tej=n/summationdisplay
j=1aijei.
Then
Tv·ek=n/summationdisplay
i=1(v·ei)aki.
That is, if
v=⎡
⎢⎣v1
...
vn⎤
⎥⎦, then Tv=⎡
⎢⎣a11···a1n
...
an1···ann⎤
⎥⎦⎡
⎢⎣v1
...
vn⎤
⎥⎦,
as desired.
39. (a) 70 cos θ+20 sin θ
(b) (21√
3+6) ft·lb
41. Each side equals 2 xy−7yz+5z2−48x+54y−
5z−96. (Or switch the ﬁrst two columns and then
subtract the ﬁrst row from the second.)
43. Add the last row to the ﬁrst and subtract it from the
second.
45. (a) Scalar.
(b) Vector.(c) Vector.
(d) Scalar.
47. (a)
A−1=/bracketleftbigg
1−1
01/bracketrightbigg
,B−1=/bracketleftbigg
10
−21/bracketrightbigg
,
(AB)−1=/bracketleftbigg
1−1
−23/bracketrightbigg
(b) A−1B−1=/bracketleftbigg
3−1
−21/bracketrightbigg
/negationslash=(AB)−1,
B−1A−1=/bracketleftbigg
1−1
−23/bracketrightbigg
=(AB)−1
49. (a)1
6/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea1a2a3
b1b2b3
c1c2c3/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(b) 1/3
51. Use the fact that /bardbla/bardbl2=a·a, expand both sides, and
use the deﬁnition of c.
53. (1/√
38)i−(6/√
38)j+(1/√
38)k
55. (2/√
5)i−(1/√
5)j
57. (√
3/2)i+(1/2√
2)j+(1/2√
2)kChapter 2
Section 2.1
1.(a) Scalar-valued.
(b) Vector-valued.
(c) Vector-valued.
3.(a)c=0 corresponds to (iii) c=1 corresponds to
(ii)c=−1 corresponds to (i).
(b)c=12 corresponds to (iv) c=6 corresponds to (v).
5.
y
x(a)
1 –11
–1c = 1c = 0
c = –1
y
x(b)
1 e 035
–3c = 3
c = –3c = 0
y
x(c)
c = 1c = 2
c = 0 02
1
–1
–2

<<<PAGE 526>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 499
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 499
y
x(d)
c = –2
c = 4c = 0
1
4–1
41
8
7.The level curves and graphs are sketched below. The
graph in part (c) is a hyperbolic paraboloid like that ofExample 4, but rotated 45
◦and vertically compressed by
a factor of 1/4. To see this, use the variables u=x+y
andv=x−y. Then z=(v2−u2)/4.
y
xz = −1
z = 2
z = 5...
...
(3, 0)......
...(a)
Intersection
with xy plane
Intersectionwith xz plane
Intersectionwith zy plane
xyzz = 1
z = 4
z = 9
xy
z = 0...(b)
...
x1 23Sectionz = 4y  ,x = 0
2
Sectionz = x  ,y = 02
yz
(c)z=−xy
z = 2
z = 1
z = 0
z = 1
z = 2z = −1
z = −2z = −2
z = −1
xy

<<<PAGE 527>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 500
500 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
Section x = −y
z = 2
z = 1
z = 1z = 2
z = −1
z = −2z = −1
xyz
z = −2
Section x = y
9.(a) f(x,y,z)=x2y6−2z,c=3
(b)g(x,y)=(x2y6−3)/2
11. For Example 2, z=r(cosθ+sinθ)+2, shape depends
onθ; for Example 3, z=r2, shape is independent of θ;
for Example 4, z=r2(cos2θ−sin2θ), shape depends
onθ.
13. The level curves are circles x2+y2=100−c2when
c≤10. The graph is the upper hemisphere of
x2+y2+z2=100.
xc = 0
c = 2
c = 4
c = 6
c = 8
c = 10y
xyz
10
101015. The level curves are circles, and the graph is a
paraboloid of revolution. See Example 3 of thissection.
17. Ifc=0, the level curve is the straight line y=−x
together with the line x=0. If c/negationslash=0, then
y=−x+(c/x). The level curve is a hyperbola with the
yaxis and the line y=−xas asymptotes. The graph is
a hyperbolic paraboloid. Sections along the line y=ax
are the parabolas z=(1+a)x2.
19. Ifc>0, the level surface f(x,y,z)=cis empty. If
c=0, the level surface is the point (0, 0, 0). If c<0,
the level surface is the sphere of radius√−ccentered at
(0, 0, 0). A section of the graph determined by z=ais
given by t=−x2−y2−a2, which is a paraboloid of
revolution opening down in xytspace.
c
c−xy
|c||c|
|c|2−
−|c|2
xy
21. Ifc<0, the level surface is empty. If c=0, the level
surface is the zaxis. If c>0, it is the right-circular
cylinder x2+y2=cof radius√c, whose axis is the z
axis. A section of the graph determined by z=ais the
paraboloid of revolution t=x2+y2. A section
determined by x=bis a “trough” with parabolic cross
section t(y,z)=y2+b2.

<<<PAGE 528>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 501
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 501
23. Setting u=(x−z)/√
2 andv=(x+z)/√
2 gives the
uandvaxes rotated 45◦around the yaxis from the x
andzaxes. Because f=vy√
2, the level surfaces
f=care “cylinders” perpendicular to the vyplane
(z=−x) whose cross sections are the hyperbolas
vy=c/√
2, so the section Sx=a∩graph fis the
hyperbolic paraboloid t=(z+a)yinyztspace [see
Exercise 7(c)]. The section Sy=b∩graph fis the plane
t=bx+bzinxztspace. The section Sz=b∩graph f
is the hyperbolic paraboloid t=y(x+b)i nxytspace.
25. Ifc<0, the level curve is empty. If c=0, the level
curve is the xaxis. If c>0, it is the pair of parallel lines
|y|=c . The sections of graph with xconstant are
V -shaped curves z=|y|inyzspace. The graph is
shown in the accompanying ﬁgure.
z
y
x(Exercise 25)
27. The value of zdoes not matter, so we get a “cylinder” of
elliptic cross section parallel to the zaxis and
intersecting the xyplane in the ellipse 4 x2+y2=16.
xyz
2− 2
4 − 4
29. The value of xdoes not matter, so we get a “cylinder”
parallel to the xaxis of hyberbolic cross section
intersecting the yzplane in the hyperbola z2−y2=4.31. An elliptic paraboloid with axis along the xaxis.
14916 9y2 + 4z2 = 144
yzx
9y2 + 4z2 = 81
9y2 + 4z2 = 36
9y2 + 4z2 = 4
33. The value of ydoes not matter, so we get a “cylinder” of
parabolic cross section.
xyz
35. This is a saddle surface similar to that of Example 4, but
the hyperbolas, which are level curves, no longer haveperpendicular asymptotes.
3|c|2|c|
c < 0
c > 0
Level curvesy
x

<<<PAGE 529>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 502
502 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
xz
y
37. A double cone with axis along the yaxis and elliptical
cross sections.
−1 −21 26 = 2x   + z2 23 = 4x   + 2z2 2
xz
y
39. Complete the square to get
(x+2)2+(y−b/2)2+(z+9
2)2=(b2+4b+97)/4.
This is an ellipsoid with center at ( −2,b/2,−9
2) and
axes parallel to the coordinate axes.
41. Level curves are described by cos 2θ =cr2.I fc>0,
then−π/ 4≤θ≤π/4o r3π/4≤θ≤5π/4. If c<0,
thenπ/4≤θ≤3π/4o r5π/4≤θ≤7π/4. In either
case you get a ﬁgure-eight shape, called a lemniscate,
through the origin. (Such shapes were ﬁrst studied byJacques Bernoulli and are sometimes called Bernoulli’ slemniscates.)
xy
1
|c|
1
cc < 0
c > 0Section 2.2
1.Nothing.
3.(a) 0 (b)−1/2 (c) 1
5.(a) 5 (b) 0 (c) 2 x
7.e3/10
9.(a) 0 (b)−1/2 (c) 0
11. (a) Compose f(x,y)=xywith g(t)=(sint)/tfor
t/negationslash=0 and g(0)=1.
(b) 0 (c) 0
13. (a) 1
(b)/bardblx0/bardbl
(c) (1, e)
(d) Limit doesn’t exist (look at the limits for x=0 and
y=0 separately).
15. Everywhere except (0, 0).
17. 0
19. If (x0,y0)∈A, then|x0|<1 and|y0|<1. Let
r=min(1 −|x0|,1−|y0|). Prove that Dr(x0,y0)⊂A
either analytically or by drawing a ﬁgure.
21. Letr=min(2 −/radicalbig
x2
0+y2
0,/radicalbig
x2
0+y2
0−√
2).
23. Use parts (ii) and (iii) of Theorem 4.
25. (a) Let the value of the function be 1 at (0, 0).(b) No.
27. For|x−2|<δ=√ε+4−2, we have
|x2−4|=| x−2/bardblx+2|<δ(δ+4)=ε.B y
Theorem 3(iii), limit x→2x2=(limit x→2x)2=22=4.
29. Letr=/bardblx−y/bardbl/2. If /bardblz−y/bardbl≤ r, let
f(z)=/bardblz−y/bardbl/r.I f/bardblz −y/bardbl>r, let f(z)=1.
31. (a) limit x→b+f(x)=Lif for every ε>0 there is a
δ>0 such that x>band 0<x−b<δimply
|f(x)−L|<ε.
(b) limit x→0−(1/x)=− ∞ , limit t→−∞ et=0, and so
limit x→0−e1/x=0. Hence
limit x→0−1/(1+e1/x)=1. The other limit is 0.

<<<PAGE 530>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 503
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 503
(c)
1
1
2
1 + e1/x1
xy
33. Ifε>0 and x0are given, let δ=(ε/K)1/α. Then
/bardblf(x)−f(x0)/bardbl<Kδα=εwhenever /bardblx−x0/bardbl<δ.
Notice that the choice of δdoes not depend on x0. This
means that fisuniformly continuous.
35. (a) Choose δ<1/500.
(b) Choose δ<0.002.
Section 2.3
1.(a)∂f/∂x=y;∂f/∂y=x
(b)∂f/∂x=yexy;∂f/∂y=xexy
(c)∂f/∂x=cosxcosy−xsinxcosy;
∂f/∂y=−xcosxsiny
(d)∂f/∂x=2x[1+log (x2+y2)];
∂f/∂y=2y[1+log (x2+y2)]; (x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0)
3.(a)∂w/∂x=(1+2x2) exp ( x2+y2);
∂w/∂y=2xyexp ( x2+y2)
(b)∂w/∂x=−4xy2/(x2−y2)2;
∂w/∂y=4yx2/(x2−y2)2
(c)∂w/∂x=yexylog (x2+y2)+2xexy/(x2+y2);
∂w/∂y=xexylog (x2+y2)+2yexy/(x2+y2)
(d)∂w/∂x=1/y;∂w/∂y=−x/y2
(e)∂w/∂x=− y2exysinyexysinx+cosyexycosx;
∂w/∂y=(xyexy+exy)(−sinyexysinx)
5.z=6x+3y−11
7.z=x−y+1
9.(a)/bracketleftBig10
01/bracketrightBig
(b)/bracketleftBiggeyxey−siny
101 e
y/bracketrightBigg
(c)/bracketleftBig11 ez
2xy x20/bracketrightBig(d)⎡
⎣(y+xy2)exy(x+x2y)exy
sinyx cosy
5y210xy⎤⎦
11.
z=2(x−4)+4(y−3)+10
13. Atz=1.
15. Both are xyexy.
17. (2, 6,−36)
19. (a)∇f=(e−x2−y2−z2(−2x2+1),
−2xye−x2−y2−z2,−2xze−x2−y2−z2)
(b)∇f=(x2+y2+z2)−2(yz(y2+z2−x2),
xz(x2+z2−y2),xy(x2+y2−z2))
(c)∇f=(z2excosy,−z2exsiny,2zexcosy)
21. 2x+6y−z=5
23. l(t)=( 1 ,3 ,2 0 ) +t(−1, 2, 8)
25.−2k
27. They are constant. Show that the derivative is the zero
matrix.
Section 2.4
1.This curve is the ellipse ( y2/16)+x2=1:
y
x
3.This curve is the straight line through ( −1, 2, 0) with
direction (2, 1, 1):
z
y
x(−5, 0, −2)(−1, 2, 0)

<<<PAGE 531>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 504
504 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
5.(a)c(t)=(2 cos( t), 2 sin( t)),t∈[0, 2π ]
(b)c(t)=(2 sin( t), 2 cos( t)),t∈[0, 2π ]
(c)c(t)=(2 cos( t)+4, 2 sin( t)+7),t∈[0, 2π ]
7.6i+6tj+3t2k
9.(−2 cos tsint,3−3t2,1 )
11. c/prime(t)=(et,−sint)
13. c/prime(t)=(tcost+sint,4 )
15. Horizontal when t=(R/v)nπ,nan integer; speed is
zero if nis even; speed is 2v ifnis odd.
17. (sin 3, cos 3, 2) +(3 cos 3, −3 sin 3, 5)( t−1)
19. ( 8 ,8 ,0 )
21. ( 8 ,0 ,1 )
23. (a)√
1+64π2
(b) Y es, when t=0.
(c)l(t)=( 1 ,0 ,1 6 π2)+t(0, 1, 8 π)
(d) (1, −2π ,0 )
25. (a) ( f◦c)(t)=(t6−t4,2t5,4t2)
(b)l(t)=( 0 ,2 ,4 ) +t(2, 10, 8)
Section 2.5
1.Use parts (i), (ii), and (iii) of Theorem 10. The derivative
atxis 2( f(x)+1)Df(x).
3.Compute each in two ways; the answers are
(a) ( f◦c)/prime(t)=et(cost−sint)
(b) ( f◦c)/prime(t)=15t4exp (3 t5)
(c) ( f◦c)/prime(t)=(e2t−e−2t)[1+log (e2t+e−2t)]
(d) ( f◦c)/prime(t)=(1+4t2)e x p( 2 t2)
5.Use Theorem 10(iii) and replace matrices by vectors.
7.(f◦g)(x,y)=(tan ( ex−y−1)−ex−y,e2(x−y)−(x−y)2)
and D(f◦g)(1, 1) =/bracketleftBig002−2/bracketrightBig
.
9.1
2cos (1) cos (log√
2)
11. (a)p(t)=(3 sin( t)+2, 1, cos( t)+t2),
p/prime(π)=(−3, 0, 2π )
(b)c(π)=(−1, 0, π),c/prime(π)=(0,−1, 1),
Df(−1, 0, π)=/bracketleftBigg03 0
−20 0
102 π/bracketrightBigg
(c) (−3, 0, 2π )13.−2 cos tsintesint+sin4t+cos3tesint−3 cos2tsin2t
for both (a) and (b).
15. (2, 0)
17. (a)h(x,y)=f(x,u(x,y))=f(p(x),u(x,y)). W e
usephere solely as notation: p(x)=x.
Written out:∂h
∂x=∂f
∂pdp
dx+∂f
∂u∂u
∂x=∂f
∂p+∂f
∂u∂u
∂x
becausedp
dx=dx
dx=1
JUSTIFICATION : Call ( p,u) the variables of f.T o
use the chain rule we must express has a
composition of functions; that is, ﬁrst ﬁnd gsuch
thath(x,y)=f(g(x,y)). Let g(x,y)=(p(x),
u(x,y)). Therefore, Dh=(Df)(Dg). Then
/bracketleftBig∂h
∂x∂h
∂y/bracketrightBig
=/bracketleftBig∂f
∂p∂f
∂u/bracketrightBig⎡
⎢⎣∂g1
∂x∂g1
∂y
∂g2
∂x∂g2
∂y⎤
⎥⎦
=/bracketleftBig∂f
∂p∂f
∂u/bracketrightBig/bracketleftBigg10
∂u
∂x∂u
∂y/bracketrightBigg
=/bracketleftBig∂f
∂p+∂f
∂u∂u
∂x∂f
∂u∂u
∂y/bracketrightBig
,
and so∂h
∂x=∂f
∂p+∂f
∂u∂u
∂x. Y ou may see
∂h
∂x=∂f
∂x+∂f
∂u∂u
∂xas an answer. This requires
careful interpretation because of possible ambiguity
about the meaning of ∂f/∂x, which is why the name
pwas used.
(b)∂h
∂x=∂f
∂x+∂f
∂udu
dx+∂f
∂vdv
dx
(c)∂h
∂x=∂f
∂u∂u
∂x+∂f
∂v∂v
∂x+∂f
∂wdw
dx
19. (a)G(x,y(x))=0 and so∂G
∂x+∂G
∂ydy
dx=0.
(b)⎡
⎢⎣dy1
dx
dy2
dx⎤
⎥⎦=−⎡
⎢⎣∂G1
∂y1∂G1
∂y2
∂G2
∂y1∂G2
∂y2⎤
⎥⎦−1⎡
⎢⎣∂G1
∂x
∂G2
∂x⎤
⎥⎦
where−1means the inverse matrix.

<<<PAGE 532>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 505
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 505
The ﬁrst component of this equation reads
dy1
dx=−∂G1
∂x∂G2
∂y2+∂G2
∂x∂G1
∂y2
∂G1
∂y1∂G2
∂y2−∂G2
∂y1∂G1
∂y2.
(c)dy
dx=−2x
3y2+ey
21. Apply the chain rule to ∂G/∂T, where G(t(T,P),
p(T,P),V(T,P))=P(V−b)ea/RVT−RTis
identically 0; t(T,P)=T; and p(T,P)=P.
23. Deﬁne R1(h)=f(x0+h)−f(x0)−[Df(x0)]h.
25. Letg1andg2beC1functions from R3toRsuch that
g1(x)=1 for/bardblx/bardbl<√
2/3; g1(x)=0 for/bardblx/bardbl>2√
2/3;
g2(x)=1 for/bardblx−( 1 ,1 ,0 ) /bardbl<√
2/3; and g2(x)=0
for/bardblx−( 1 ,1 ,0 ) /bardbl>2√
2/3. (See Exercise 24.) Let
h1(x)=/bracketleftBigg10 0
0−10
00 0/bracketrightBigg/bracketleftBiggx1
x2
x3/bracketrightBigg
+/bracketleftBigg110/bracketrightBigg
and h2(x)=/bracketleftBigg00−100 000 1/bracketrightBigg/bracketleftBiggx1
x2
x3/bracketrightBigg
,
and put f(x)=g1(x)h1(x)+g2(x)h2(x).
27. Proof of rule (iii) follows:
|h(x)−h(x0)−[f(x0)Dg(x0)+g(x0)Df(x0)](x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
≤|f(x0)||g(x)−g(x0)−Dg(x0)(x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
+|g(x0)||f(x)−f(x0)−Df(x0)(x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
+|f(x)−f(x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl|g(x)−g(x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl/bardblx−x0)/bardbl.
Asx→x0, the ﬁrst two terms go to 0 by the
differentiability of fandg. The third does so because
|f(x)−f(x0)|//bardblx−x0/bardbland|g(x)−g(x0)|//bardblx−x0/bardbl
are bounded by a constant, say M, on some ball Dr(x0).
To see this, choose rsmall enough that [ f(x)−f(x0)]/
/bardblx−x0/bardblis within 1 of Df(x0)(x−x0)//bardblx−x0/bardblif
/bardblx−x0/bardbl<r. Then we have |f(x)−f(x0)|//bardblx−x0/bardbl≤
1+|Df(x0)(x−x0)|//bardblx−x0/bardbl=1+|∇ f(x0)·(x−x0)|/
/bardblx−x0/bardbl≤1 +/bardbl ∇ f(x0)/bardblby the Cauchy–Schwarz
inequality.
The proof of rule (iv) follows from rule (iii) and the
special case of the quotient rule, with fidentically 1;
that is, D(1/g)(x0)=[−1/ g(x0)2]Dg(x0). To obtainthis answer, note that on some small ball
Dr(x0),g(x)>m>0. Use the triangle inequality and
the Schwarz inequality to show that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
g(x)−1
g(x)+1
g(x0)2Dg(x0)(x−x0)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
≤1
|g(x)|1
|g(x0)||g(x)−g(x0)−Dg(x0)(x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
+|g(x)−g(x0)|
|g(x)|g(x0)2|Dg(x0)(x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
≤1
m2|g(x)−g(x0)−Dg(x0)(x−x0)|
/bardblx−x0/bardbl
+/bardbl∇g(x0)/bardbl
m3|g(x)−g(x0)|.
These last two terms both go to 0, because gis
differentiable and continuous.
29. First ﬁnd formula for ( ∂/∂x)(F(x,x)) using the chain
rule. Let F(x,z)=/integraltextx
0f(z,y)dyand use the
fundamental theorem of calculus.
31. By Exercise 28 and Theorem 10(iii) (Exercise 27), each
component of kis differentiable and Dki(x0)=f(x0)
Dgi(x0)+gi(x0)Df(x0). Because [D gi(x0)]yis the ith
component of [D g(x0)]yand [D f(x0)]yis the number
∇f(x0)·y, we get [Dk (x0)]y=f(x0)[Dg(x0)]y+
[Df(x0)]y[g(x0)]=f(x0)[Dg(x0)]y+[∇f(x0)·y]g(x0).
33. 4
35. Letg(x,y)=x−y, so that z=f◦g. Then the chain
rules implies∂z
∂x=∂f
∂g∂g
∂x=∂f
∂gand
∂z
∂y=∂f
∂g∂g
∂y=−∂f
∂g.
Section 2.6
1.∇f( 1 ,1 ,2 ) ·v=( 4 ,3 ,4 ) ·(1/√
5, 2/√
5, 0)=2√
5
3.(a) 17ee/13
(b)e/√
3
(c) 0
5.(a) Since ∇f(x0) points in the direction of fastest
increase (Theorem 13), the maximum value of the
directional derivative is Df(x0)∇f(x0)
/bardbl∇f(x0)/bardbl=
∇f(x0)·∇f(x0)
/bardbl∇f(x0)/bardbl=/bardbl ∇ f(x0)/bardbl.
(b) 21√
2

<<<PAGE 533>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 506
506 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
7.9/√
29
9.(a)z+9x=6y−6
(b)z+y=π/2
(c)z=1
11. (a)−1
3√
3(i+j+k)
(b) 2i +2j+2k
(c)−2
9(i+j+k)
13. k
15. The graph of fis the level surface
0=F(x,y,z)=f(x,y)−z. Therefore, the tangent
plane is given by
0=∇F(x0,y0,z0)·(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0)
=/parenleftbigg
∂f
∂x(x0,y0),∂f
∂y(x0,y0),−1/parenrightbigg
·(x−x0,y−y0,z−z0).
Because z0=f(x0,y0), this is z=f(x0,y0)+
(∂f/∂x)(x0,y0)(x−x0)+(∂f/∂y)(x0,y0)(y−y0).
17. (a)∇f=(z+y,z+x,x+y),
g/prime(t)=(et,−sint, cos t),
(f◦g)/prime(1)=2ecos 1+cos21−sin21
(b)∇f=(yzexyz,xzexyz,xyexyz),g/prime(t)=(6, 6t,3t2),
(f◦g)/prime(1)=108e18
(c)∇f=[1+log (x2+y2+z2)](xi+yj+zk),g/prime=
(et,−e−t,1 ) ,
(f◦g)/prime(1)=[1+log (e2+e−2+1)](e2−e−2+1)
19. (a) (0, 0)
(b)∇f(0, 0) =(−4x,−6y)|(0,0)=(0, 0)
21. Letf(x,y,z)=1/r=(x2+y2+z2)−1/2;
r=(x,y,z). Then we calculate ∇f=−
(x2+y2+z2)−3/2(x,y,z)=−(1/r3)r.
23.∇f=(g/prime(x), 0)
25. Df(0, 0,...,0 ) =[0,...,0 ]
27. d1=[−(0.03+2by 1)/2a]i+y1j,d2=
[−(0.03+2by 2)/2a]i+y2j, where y1andy2are the
solutions of ( a2+b2)y2+0.03by +/parenleftbig0.032
4−a2/parenrightbig
=0.xz
yc/b
c/ac
29.∇V=λ
2πε 0/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg
x+x0
r2
2−x−x0
r2
1/parenrightbigg
i+2y/parenleftbigg
1
r2
2−1
r2
1/parenrightbigg
j/bracketrightbigg
31. Crosses at (2, 2, 0),√
5/10 seconds later.
Review Exercises for Chapter 2
1.(a) Elliptic paraboloid.
(b) Let y/prime=y+3 and write z=xy/prime. This is a (shifted)
hyperbolic paraboloid.
3.(a)Df(x,y)=/bracketleftBig2xy x2
−ye−xy−xe−xy/bracketrightBig
(b)Df(x)=/bracketleftBig1
1/bracketrightBig
(c)Df(x,y,z)]=[exeyez]
(d)Df(x,y,z)=/bracketleftBigg100010001/bracketrightBigg
5./bracketleftbigg
0001−2π 0/bracketrightbigg
7./bracketleftBigg−12 28
−51 7−4−5/bracketrightBigg
9.(0, 25π,0 )
11. The plane tangent to a sphere at ( x0,y0,z0) is normal to
the line from the center to ( x0,y0,z0).
13. (a)z=x−y+2
(b)z=4x−8y−8
(c)x+y+z=−1
(d) 10 x+6y−4z=6−π
(e) 2 z=√
2x+√
2y
(f)x+2y−z=2

<<<PAGE 534>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 507
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 507
15. (a) The level curves are hyperbolas xy=1/c:
y
c = 1
c = 4
c = 1c = 4c = −4c = −1
c = −4
c = −11 −1−22
2 x
−21
−1
(b) c=x2−xy−y2
=/parenleftbigg
x−1+√
5
2y/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
x−1−√
5
2y/parenrightbigg
−1
−2
−3−3 −2−1123
12 3c = −1
c = 1
xy
c = −1c = 1
17. (a) 0 (b) Limit does not exist.
19. (1+2x2)e x p( 1 +x2+y2)
21.40√
5e−15
23. (a) The line L(t)=(x0,y0,f(x0,y0))+t(a,b,c) lies
in the plane z=f(x0,y0)i fc=0 and is per-
pendicular to ∇f(x0,y0)i fa(∂f/∂x)(x0,y0)+
b(∂b/∂y)(x0,y0)=0. On L,w eh a v e
f(x0,y0)+/bracketleftBig∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightBig
(x−x0)+/bracketleftBig∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightBig
(y−y0)
=f(x0,y0)+at/bracketleftBig∂f
∂x(x0,y0)/bracketrightBig
+bt/bracketleftBig∂f
∂y(x0,y0)/bracketrightBig
=f(x0,y0)=z.
Therefore, Llies in the tangent plane. An upward
unit normal to the tangent plane is p=(1+/bardbl ∇ f/bardbl−1/2(−(∂f/∂x)(x0,y0),−(∂f/∂y)(x0,y0), 1). Therefore,
cosθ=p·k=(1+/bardbl ∇ f/bardbl2)−1/2, and tan θ=sinθ/
cosθ= {/bardbl∇ f/bardbl2/(1+/bardbl∇ f/bardbl2)}1/2/(1+/bardbl∇ f/bardbl2)−1/2
=/bardbl ∇ f/bardblas claimed.
(b) The tangent plane contains the horizontal line
through (1, 0, 2) perpendicular to
∇f(1, 0) =(5, 0), that is, parallel to the yaxis. It
makes an angle of arctan ( /bardbl∇f(1, 0)/bardbl) =
arctan 5 ≈78.7◦with respect to the xyplane.
25. (1/√
2, 1/√
2) or ( −1/√
2,−1/√
2)
27. A unit normal is (√
2/10)(3, 5, 4). The tangent plane is
3x+5y+4z=18.
29. 4i+16j
31. (a) Because gis the composition λ/mapsto→λx/mapsto→f(λx),
the chain rule gives
g/prime(λ)=Df(λx)⎡
⎢⎣x1
...
xn⎤
⎥⎦.
Thus,
g/prime(1)=Df(x)⎡
⎢⎣x1
...
xn⎤
⎥⎦=∇ f(x)·x.
But also g(λ)=λpf(x), so g/prime(λ)=pλp−1f(x)
andg/prime(1)=pf(x).
(b) p=1
33. Differentiate directly using the chain rule, or use
Exercise 31(a) with p=0.
35. (a) If ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0), then we calculate for (i) that
∂f/∂x=(y3−yx2)/(x2+y2)2and∂f/∂y=
(x3−xy2)/(x2+y2)2.I fx=y=0, use the
deﬁnition directly to ﬁnd that both partial derivativesare 0. For (ii), if ( x,y)/negationslash=(0, 0), then ∂f/∂x=2xy
6/
(x2+y4)2and∂f/∂y=(2x4y−2x2y5)/
(x2+y4)2. The partials at the origin are zero.
(b) The function (i) is not continuous at (0, 0); the
function (ii) is differentiable, but the derivative isnot continuous.
37. (a)√
2π/8
(b)−sin√
2
(c)−2√
2e−2

<<<PAGE 535>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 508
508 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
39. (−4e−1,0 )
41. (a) See Theorem 11.
(b)
g(u)=(sin 3u )2+cos 8u ∇f=(2x,1 )
g/prime(u)=6 sin 3u cos 3u −8 sin 8u ∇f(h(0))=∇ f(0, 1) =(0, 1)
g/prime(0)=0 h/prime(u)=(3 cos 3u ,−8 sin 8u )
g/prime(0)=∇ f(h(0))·h/prime(0)
=(0, 1)·(3, 0) =0
43. t=√
14(−3+√
359)/70=(−3+√
359)/5√
14
45.∂z/∂x=4(e−2x−2y+2xy)(1+y)/(e−2x−2y−e2xy)2
∂z/∂y=4(e−2y−2x+2xy)(1+x)/(e−2x−2y−e2xy)2
47. Notice that y=x2, so that if yis constant, xcannot be a
variable.
49. [f/prime(t)g(t)+f(t)g/prime(t)] exp [ f(t)g(t)]
51. d[f(c(t))]/dt=2t/[(1+t2+2 cos2t)(2−2t2+t4)]
−4t(t2−1) ln(1 +t2+2 cos2t)/(2−2t2+t4)2
−4 cos tsint/[(1+t2+2 cos2t)(2−2t2+t4)]
53. Letx=f(t),y=t, and use the chain rule to
differentiate u(x,y) with respect to t.
55. (a)n=PV/RT;P=nRT/V;
T=PV/nR;V=nRT/P.
(b)∂V/∂T=nR/P;∂T/∂P=V/nR;
∂P/∂V=−nRT/V2.
Multiply, remembering that PV=nRT .
57. (a) We can solve for any of the variables in terms of the
other two.
(b)∂T/∂P=(V−β)/R;
∂P/∂V=− RT/(V−β)2+2α/V3;
∂V/∂T=R/[(V−β)(RT/(V−β)2−2α/V3)]
(c) Multiply and cancel factors.
59. (a) (1/√
2, 1/√
2)
(b) The directional derivative is 0 in the direction
(x0i+y0j)//radicalbig
x2
0+y2
0.
(c) The level curve through ( x0,y0) must be tangent to
the line through (0, 0) and ( x0,y0). The level curves
are lines or half-lines emanating from the origin.
61. G(x,y)=x−yChapter 3
Section 3.1
1.∂2f
∂x2=24x3y−xy3
(x2+y2)4,∂2f
∂y2=24−x3y+xy3
(x2+y2)4,
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x=−6x4+36x2y2−6y4
(x2+y2)4
3.∂2f
∂x2=− y4cos(xy2),
∂2f
∂y2=−2xsin (xy2)−4x2y2cos ( xy2),
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x=−2ysin (xy2)−2xy3cos ( xy2)
5.∂2f
∂x2=2(cos2x+e−y) cos 2 x+2 sin22x
(cos2x+e−y)3,
∂2f
∂y2=e−y−cos2x
ey(cos2x+e−y)3
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x=2 sin 2 x
ey(cos2x+e−y)3
7.(a) fx=−1,fy=−π,fxx=0,fyy=0,
fxy=fyx=−1
(b) fx=5,fy=−18, fxx=2,fyy=42,
fxy=fyx=−8
(c) All second partial derivatives are zero.
9.No.
11. (a)c2∂2f
∂x2=−c2sin(x−ct)=∂2f
∂t2
(b)c2∂2f
∂x2=−c2sin(x) sin( ct)=∂2f
∂t2
(c)c2∂2f
∂x2=30c2(x−ct)4+30c2(x+ct)4=∂2f
∂t2
13. (a)∂2z/∂x2=6,∂2z/∂y2=4,
∂2z/∂x∂y=∂2z/∂y∂x=0
(b)∂2z/∂x2=0,∂2z/∂y2=4x/3y3,
∂2z/∂x∂y=∂2z/∂y∂x=−2/3y2
15. fxy=2x+2y,fyz=2z,fzx=0,fxyz=0
17. Because fand∂f/∂zare both of class C2,w eh a v e
∂3f
∂x∂y∂z=∂2
∂x∂y∂f
∂z=∂2
∂y∂x∂f
∂z=∂
∂y/parenleftbigg
∂2f
∂x∂z/parenrightbigg
=∂
∂y/parenleftbigg
∂2f
∂z∂x/parenrightbigg
=∂3f
∂y∂z∂x.

<<<PAGE 536>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 509
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 509
19. fxzw=fzwx=exyz[2xycos ( xw)+
x2y2zcos ( xw)−x2ywsin (xw)]
21. (a)∂f
∂x=arctanx
y+xy
x2+y2
∂f
∂y=−x2
x2+y2
∂2f
∂x2=2y3
(x2+y2)2,∂2f
∂y2=2x2y
(x2+y2)2
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x=−2xy2
(x2+y2)2
(b) ∂f
∂x=−xsin/radicalbig
x2+y2
/radicalbig
x2+y2,∂f
∂y=−ysin/radicalbig
x2+y2
/radicalbig
x2+y2
∂2f
∂x2=x2sin/radicalbig
x2+y2
(x2+y2)3/2−x2cos/radicalbig
x2+y2
x2+y2
−sin/radicalbig
x2+y2
(x2+y2)1/2
∂2f
∂y2=y2sin/radicalbig
x2+y2
(x2+y2)3/2−y2cos/radicalbig
x2+y2
x2+y2
−sin/radicalbig
x2+y2
(x2+y2)1/2
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x
=xy/bracketleftbigg
sin/radicalbig
x2+y2
(x2+y2)3/2−cos/radicalbig
x2+y2
x2+y2/bracketrightbigg
(c)∂f
∂x=−2xexp (−x2−y2),
∂f
∂y=−2yexp(−x2−y2),
∂2f
∂x2=(4x2−2) exp ( −x2−y2),
∂2f
∂y2=(4y2−2) exp ( −x2−y2),
∂2f
∂x∂y=∂2f
∂y∂x=4xyexp (−x2−y2)
23.∂2f
∂x2/parenleftBigdx
dt/parenrightBig2
+2∂2f
∂x∂ydx
dtdy
dt+∂2f
∂y2/parenleftBigdy
dt/parenrightBig2
+∂f
∂xd2x
dt2+∂f
∂yd2y
dt2,
where c(t)=(x(t),y(t))
25. Evaluate the derivatives ∂2u/∂x2and∂2u/∂y2and add.27. (a) The ﬁrst function is harmonic, the second is not.
(b) Any polynomial of degree 1 or 0 is harmonic.
29. (a) Evaluate the derivatives and compare.
(b)
x
t
x = tφ
31. V=−GmM /r=−GmM (x2+y2+z2)−1/2. Check
that
∂2V
∂x2+∂2V
∂y2+∂2V
∂z2=GmM (x2+y2+z2)−3/2
[3−3(x2+y2+z2)(x2+y2+z2)−1]=0.
Section 3.2
1.(a) f(h1,h2)=1+h1+h2+R1(0,h)
(b) f(h1,h2)=1+h1+h2+1
2h2
1+h1h2+1
2h22+
R2(0,h)
3.f(h1,h2)=h21+2h1h2+h22[R2(0,h)=0, in this case].
5.f(h1,h2)=1+h1+h2+h21
2+h1h2+h22
2+R2(0,h)
7.f(h1,h2)=1+h1h2+R2(0,h)
9.g(x,y)=−1+1
2(x−π)2+1
2/parenleftBig
y−π
2/parenrightBig2
11. p(x,y)=2−3π2
4(y−1)−1
2/parenleftBig
x−π
2/parenrightBig2
+π2
4(y−1)2−7π
2/parenleftBig
x−π
2/parenrightBig
(y−1)
13. (a) Show that |Rk(x,a)|≤ABk+1/(k+1)! for
constants A,B, and xin a ﬁxed interval [ a,b].
Prove that Rk→0a sk→∞ . (Use convergence

<<<PAGE 537>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 510
510 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
of the series/summationtext
ck/k!=ecand use Taylor’ s
theorem.)
(b) The only possible trouble is at x=0. Use
L’ H ˆopital’ s rule to show that
limit
t→∞p(t)et=∞
for every polynomial p(t). Using this, establish that
limit x→0+p(x)e−1/x=0 for every rational function
p(x), and conclude that f(k)(0)=0 for every k.
(c) f:Rn→Ris analytic at x0if the series
f(x0)+n/summationdisplay
i=1hi∂f
∂xi(x0)+1
2n/summationdisplay
i,j=1hihj∂2f
∂xi∂xj(x0)+···
+1
k!n/summationdisplay
i1,...,ik=1hi1hi2···hik∂kf
∂xi1···∂ xik(x0)+···
converges to f(x0+h) for all h=(h1,...,hn)i n
some sufﬁciently small disc /bardblh/bardbl<ε. The function
fis analytic if for every R>0 there is a constant
Msuch that |(∂kf/∂xi1···∂ xik)(x)|<Mkfor each
kth-order derivative at every xsatisfying /bardblx/bardbl≤ R.
(d) f(x,y)=1+x+y+1
2(x2+2xy+y2)+···
+1
k!k/summationdisplay
j=0/parenleftBigk
j/parenrightBig
xjyk−j+···
Section 3.3
1.(0, 0); saddle point.
3.The critical points are on the line y=−x; they are local
minima, because f(x,y)=(x+y)2≥0, equaling zero
only when x=− y.
5.(0, 0); saddle point.
7./parenleftbigg
−1
4,−1
4/parenrightbigg
; local minimum.
9.(0, 0); local maximum. (The tests fail, but use the fact
that cos z≤1.)
(√π/2,√π/2), local minimum
(0,√π), local minimum.
11. No critical points.
13. (1, 1) is a local minimum.
15. (0,nπ); critical points, no local maxima or minima.17. Local minimum at (1, 1).
19. Local maximum at (0, 3), local minimum at (1, 2),saddles at (0, 2) and (1, 3).
21. Minimum at (0, 0) and maxima at (0, ±1) [and saddles
at (±1, 0)].
23. (a)∂f/∂xand∂f/∂yvanish at (0, 0).
(b) Show that f(g(t))=0a tt=0 and that
f(g(t))≥0i f|t|<|b|/3a2.
(c) fis negative on the parabola y=2x2.
25. The critical points are on the line y=xand they are
local minima (see Exercise 1).
27. Saddle.
29. Minimize S=2xy+2yz+2xzwith z=V/xy,Vthe
constant volume.
31. 40, 40, 40
33. (a)∇f(0, 0) =(6x5+2x,6y5)|(0,0)=(0, 0), so f
has a critical point at (0,0). The Hessian matrix of f
at (0,0) is/bracketleftbigg
30x4+20
03 0 y/bracketrightbigg
(0,0)=/bracketleftbigg
2000/bracketrightbigg
, which
has determinant zero. Similarly for gandh.
(b) fhas a local minimum at (0,0) since f(0, 0) =0
and f(x,y)>0 for all other ( x,y).ghas a local
maximum at (0,0) since g(0, 0) =0 and
g(x,y)<0 for all other ( x,y).hhas a saddle at
(0,0) since h(0,y)≥0, but h(x,0 )<0 for xnear
zero. This shows that there are points arbitrarilyclose to the origin on which htakes both positive
and negative values.
35. The only critical point is (0, 0, 0). It is a minimum,because
f(x,y,z)≥x
2+y2
2+z2+xy=1
2(x+y)2+z2≥0.
37./parenleftbigg
1,3
2/parenrightbigg
is a saddle point;/parenleftbigg
5,27
2/parenrightbigg
is a local minimum.
39.3
2is the absolute maximum and 0 is the absolute
minimum.
41.−2 is the absolute minimum; 2 is the absolute maximum.
43. Absolute maximum of 3 at ( −1, 2), absolute minimum
o f0a t( −2, 5) and (2, 1).

<<<PAGE 538>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 511
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 511
45./parenleftbigg
1
2,4/parenrightbigg
is a local minimum.
47. Ifun(x,y)=u(x,y)+(1/n)ex, then∇2un=
(1/n)ex>0. Thus, unis strictly subharmonic and can
have its maximum only on ∂D,s a y ,a tp n=(xn,yn). If
(x0,y0)∈D, check that this implies u(xn,yn)>
u(x0,y0)−e/n. Thus, there must be a point q=(x∞,y∞)
on∂Dsuch that arbitrarily close to qwe can ﬁnd an
(xn,yn) for nas large as we like. Conclude from the
continuity of uthatu(x∞,y∞)≥u(x0,y0).
49. Follow the methods of Exercise 47.
51. (a) If there were an x1with f(x1)<f(x0), then the
maximum of fon the interval between x0andx
would be another critical point.
(b) Verify (i) by the second derivative test; for (ii), f
goes to −∞ asy→∞ andx=− y.
Section 3.4
1.(a) Maximum of 3, minimum of 1.
(b) Maximum of 3, minimum of 0.
3.Maximum at/radicalBig
2
3(1,−1, 1), minimum at/radicalBig
2
3(−1, 1, −1).
5.Maximum at (√
3, 0), minimum at ( −√
3, 0).
7.Maximum at/parenleftbig9√
70,4√
70/parenrightbig
, minimum at/parenleftbig
−9√
70,−4√
70/parenrightbig
.
9.The minimum value 4 is attained at (0, 2). Use a
geometric picture rather than Lagrange multipliers.
11. (0, 0, 2) is a minimum of f.
13.3
2is the absolute maximum and 0 is the absolute
minimum.
15. (a) Saddle at (0,0).
(b) Maximum of 14 at (3, 1), minimum of −14 at
(−3,−1).
17. Maximum of 1/3√
3, minimum of −1/3√
3.
19. (a) 3, 3, 3
(b) 9, 9, 9
21. The diameter should equal the height, 20/3√
2πcm.
23. Maximum value√
3a t/parenleftbig1√
3,1√
3,−1√
3/parenrightbig
and minimum
value−√
3a t/parenleftbig
−1√
3,−1√
3,1√
3/parenrightbig
.25. Horizontal length is√qA/p, vertical length is√pA/q.
27. For Exercise 3, the bordered Hessians required are
|¯H2|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle02 x 2y
2x−2λ 0
2y 0−2λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=8λ(x2+y2),
|¯H3|=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle02 x 2y 2z
2x−2λ 00
2y 0−2λ 0
2z 00 −2λ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=−16λ( x2+y2+z2).
At/radicalBig
2
3(1,−1, 1) the Lagrange multiplier is λ=√
6/4>0,
indicating a maximum at/radicalBig
2
3(1,−1, 1), and λ=
−√
6/4<0 indicates a minimum at/radicalBig
2
3(−1, 1, −1). In
Exercise 7, |¯H|=24λ(4 x2+6y2), and so λ=√
70/12 >0
indicates a maximum at (9/√
70, 4/√
70) and λ=−√
70/
12<0 indicates a minimum at ( −9/√
70,−4/√
70).
29. 11,664 in3
31. (a)∇f(x)=Ax.
(b)Sis deﬁned by the constraint function
g(x)=x2
1+x2
2+x2
3−1. Because ∇g(x)=2xis
not0, Theorem 9 applies. At an xwhere fis
extreme, there is a λ/2 such that
∇f(x)=(λ/2)/∇g(x). That is, Ax=λx.
33. Minimum is ( −1/√
2, 0), maximum is (1
4,±√
7/8),
local minimum at (1/√
2, 0).
35. No critical points; no maximum or minimum.
37. (−1, 0, 1)
39. The point ( K,L)=(αB/q,( 1−α)B/p) optimizes the
proﬁt.
Section 3.5
1.LetF(x,y,z)=x+y−z+cos(xyz). Then
(∂F/∂z) ( 0 ,0 ,0 ) =−1/negationslash=0. The implicit function
theorem then says that we can solve for z=g(x,y).
(∂g/∂x)(0, 0) =(∂g/∂y)(0, 0) =1.
3.(a) If x<−1
4, we can solve for yin terms of xusing
the quadratic formula.
(b)∂F/∂y=2y+1 is nonzero for {y|y<−1
2}and
{y|>−1
2}. These regions correspond to the upper
and lower halves of a horizontal parabola with
vertex at ( −1
4,−1
2) and to the choice of sign in the
quadratic formula. The derivative

<<<PAGE 539>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 512
512 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
dy/dx=−3/(2 y+1) is negative on the top half of
the parabola, positive on the bottom.
5.Use the special implicit function theorem with n=1.
(See Example 1.) Line (i) is given by
0=(x−x0,y−y0)·∇F(x0,y0)=
(x−x0)(∂F/∂x)(x0,y0)+(y−y0)(∂F/∂y)(x0,y0).
For line (ii), Theorem 11 gives dy/dx=
−(∂F/∂x)/(∂F/∂y), and so the lines agree and are
given by
y=y0−(∂F/∂x)(x0,y0)
(∂F/∂y)(x0,y0)(x−x0).
7.LetF(x,y,z)=x3z2−z3yx;
∂F/∂z=2x3z−3z2yx/negationslash=0 at (1, 1, 1). Near the
origin, with x=y/negationslash=0, we get solutions z=0 and
z=x, and so there is no unique solution. At (1, 1),
∂z/∂x=2 and∂z/∂y=−1.
9.With F1=y+x+uvandF2=uxy+v, the
determinant in the general implicit function theorem is
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂F1/∂u∂F1/∂v
∂F2/∂u∂F2/∂v/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=v−uxy,
which is 0 at (0, 0, 0, 0). Thus, the implicit function
theorem does not apply. If we try directly, we ﬁnd thatv=−uxy,s ox+y=u
2xy. For a particular choice of
(x,y) near (0, 0), either there are no solutions for ( u,v)
or else there are two.
11. No. f(x,y)=(−1, 0) has inﬁnitely many solutions,
namely, ( x,y)=(0,y) for any y.
13. (a)x2
0+y2
0/negationslash=0
(b) f/prime(z)=−z(x+2y)/(x2+y2);
g/prime(z)=z(y−2x)/(x2+y2)
15. (a) Solve the equation x3−y2=0 for x. Then Cis the
graph of f(y)=y2/3.
(b)Fx(0, 0) =3x2|0,0=0. No; it contradicts the
converse of the implicit function theorem.
17. (a) Let F1=x2−y2−u3+v2+4,F2=
2xy+y2−2u2+3v4+8.Compute ( ∂F1/∂u)
(2,−1, 2, 1) =−12, (∂F1/∂v)(2,−1, 2, 1) =2,
(∂F2/∂u)(2,−1, 2, 1) =−8, (∂F2/∂v)(2,−1,
2, 1)=12. Then /Delta1=−128/negationslash=0, so the implicit
function theorem says we can solve for uandvas
functions of xandynear (2, −1, 2, 1).
(b)13
32
19. Multiply and equate coefﬁcients to get a0,a1, and a2as
functions of r1,r2, and r3. Then compute the Jacobiandeterminant ∂(a0,a1,a2)/∂(r1,r2,r3)=(r3−r2)
(r1−r2)(r1−r3). This is not zero if the roots are
distinct. Thus, the inverse function theorem shows thatthe roots may be found as functions of the coefﬁcients insome neighborhood of any point at which the roots aredistinct. That is, if the roots r
1,r2,r3ofx3+a2x2+
a1x+a0are all different, then there are neighborhoods
Vof (r1,r2,r3) and Wof (a0,a1,a2) such that the roots
inVare smooth functions of the coefﬁcients in W.
Review Exercises for Chapter 3
1.Letg(x,y)=y−kx,s ou=f◦g. Then
(∂u/∂x)=(∂f/∂g)(∂g/∂x)=(∂f/∂g)(−k ) and
(∂u/∂y)=(∂f/∂g)(∂g/∂y)=(∂f/∂g). The result
follows.
3.Saddle at (0,0).
5.p(x,y)=e−1−2e−1(x−1)+2e−1(y−1)+
e−1(x−1)2−4e−1(x−1)(y−1)+e−1(y−1)2
7.(a) Saddle point.
(b) Saddle point for any C.
9.(a) 1
(b)√
83/6
11. Use the second derivative test; (0, 0) is a local maximum;(−1, 0) is a saddle point; (2, 0) is a local minumum.
13. Saddle points at ( n,0 ) ,n =integer.
15. Maximum ≈2.618, minimum ≈0.382.
17. Maximum 1, minimum cos 1.
19. z=1/4
21. (0, 0,±1)
23. Ifb≥2, the minimum distance is 2√b−1; if b≤2,
the minimum distance is |b|.
25. Local maximum at (2, 0), local minimum at (0,1) and(3, 1), saddles at (0,0), (3,0) and (2, 1).
27. Not stable.
29. f(−3
2,−√
3/2)=3√
3/4
31. x=(20/3)3√
3;y=103√
3;z=53√
3
33. The determinant required in the general implicitfunction theorem is not zero, and so we can solve for u
andv;(∂u/∂x)(2,−1)=13/32.

<<<PAGE 540>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 513
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 513
35. A new orthonormal basis may be found with respect to
which the quadratic form given by the matrix
A=/bracketleftBigab
bc/bracketrightBig
takes diagonal form. This change of basis deﬁnes newvariables ξandη, which are linear functions of xandy.
Manipulations of linear algebra and the chain rule showthatLv=λ(∂
2v/∂ξ2)+μ(∂2v/∂η2). The numbers λ
andμare the eigenvalues of Aand are positive, because
the quadratic form is positive-deﬁnite. At a maximum,∂v/∂ξ =∂v/∂η =0. Moreover, ∂
2v/∂ξ2≤0 and∂2v/
∂η2≤0, because if either were greater than 0, the cross
section of the graph in that direction would have aminimum. Then Lv≤0, thus contradicting strict
subharmonicity.
37. Reverse the inequalities in Exercises 35 and 36.
39. LetF1=2xu3v−yv−1,F2=y3v+x5u2−2.
Compute ( ∂F1/∂u) ( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 )=6 ,( ∂F1/∂v)
( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ) =1, (∂F2/∂u) ( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ) =2, (∂F2/∂v)
( 1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ) =1. Then /Delta1=4/negationslash=0, so the implicit
function theorem says we can solve for uandvas
functions of xandynear (1, 1, 1, 1).
Df(1, 1) =/bracketleftbigg
−7/41
17/2 −5/bracketrightbigg
41. The equations for a critical point, ∂s/∂m=∂s/∂b=0,
when solved for mandbgive m=(y1−y2)/(x1−x2)
andb=(y2x1−y1x2)/(x1−x2). The line y=mx+b
then goes through ( x1,y1) and ( x2,y2).
43. At a minimum of s,w eh a v e
0=∂s/∂b=−2/summationtextn
i=1(yi−mxi−b).
45. y=9
10x+6
5
47. Letα=(ax−4a3t). Compute ut=8a3tanhαand
ux=−2autanhαsout+4a2ux=0. Then compute
uxx=4a2u−u2/2. Then uxxx=4a2ux−uux,s ow e
obtain ut+uxxx+uux=ut+4a2ux=0.
49. T/prime+kc1T=0,/Theta1/prime/prime+c2/Theta1=0,r2R/prime/prime+rR/prime−c3R=0
for some constants c1,c2, and c3.
Chapter 4
Section 4.1
1.r/prime(t)=−(sint)i+2(cos 2t )j,r/prime(0)=2j,
a(t)=−(cost)i−4(sin 2t )j,a(0)=−i,
l(t)=i+2tj3.r/prime(t)=√
2i+etj−e−tk,r/prime(0)=√
2i+j−k,
a(t)=etj+e−tk,a(0)=j+k,l(t)=√
2ti+(1+t)j+(1−t)k
5.(et−e−t, cos t−sint,−3t2)
7.[−3t2(2 sin t+cost)−t3(2 cos t−sint)]i+
[3t2(2et+e−t)+t3(2et−e−t)]j
+[et(cost−sint)−e−t(−sint+cost)]k
9.Compute v=(−asint,acost,b)s o
a=(−acost,−asint, 0). Since the z-component of a
is identically zero, ais always parallel to the xyplane.
11. The paths in (a) and (c) are regular, while the path in (b)is not.
13. (0,−12,−1) and (0, −26,−8)
15. m( 0 ,6 ,0 )
17.−24π2(cos(2π t/5), sin (2π t/5))/25
19.d
dt(/bardblv/bardbl2)=d
dt(v·v)=2v·dv
dt=2v·a=0
21. 6129 seconds
23. c(t)=/parenleftBigt2
2,et−6,t3
3+1/parenrightBig
25. (a)c(t)=(t,et),−∞<t<∞.The image of this
path is the graph y=ex.
(b)c(t)=(1
2cost, sint), 0≤t≤2π, an ellipse.
(c)c(t)=(at,bt,ct)
(d)c(t)=(2
3cost,1
2sint), 0≤t≤2π, an ellipse.
27. c(t)×c/prime(t) is normal to the plane of the orbit at time t.
As in Exercise 26, its derivative is 0, and so the orbitalplane is constant.
Section 4.2
1.2√
5π
3.2(2√
2−1)
5.6−√
3√
2+1
2log/bracketleftbigg
2√
2+3√
2+√
3/bracketrightbigg
7.2√
2
9.(a)c(t)=(1−t,2−t,−t),t∈[0, 1]
(b)√
3 (c)√
3

<<<PAGE 541>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 514
514 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
11. 2π(√
5+√
2)
13. 3+log 2
15. (a) Because αis strictly increasing, it maps [ a,b]
one-to-one onto [α (a),α(b)]. By deﬁnition, vis the
image of cif and only if there is a tin [a,b] with
c(t)=v. There is one point sin [α (a),α(b)] with
s=α(t), so d(s)=c(t)=v. Therefore, the image
ofcis contained in that of d. Use α−1similarly for
the opposite inclusion.
(b)
ld=/integraldisplayα(b)
α(a)/bardbld/prime(s)/bardblds=/integraldisplays=α(b)
s=α(a)/bardbld/prime(α(t))/bardblα/prime(t)dt
=/integraldisplayt=b
t=a/bardbld/prime(α(t))α/prime(t)/bardbldt=/integraldisplayb
a/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt=lc
(c) Differentiate dusing the chain rule.
17. (a)lc=/integraltextb
a/bardblc/prime(s)/bardblds=/integraltextb
ads=b−a
(b)T(s)=c/prime(s)//bardblc/prime(s)/bardbl=c/prime(s), so T/prime(s)=c/prime/prime(s).
Then k=/bardblT/prime/bardbl=/bardbl c/prime/prime(s)/bardbl.
(c) Show that if vandware in R3,
/bardblv×w/bardbl=/bardbl w−(v·w//bardblv/bardbl2)v/bardbl·/bardblv/bardbl. Use this to
show that if ρ(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)) is never
( 0 ,0 ,0 )a n d f(t)=ρ(t)//bardblρ(t)/bardbl, then
df
dt=1
/bardblρ(t)/bardbl/bracketleftbigg
ρ/prime(t)−ρ(t)·ρ/prime(t)
/bardblρ(t)/bardbl2ρ(t)/bracketrightbigg
anddf
dt=/bardblρ(t)×ρ/prime(t)/bardbl
/bardblρ(t)/bardbl2.
Withρ(t)=c/prime(t), this gives
T/prime(t)=c/prime/prime(t)
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl−c/prime(t)·c/prime/prime(t)
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl3c/prime(t)
and /bardblT/prime(t)/bardbl=/bardblc/prime(t)×c/prime/prime(t)/bardbl
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl2.
Ifsis the arc length of c,ds/dt=/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl, and
therefore
/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubledT
dt/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubledT
dsds
dt/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble
=k/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl.
Thus,
k=1
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldT
dt=/bardblc/prime(t)×c/prime/prime(t)/bardbl
/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl3.
(This result is useful in Exercise 21.)
(d) 1/√
219. (a)/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbl=/bardbl (−sint, cos t)/bardbl=1
(b)k=/bardblT/prime(t)/bardbl=/bardbl (−cost,−sint)/bardbl=1
21. (a) Because cis parametrized by arc length,
T(s)=c/prime(s), and N(s)=c/prime/prime(s)//bardblc/prime/prime(s)/bardbl. Use
Exercise 17 to show that
dB
ds=/parenleftbigg
c/prime/prime×c/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime/prime/bardbl/parenrightbigg
+c/prime×/parenleftbigg
c/prime/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime/prime/bardbl−c/prime/prime·c/prime/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime/prime/bardbl3c/prime/prime/parenrightbigg
and
τ=−dB
ds·N=−(c/prime×c/prime/prime/prime)·c/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime/prime/bardbl2=(c/prime×c/prime/prime)·c/prime/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime/prime/bardbl2.
(b) Obtain T/prime(t) and/bardblT/prime(t)/bardblas in Exercise 17. Bis a
unit vector in the direction of c/prime×T/prime=(c/prime×c/prime/prime)/
/bardblc/prime/bardbl,s o B=(c/prime×c/prime/prime)//bardblc/prime×c/prime/prime/bardbl. Use the solution
of Exercise 17 with ρ=c/prime×c/prime/primeto obtain
dB/dt=(c/prime×c/prime/prime/prime)//bardblc/prime×c/prime/prime/bardbl
−{[(c/prime×c/prime/prime)·(c/prime×c/prime/prime/prime)]//bardblc/prime×c/prime/prime/bardbl3}(c/prime×c/prime/prime),
and the values of T/primeand/bardblT/prime/bardblto get
N=(/bardblc/prime/bardbl//bardblc/prime×c/prime/prime/bardbl)(c/prime/prime−(c/prime×c/prime/prime)//bardblc/prime/bardbl2).
Finally, use the chain rule and the inner product of
these to obtain
τ=−/bracketleftBigdB
ds(s(t))/bracketrightBig
·N(s(t))
=−1
|ds/dt|dB
dt·N=(c/prime×c/prime/prime)·c/prime/prime/prime
/bardblc/prime×c/prime/prime/bardbl2.
(c)√
2/2
23. (a)Nis deﬁned as T/prime//bardblT/prime/bardbl,s oT/prime=/bardblT/prime/bardblN=kN.
Because T·T/prime=0,T,N, and Bare an orthonormal
basis for R3. Differentiating B(s)·B(s)=1 and
B(s)·T(s)=0 shows that B/prime·B=0 and
B/prime·T+B·T/prime=0. But T/prime·B=/bardblT/prime/bardblN·B=0, so
B/prime·T=0 also. Thus, B/prime=(B/prime·T)T+(B/prime·N)N+
(B/prime·B)B=(B/prime·N)N=−τN. Also, N/prime·N=0,
because N·N=1. Thus, N/prime=(N/prime·T)T+(N/prime·B)B.
But differentiating N·T=0 and N·B=0g i v e s
N/prime·T=−N·T/prime=−kandN/prime·B=−N·B/prime=τ,
and so the middle equation follows.
(b)ω=τT+kB
25. Follow the hint in the text.

<<<PAGE 542>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 515
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 515
Section 4.3
1.
y
x
3.
y
x
5.F=(2y,x):
y
x
7.
y
x
9.(a) corresponds to (i).
(b) corresponds to (ii).11. The ﬂow lines are concentric circles:
xy
13. The ﬂow lines for t>0:
xy
15. c/prime(t)=(2e2t,1/t,−1/t2)=F(c(t))
17. c/prime(t)=(cost,−sint,et)=F(c(t))
19. (F◦c)(t)=/parenleftbigg
1
(1−t)2,0 ,et
1−t+et
(1−t)2/parenrightbigg
=c/prime(t)
21. (a) f(x,y,z)=xyz
(b) f(x,y,z)=x2
2+y2
2+z2
2
23. Compare1
2mv2for the escape velocity ve=√2gR0
and the velocity in an orbit of radius R0given in Section
4.1. (Ignore the rotation of the earth.)
25. Use the fact that −∇Tis perpendicular to the surface
T=constant.
27. x/prime(t)=x(t)ey(t),y/prime(t)=(y(t))2(z(t))2,
z/prime(t)=x(t)y(t)z(t)
Section 4.4
1.yexy−xexy+yeyz
3.3
5.divV>0 in the ﬁrst and third quadrants,
divV<0 in the second and fourth quadrants.

<<<PAGE 543>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 516
516 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
7.∇·F=0; if Frepresents a ﬂuid, there is neither
expansion nor compression; the area of a small rectangle
remains the same.
xy
9.3x2−x2cos ( xy)
11. ycos ( xy)+x2sin (x2y)
13. 0
15. (10y−8z)i+(6z−10x)j+(8x−6y)k
17.−sinx
19. x
21. (a)∇·(∇× F)=∇· (0,−z,2xy)=0
(b) No, since ∇× F/negationslash=0.
23. (a)zexz+xcos(xy)+2x5y3z
(b) (3 x5y2z2,xexz−5x4y3z2,ycos(xy))
25. (a) Nonsense. (b) Nonsense.
(c) Nonsense. (d) Vector ﬁeld.(e) Nonsense. (d) Scalar function.
27.∇·F=∂f
∂x+∂g
∂y+∂h
∂z=0 since f,g, and hdo not
depend on x,y, and z, respectively.
29.∇×∇ f=0
31.∇×∇ f=0
33.∇× F/negationslash=0
35. LetF=F1i+F2j+F3kand compute both sides of the
identity.
37. (a) 2 xyi+x2j(c) (−y3zx3,2x2y4z,2x3z2−2xy)
(b) (3 y2xz,4xz−y3z, 0) (d) 4 x2yz2+x2
39. No.
41. Separate each expression into its real and imaginary
parts and then treat the resulting quantity as a vectorﬁeld on R
2. Directly calculate its curl and divergence.
In (a), F=(x2−y2)i−2xyj; in (b),F=(x3−3xy2)i+(y3−3x2y)j; and in (c),
F=(excosy)i−(exsiny)j. Show that ∇·F=0 and
∇×F=0 in each case.
Review Exercises for Chapter 4
1.v(1)=(3,−e−1,−π/ 2);a(1)=(6,e−1,0 ) ;
s(1)=/radicalbigg
9+e−2+π2
4;l(t)
=(2,e−1,0 )+(t−1)(3,−e−1,−π/ 2)
3.v(0)=( 1 ,1 ,0 ) ; a(0)=(1, 0,−1);
s=√
2;l(t)=( 1 ,0 ,1 ) +t( 1 ,1 ,0 )
5.Tangent vector: v=−(1/√
2)i+(1/√
2)j+k.
Acceleration vector: a=−(1/√
2)(i+j).
7.m(2, 0,−1)
9.(a)v=(−sint, cos t,√
3),a=(−cost,−sint,0 )
(b)l(t)=( 1 ,0 ,0 ) +t(0, 1,√
3)
(c) 4π
11.∇× F=/parenleftBig4Ayz/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2−4Ayz/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,
4Axz/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2−4Axz/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2,
4Axy/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2−4Axy/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2/parenrightBig
=( 0 ,0 ,0 )
13./integraldisplay4
1/radicalbig
1+4
9t−2/3+4
25t−6/5dt
15. (a)v=(−2tsin(t2), 2tcos(t2), 0); s=2t
(b)/parenleftbigg
1
2,−√
3
2,0/parenrightbigg
(c)√
5π/3
(d)v=2√
5π/3(√
3/2, 1/2, 0); s=2√
5π/3
(e)/parenleftBig3
2+5π√
3/parenrightBig/slashBig√
5π
17. x=1+t,y=−1
2+t
2,z=−2
3+t
3
19. Compute c/prime(t) and check that it equals F(c(t)).
21. 9;0
23. 3;−i−j−k
25. 0;−i−j−k
27.∇f=(yexy−ysinxy,xexy−xsinxy, 0); verify that
∇×∇ f=0 in this case.

<<<PAGE 544>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 517
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 517
29.∇f=(2xex2+y2sinxy2,2xysinxy2, 0); check that
∇×∇ f=0 from this.
31. (a) ( yz2,xz2,2xyz);
(b) ( z−y,0 ,−x)
(c) (2 xyz3−3xy2z2,2x2y2z−y2z3,y2z3−2x2yz2)
33. divF=0; curl F=
(0, 0, 2( x2+y2)f/prime(x2+y2)+2f(x2+y2))
35. (a) A cone about i/primemaking an angle of π/3 with i/prime.
(b)∇g=(3x2,5z,5y+2z)
37. (a) [∂P/∂x)2+(∂P/∂y)2]1/2
(b) A small packet of air would obey F=ma.
(c)
HL
EN
GWind direction
(d)
HL
WS
GWind direction
39. (a)/radicalbig
R2+ρ2
ρ(z0−z1)
(b)/radicalbigg
2(R2+ρ2)z0
gρ2
41. 680 miles per hour
Chapter 5
Section 5.1
1.(a) 1
(b) 2(c) ln 128 +ln√
2
(d)1
2ln 2=ln√
2
3.(a)13
15(b)π+1
2
(c) 1 (d) log 2 −1
2
5.To show that the volumes of the two cylinders are equal,
show that their area functions are equal.
7.2r3(tanθ)/3
9.26
9
11. (2/π)(e2+1)
13.35795
8
15.196
15
Section 5.2
1.(a)7
12(b)e−2
(c)1
9sin 1 (d) 2 ln 4 −2
3.0
5.
z
y
x5
7.1/4

<<<PAGE 545>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 518
518 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
9.Use Fubini’ s theorem to write
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
R[f(x)g(y)]dx dy =/integraldisplayd
cg(y)/bracketleftBig/integraldisplayb
af(x)dx/bracketrightBig
dy,
and notice that/integraltextb
af(x)dxis a constant and so may be
pulled out.
11. 11/6
13. By Exercise 2(a), we have:
f(m,n)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Rxmyndx dy =/parenleftbigg
1
m+1/parenrightbigg/parenleftbigg
1
n+1/parenrightbigg
.
Then, as m,n→∞ , we see that lim f(m,n)=0.
15. Because/integraltext1
0dy=/integraltext1
02ydy=1, we have/integraltext1
0[/integraltext1
0f(x,y)dy]dx=1. In any partition of
R=[0, 1]×[0, 1], each rectangle Rjkcontains points
c(1)
jkwith xrational and c(2)
jkwith xirrational. If in the
regular partition of order n, we choose cjk=c(1)
jkin
those rectangles with 0 ≤y≤1
2andcjk=c(2)
jkwhen
y>1
2, the approximating sums are the same as those for
g(x,y)=/braceleftbigg10 ≤y≤1
2
2y1
2<y<1.
Because gis integrable, the approximating sums must
converge to/integraltext
RgdA=7/8. However, if we had picked
allcij=c(1)
jk, all approximating sums would have the
value 1.
17. Fubini’ s theorem does not apply because the integrand is
not continuous nor bounded at (0, 0).
Section 5.3
1.(a) (iii) (b) (iv)
(c) (ii) (d) (i)
3.(a) 1/3, both.
(b) 5/2, both.
(c) ( e2−1)/4, both.
(d) 1/35, both.
5.A=/integraltextr
−r/integraltext√
r2−x2
−√
r2−x2dy dx =2/integraltextr
−r√
r2−x2dx=
r2[arcsin 1 −arcsin( −1)]=πr2
7.28,000 ft3
9.011. y-simple; π/2.
13.2
3
15. 50π
17.π/24
19. Compute the integral with respect to yﬁrst. Split that
into integrals over [−φ (x), 0] and [0, φ(x)] and change
variables in the ﬁrst integral, or use symmetry.
21. Let{Rij}be a partition of a rectangle Rcontaining D
and let fb e1o n D. Thus, f∗i s1o n Da n d0o n R\D.
Letcjk∈R\DifRijis not wholly contained in D. The
approximating Riemann sum is the sum of the areas of
those rectangles of the partition that are contained in D.
Section 5.4
1.(a)/integraltext4
0/integraltext2x
0dydx
(b)/integraltext3
0/integraltext9
y2dx dy
(c)/integraltext4
−4/integraltext√
16−x2
0dydx
(d)/integraltext1
0/integraltextarcsin y
π
2dx dy
3.(a) 1/8 (b) π/4 (c) 17/12
(d)G(b)−G(a), where dG/dy=F(y,y)−F(a,y)
and∂F/∂x=f(x,y).
5.1
3(e−1)
7.Note that the maximum value of fonDiseand the
minimum value of fonDis 1/e . Use the ideas in the
proof of Theorem 4 to show that
1
e≤1
4π2/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
f(x,y)dA≤e.
9.The smallest value of f(x,y)=1/(x2+y2+1) on D
is1
6, at (1, 2), and so
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy ≥1
6·area D=1.
The largest value is 1, at (0, 0), and so
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy ≤1·area D=6.
11.4
3πabc

<<<PAGE 546>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 519
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 519
13.π(20√
10−52)/3
15.√
3/4
17. Dlooks like a slice of pie.
/integraldisplay1
0/bracketleftBig/integraldisplayx
0f(x,y)dy/bracketrightBig
dx+/integraldisplay√
2
1/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay√
2−x2
0f(x,y)dy/bracketrightbigg
dx
19. Use the chain rule and the fundamental theorem of
calculus.
Section 5.5
1.(a) (ii) (b) (i) (c) (iii) (d) (iv)
3.1/3
5.10
7.x2+y2≤z≤/radicalbig
x2+y2,
−/radicalbig
1−y2≤x≤/radicalbig
1−y2,−1≤y≤1
9.0≤z≤/radicalbig
1−x2−y2,
−/radicalbig
1−y2≤x≤/radicalbig
1−y2,−1≤y≤1
11. 50π/√
6
13. 1/2
15. 0
17. a5/20
19. 0
21. 3/10
23. 1/6
25./integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2/integraldisplay1
√
x2+y2f(x,y,z)dz dy dx
27./integraldisplay1
−1/integraldisplay√
1−x2
−√
1−x2/integraldisplay√
4−x2−y2
0f(x,y,z)dz dy dx
29./integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/integraldisplayf(x,y)
0dz dx dy =/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy
31. LetM/epsilon1andm/epsilon1be the maximum and minimum of fon
B/epsilon1. Then we have the inequality m/epsilon1vol (B/epsilon1)≤/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
B/epsilon1fd V≤M/epsilon1vol (B/epsilon1). Divide by vol ( B/epsilon1), let/epsilon1→0 and
use continuity of f.Review Exercises for Chapter 5
1.81/2
3.1
4e2−e+9
4
5.81/2
7.1
4e2−e+9
4
9.7/60
11. 1/2
13. In the notation of Figure 5.3.1,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Ddx dy=/integraldisplayb
a[φ2(x)−φ1(x)]dx.
15. (a) 0 (b) π/24 (c) 0
17. y-simple; 2π +π2.
3
1y
x
19. x-simple; 73/3.
1
9
−1−1xy
4
21. y-simple; 33/140.
y
x
1

<<<PAGE 547>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 520
520 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
23. y-simple; 71/420.
1
1y
xy = x
y = x2
0
25. 1/3
27. 19/3
29. 7/12
11
xy
31. The function f(x,y)=x2+y2+1 lies between 1 and
22+1=5o n D, and so the integral lies between these
values times 4π , the area of D.
33. Interchange the order of integration (the reader should
draw a sketch in the ( u,t) plane):
/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayt
0F(u)du dt=/integraldisplayx
0/integraldisplayx
uF(u)dt du
=/integraldisplayx
0(x−u)F(u)du.
35.π/12
37. The region is the shaded region Win the ﬁgure.
(1, 0, 1)(0, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(0, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 0)(1, 0, 0)
xyz
DWThe integral in the order dy dx dz , for example, is
/integraldisplay1
0/integraldisplay1
z/integraldisplay1
1−xf(x,y,z)dy dx dz .
Chapter 6
Section 6.1
1.(a) One-to-one, Onto.
(b) Neither.
(c) One-to-one, Onto.
(d) Neither.
3.An appropriate linear function Tis given by
T(x,y)=/parenleftbig
x,−x
3+2y
3/parenrightbig
, or in matrix form, as:
T(v)=Av=/parenleftbigg
10
−1
32
3/parenrightbigg
v.
5.S=the unit disc minus its center.
7.D=[0, 3]×[0, 1]; yes.
9.The image is the triangle with vertices (0, 0), (0, 1), and(1, 1). Tis not one-to-one, but becomes so if we
eliminate the portion x
∗=0.
11. Dis the set of ( x,y,z) with x2+y2+z2≤1 (the
unit ball). Tis not one-to-one, but is one-to-one on
(0, 1]×(0,π)×(0, 2π].
13. Showing that Tis onto is equivalent in the 2 ×2 case to
showing that the system ax+by=e,cx+dy=fcan
always be solved for xandy, where
A=/bracketleftbiggab
cd/bracketrightbigg
.
When you do this by elimination or by Cramer’ s rule, thequantity by which you must divide is det A. Thus, if det
A/negationslash=0, the equations can always be solved.
15. Suppose that T(x)=T(y). Then
Ax+v=Ay+v
Ax=Ay.
By Exercise 12, this implies that x=yif and only if
detA/negationslash=0.
Showing that T(x)=Ax+vis equivalent to showing
that
T(x)=Ax+v=y
or
Ax=y−v

<<<PAGE 548>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 521
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 521
has a solution for any choice of y∈R2. This happens if
and only if det A/negationslash=0, by Exercise 13. Finally, verifying
thatTtakes parallelograms to parallelograms follows
exactly as in Exericse 14, by simply applying Tto both
sides of the given equation and simplifying.
17. We can show that Tis not globally one-to-one by
example. A simple choice is to compare the point (1, 0)
with (−1, 0), which correspond to the polar coordinates
r=1,θ=0 and r=1,θ=π, respectively. We note:
T(1 cos 0, 1 sin 0) =(12cos 0, 12sin 0)
=(12cos 2π ,12sin 2π )=T(1 cos π, 1 sin π).
Since T(1, 0) =T(−1, 0), Tis not one-to-one.
Section 6.2
1.A good substitution might be u=3x+2y,v=x−y,
which has Jacobian∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)=1
5.
3.π
2(e−1)
5.Dis the region 0 ≤x≤4,1
2x+3≤y≤1
2x+6.
(a) 140 (b) −42
7.D∗is the region 0 ≤u≤1, 0≤v≤2;
2
3(9−2√
2−3√
3).
9.π
11.64π
5
13. 3π/2
15.5π
2(e4−1)
17. 2a2
19.21
2/parenleftBig
e−1
e/parenrightBig
21.100π
3
23. 4π[√
3/2−log (1 +√
3)+log√
2]
25. 4πlog(a/b)
27. 0
29. 2π[(b2+1)e−b2−(a2+1)e−a2]31. 24
33. (a)4
3πabc (b)4
5πabc
35. (a) Check that if T(u1,v1)=T(u2,v2), then u1=u2
andv1=v2.
(b) 160/3
37.4
9a2/3/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D∗[f((au2)1/3,(av2)1/3)u−1/3v−1/3]du dv
Section 6.3
1./parenleftbigg
1,1
3a/parenrightbigg
3.[π2−sin(π2)]/π3
5./parenleftbigg
11
18,65
126/parenrightbigg
7.$503.64
9.(a)δ, where δis the (constant) mass density.
(b) 37/12
11. 500π/parenleftbigg
10−1
3/parenrightbigg
13./parenleftbigg
1
2,1
2,1
2/parenrightbigg
15. 1/4
17. Letting δbe density, the moment of inertia is
δ/integraldisplayk
0/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayasecφ
0(ρ4sin3φ)dρdθdφ.
19. (1.00×108)m
21. (a) The only plane of symmetry for the body of an
automobile is the one dividing the left and rightsides of the car.
(b)¯z·/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wδ(x,y,z)dx dy dz is the zcoordinate
of the center of mass times the mass of W.
Rearrangement of the formula for ¯zgives the ﬁrst
line of the equation. The next step is justiﬁed by theadditivity property of integrals. By symmetry, wecan replace zby−zand integrate in the region
above the xyplane. Finally, we can factor the minus
sign outside the second integral, and becauseδ(x,y,z)=δ(u,v,−w), we are subtracting the
second integral from itself. Thus, the answer is 0.

<<<PAGE 549>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 522
522 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
(c) In part (b), we showed that ¯ztimes the mass of Wis
0. Because the mass must be positive, ¯zmust be 0.
(d) By part (c), the center of mass must lie in both
planes.
23. V=−(4.71×1019)Gm/R≈−(3.04×109)m/R,
where mis the mass of a test particle at distance Rfrom
the planet’ s center.
25. In the x,y-plane, the circle Dgiven by
(x−a)2+y2=r2has center (and center of mass)
(a, 0). Also, the area of the circle has area A(D)=πr2.
Therefore, by Exercise 24 we have:
V ol(W)=2π(a)(πr2).
Section 6.4
1.4
3.3/16
5.1
(1−α)(1−β)
7.(a) 3π
(b)λ<1
9.Integration of/integraltext/integraltext
e−xydx dy with respect to xﬁrst and
then ygives log 2. Reversing the order gives the integral
on the left side of the equality stated in the exercise.
11. Integrate over [ε ,1 ]×[ε, 1] and let ε→0 to show the
improper integral exists and equals 2 log 2.
13.2π
9[(1+a3)3/2−a9/2−1]
15. Use the fact that
sin2(x−y)/radicalbig
1−x2−y2≤1/radicalbig
1−x2−y2.
17. Use the fact that ex2+y2/(x−y)≥1/(x−y) on the
given region.
19. Each integral equals 1/4, and Theorem 3 (Fubini’ s
theorem) does apply.
21. Here, we let D1=[0, 1]×[0, 1], and D2=[1,∞]×
[1,∞], as in the hint. On D1, letg(x,y)=1
xαyβand
f(x,y)=1
xαyβ+xγyρ. Since x,y≥0, it is clear that
0≤f(x,y)≤g(x,y) for all points in D1. Therefore,
since/integraltext/integraltext
D1g(x,y)dx dy exists by Exercise 5, we know
that/integraltext/integraltext
D1f(x,y)dx dy must also exist.Y ou may use a similar argument for the region D2by
choosing a different g(x,y) and applying the result of
Exercise 6. Once/integraltext/integraltext
f(x,y)dx dy exists over both the
regions D1andD2, it will exist also over their union
D=D1∪D2.
Review Exercises for Chapter 6
1.(a)T/parenleftbigu
v/parenrightbig
=/parenleftbig2
012/parenrightbig/parenleftbigu
v/parenrightbig
=/parenleftbig2u+v
2v/parenrightbig
=/parenleftbigx
y/parenrightbig
(b)/integraltext/integraltext
Pf(x,y)dx dy =4/integraltext/integraltext
Sf(2u+v,2v)du dv
3.3 (Use the change of variables u=x2−y2,v=xy.)
5.1
3π(4√
2−7
2)
7.(5π/2)√
15
9.abc/6
11. Cut with the planes x+y+z=3/radicalbig
k/n,
1≤k≤n−1,kan integer.
13. (25+10√
5)π/3
15. (e−e−1)/4 (Use the change of variables
u=y−x,v=y+x.)
17. (9.92×106)πgrams
19. (a) 32
(b) This occurs at the point of the unit sphere
x2+y2+z2=1 inscribed in the cube.
21. ( 0 ,0 ,3 a4/8)
23. 4πln(a/b)
25.π/2
27. (a) 9/2 (b) 64π
29. Work the integral with respect to yﬁrst on the region
Dε,L={(x,y)|ε≤x≤L,0≤y≤x}to obtain
Iε,L=/integraltext/integraltext
Dε,Lfd x d y =/integraltextL
εx−3/2(1−e−x)dx. The
integrand is positive, and so Iε,Lincreases as ε→0 and
L→∞ . Bound 1 −e−xabove by xfor 0<x<1 and
by 1 for 1 <x<∞to see that Iε,Lremains bounded
and so must converge. The improper integral does exist.
31. (a) 1/6 (b) 16π/ 3
33. 2π

<<<PAGE 550>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 523
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 523
Chapter 7
Section 7.1
1.γ(t)=/braceleftbigg
(3 cos πt, 3 sin πt),t∈[0, 1]
(6t−9, 0), t∈[1, 2]
3.γ(t)=/braceleftbigg
(t, sinπt),t∈[0, 1]
(2π−πt,0 ) , t∈[1, 2]
5.γ(t)=(3 cos 2π t, 4 sin 2π t,3 ) , t∈[0, 1]
7.γ(t)=(t,t,t3),t∈[−3, 2], or
γ(t)=(5t−3, 5t−3, (5t−3)3),t∈[0, 1]
9./integraldisplay
cf(x,y,z)ds=/integraldisplay
If(x(t),y(t),z(t))/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt
=/integraldisplay1
00·1dt=0
11.(a) 2 (b) 52√
14
13.−1
3(1+1/e2)3/2+1
3(23/2)
15. (a) The path follows the straight line from (0, 0) to
(1, 1) and back to (0, 0) in the xyplane. Over the
path, the graph of fis a straight line from (0, 0, 0)
to (1, 1, 1). The integral is the area of the resulting
triangle covered twice and equals√
2.
(b)s(t)=/braceleftbigg√
2(1−t4) when −1≤t≤0
√
2(1+t4) when 0 <t≤1.
The path is
c(s)=/braceleftbigg
(1−s/√
2)(1, 1) when 0 ≤s≤√
2
(s/(√
2−1))(1, 1) when√
2≤s≤2√
2
and/integraltext
cfd s=√
2.
17. 2a/π
19. (a) [2√
5+log(2+√
5)]/4
(b) (5√
5−1)/[6√
5+3l o g ( 2 +√
5)]
21. Since the graph gis parameterized by γ(t)=(t,g(t)),
we have γ/prime(t)=(1,g/prime(t)), and thus:
/bardblγ/prime(t)/bardbl=/radicalbig
1+(g/prime(t))2.
23. 2
25.π√
2
827.√
2
3t3
0
29. (a)/radicalbigg
2
g
(b) Solving for y,w eh a v e :
y=−/radicalbig
2x−x2+1.
(Note that the negative square root was chosen for
y.) Therefore our formula becomes:
/integraldisplay1
01
−2g(√
2x−x2+1)dx.
Section 7.2
1.−1
3.(a) 3/2 (b) 0 (c) 0 (d) 147
5.9
7.By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality,
|F(c(t))·c/prime(t)|≤/bardbl F(c(t))/bardbl/bardbl c/prime(t)/bardblfor every t. Thus,
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay
cF·ds/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraldisplay
b
aF(c(t))·c/prime(t)dt/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
≤/integraldisplayb
a|F(c(t))·c/prime(t)|dt
≤/integraldisplayb
a/bardblF(c(t))/bardbl/bardbl c/prime(t)/bardbldt
≤M/integraldisplayb
a/bardblc/prime(t)/bardbldt=Ml.
9.3
4−(n−1)/(n+1)
11. 0
13. The length of c.
15. Ifc/prime(t) is never 0, then the unit vector T(t)=
c/prime(t)//bardblc/prime(t)/bardblis a continuous function of tand so is a
smoothly turning tangent to the curve. The answer is no.
17. 7
19. Use the fact that Fis a gradient to show that the work
done is1
R2−1
R1, independent of the path.
21. (a)/bardblc/prime(x)/bardbl
(b) fhas a positive derivative; it is one-to-one and onto
[0,L] by the mean-value and intermediate-value

<<<PAGE 551>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 524
524 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
theorems. It has a differentiable inverse by the
inverse function theorem.
(c)g/prime(s)=1//bardblc/prime(x)/bardbl, where s=f(x).
(d) By the chain rule, b/prime(s)=c/prime(x)·g/prime(s), which has
unit length by part (c).
Section 7.3
1.z=2(y−1)+1
3.18(z−1)−4(y+2)−(x−13)=0
or 18 z−4y−x−13=0.
5.Not regular when u=0.
7.(a) (iii) (b) (i) (c) (ii) (d) (iv)
9.The vector n=(cosvsinu, sinvsinu, cos u)=(x,y,z).
The surface is the unit sphere centered at the origin.
11. n=−(sinv)i−(cosv)k; the surface is a cylinder.
13. (a)x=x0+(y−y0)(∂h/∂y)(y0,z0)+(z−z0)
(∂h/∂z)(y0,z0) describes the plane tangent to
x=h(y,z)a t( x0,y0,z0),x0=h(y0,z0).
(b)y=y0+(x−x0)(∂k/∂x)(x0,z0)+(z−z0)
(∂k/∂z)(x0,z0)
15. z−6x−8y+3=0
17. (a) The surface is a helicoid. It looks like a spiral ramp
winding around the zaxis. (See Figure 7.4.2.) It
winds twice around, since θgoes up to 4π .
(b)n=±(1/√
1+r2)(sinθ,−cosθ,r)
(c)y0x−x0y+(x2
0+y2
0)z=(x2
0+y2
0)z0.
(d) If ( x0,y0,z0)=(r0, cosθ0,r0sinθ0,θ0), then
representing the line segment in the form{(rcosθ
0,rsinθ0,θ0)|0≤r≤1}shows that the
line lies in the surface. Representing the line as{(x
0,ty0,z0)|0≤t≤1/(x2
0+y2
0)}and substituting
into the results of part (c) shows that it lies in thetangent plane at ( x
0,y0,z0).
19. (a) Using cylindrical coordinates leads to the
parametrization
/Phi1(z,θ)=(/radicalbig
25+z2cosθ,/radicalbig
25+z2sinθ,z),
−∞<z<∞,0≤θ≤2π
as one possible solution.
(b)n=(√
25+z2cosθ,√
25+z2sinθ,−z)/√
25+2z2
(c)x0x+y0y=25
(d) Substitute the coordinates along these lines into the
deﬁning equation of the surface and the result ofpart (c).21. (a)u/mapsto→u,v/mapsto→v,u/mapsto→u3, andv/mapsto→v3all map R
ontoR.
(b)Tu×Tv=( 0 ,0 ,1 )f o r /Phi11, and this is never 0.F o r
the surface /Phi12,Tu×Tv=9u2v2(0, 0, 1), and this
is0along the uandvaxes.
(c) We want to show that any two parametrizations of a
surface that are smooth near a point will give thesame tangent plane there. Thus, suppose/Phi1:D⊂R
2→R3and/Psi1:B⊂R2→R3are
parametrized surfaces such that
/Phi1(u0,v0)=(x0,y0,z0)=/Psi1(s0,t0) (i)
and/parenleftbig
T/Phi1
u×T/Phi1v/parenrightbig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(u0,v0)/negationslash=0
and/parenleftbig
T/Psi1
s×T/Psi1t/parenrightbig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
(s0,t0)/negationslash=0, (ii)
so that /Phi1and/Psi1are smooth and one-to-one in
neighborhoods of ( u0,v0) and ( s0,t0), which we
may as well assume are DandB. Suppose further
that they “describe the same surface,” that is,
/Phi1(D)=/Phi1(B). To see that they give the same
tangent plane at ( x0,y0,z0), show that they have
parallel normal vectors. To do this, show that thereis an open set Cwith ( u
0,v0)∈C⊂Dand a
differentiable map f:C→Bsuch that /Phi1(u,v)=
/Psi1(f(u,v)) for ( u,v)∈C. Once you have done
this, computation shows that the normal vectors arerelated by T
/Phi1
u×T/Phi1v=[∂(s,t)/∂(u,v)]T/Psi1s×T/Psi1t.
To see that there is such an f, notice that since
T/Psi1s×T/Psi1t/negationslash=0, at least one of the 2 ×2
determinants in the cross product is not zero.
Assume, for example, that
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle∂x
∂s∂y
∂s
∂x
∂t∂y
∂t/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
/negationslash=0.
Now use the inverse function theorem to write ( s,t)
as a differentiable function of ( x,y) in some
neighborhood of ( x0,y0).
(d) No.
23. (a) We plug the parametrization into the left hand side
of the equation, and simplify:
(/radicalbig
x2+y2−R)2+z2
=(/radicalbig
((R+rcosu) cosv)2+((R+rcosu) sinv)2
−R)2+(rsinu)2
=(/radicalbig
(R+rcosu)2−R)2+r2sin2u
=(R+rcosu−R)2+r2sin2u
=(rcosu)2+r2sin2u
=r2.

<<<PAGE 552>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 525
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 525
(b) We calculate the associated normal element
Tu×Tv=(−rcosucosv(R+rcosu),
−rcosusinv(R+rcosu),
−rsinu(R+rcosu))
and ﬁnd that it is not equal to the zero vector for any
choice of ( u,v).
Section 7.4
1.4π
3.3
2π[√
2+log (1 +√
2)]
5.(a) ( eusinv,−eucosv,eu)
(b)x+z=π
2
(c)π√
2(e−1)
7.√
21
2
9.1
3π(6√
6−8)
11. The integral for the volume converges, whereas that forthe area diverges.
13. A(E)=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0/radicalbig
a2b2sin2φcos2φ+b2c2sin4φcos2θ+a2c2sin4φsin2θdφdθ
15. (π/6)(5√
5−1)
17. (π/2)√
6
19. 4√
5; for ﬁxed θ,(x,y,z) moves along the horizontal
line segment y=2x,z=θfrom the zaxis out to a
radius of√
5|cosθ|into quadrant 1 if cos θ> 0 and into
quadrant 3 if cos θ< 0.
xyz
π y = 2x2π
21. (π+2)/(π−2)23.π(a+b)√
1+m2(b−a)
25.4
15(9√
3−8√
2+1)
27. With f(x,y)=/radicalbig
R2−x2−y2, (4) becomes
A(S/prime)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
D/radicalbigg
x2+y2
R2−x2−y2+1dx dy
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
DR/radicalbig
R2−x2−y2dx dy,
where Dis the disc of radius R. Evaluate using polar
coordinates, noting it is improper at the boundary, to get2πR
2.
Section 7.5
1.512
3√
5
3.11√
14
5.(a) For this surface parameterized by /Phi1,w eh a v e :
x2−y2=(u+v)2−(u−v)2
=(u2+2uv+v2)−(u2−2uv+v2)
=4uv
=4z.
(b) 0
7.3√
2+5
24
9.πa3
11. (a)√
2πR2(b) 2π R2
13.π
4/parenleftBig5√
5
3+1
15/parenrightBig
15. 16πR3/3
17. (a) The sphere looks the same from all three axes, so
these three integrals should be the same quantitywith different labels on the axes.
(b) 4π R
4/3
(c) 4π R4/3
19. 8
21. (R/2,R/2,R/2)

<<<PAGE 553>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 526
526 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
23. (a) Directly compute the vector cross product Tu×Tv
and then calculate its length and compare your
answer to the left-hand side.
(b) In this case, F=0, so A(s)=/integraltext/integraltext
D√
EG du d v.
(c) 4π a2
25. Leta=∂x/∂u,b=∂y/∂u,c=∂x/∂v, and
d=∂y/∂v. The conditions (a) and (b) in Exercise 16
are then a2+b2=c2+d2andac+bd=0. Show that
a/negationslash=0 and, by a normalization argument, show that you
can assume a=1. Now calculate further.
27. 2a2
Section 7.6
1.5π
2
3.(a) 18π (b) 36π
5.±48π (the sign depends on orientation).
7.4π
9.2π(or−2π , if you choose a different orientation).
11. 2π
13. 12π/ 5
15. With the usual spherical coordinate parametrization,T
θ×Tφ=− sinφr(see Example 1). Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
F·(Tφ×Tθ)dφdθ
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
(F·r) sinφdφdθ
=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0Frsinφdφdθ
and
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S=/integraldisplay2π
0/integraldisplayπ
0fsinφdφdθ.
17. For a cylinder of radius R=1 and normal component Fr,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplayb
a/integraldisplay2π
0Frdθdz.
19. 2π/3
21.2
5a3bcπSection 7.7
1.Apply formula (3) of this section and simplify; H=0
andK=−b2/(u2+b2)2.
3.Apply formula (3) of this section and simplify.
5.K=−4a6b6
(a4b4+4b4u2+4a4v2)2
7.Using the standard parametrization of the ellipsoid/Phi1(u,v)=(acosusinv,asinusinv,ccosv),u∈
[0, 2π ],v∈[0,π], from Exercise 6 you should have
found that the Gauss curvature of the ellipsoid is:
K=a
4c2
(a4cos2v+a2c2cos2usin2v+a2c2sin2usin2v)2
=a4c2
(a4cos2v+a2c2sin2v)2.
Then, the area area element for the ellipsoid is given as:
Tu×Tv=sinv/radicalbig
a4cos2v+a2c2sin2v.
This yields the integral:
/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0a4c2sinv
(a4cos2v+a2c2sin2v)3
2du dv.
To evaluate this integral, we try to get it into one of thestandard forms found in the tables contained in the text:
/integraldisplayπ
0/integraldisplay2π
0a4c2sinv
(a4cos2v+a2c2sin2v)3
2du dv
=2π/integraldisplayπ
0a4c2sinv
a3(a2cos2v+c2sin2v)3
2dv
=2πac2/integraldisplayπ
0sinv
(a2cos2v+c2(1−cos2v)3
2dv
=2πac2/integraldisplayπ
0sinv
((a2−c2) cos2v+c2)3
2dv
=2πac2
(a2−c2)3
2/integraldisplayπ
0sinv
/parenleftBig
cos2v+c2
a2−c2/parenrightBig3
2dv.
At this point, make the substitution w=cosv:
2πac2
(a2−c2)3
2/integraldisplayπ
0sinv
/parenleftBig
cos2v+c2
a2−c2/parenrightBig3
2dv
=2πac2
(a2−c2)3
2/integraldisplay1
−11
/parenleftbigg
(w)2+/parenleftBig/radicalBig
c2
a2−c2/parenrightBig2/parenrightbigg3
2dw.

<<<PAGE 554>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 527
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 527
Finally, use the trigonometric substitution
w=/radicalBig
c2
a2−c2tanθto ﬁnish the integration. The ﬁnal
solution will simplify to 4π , verifying the
Gauss–Bonnet theorem.
9.Apply formula (3) of this section and simplify.
11. Apply formula (2) of this section and simplify;
K=−h/prime/prime/[(1+(h/prime)2)2h].
Review Exercises for Chapter 7
1.(a) 3√
2(1−e6π)/13
(b)−π√
2/2
(c) (236, 158√
26−8)/35·(25)3
(d) 8√
2/189
3.(a)2
π+1 (b) −1/2
5.2a3
7.(a) A sphere of radius 5 centered at (2, 3, 0);
/Phi1(θ,φ)=(2+5 cosθsinφ,3+5 sinθsinφ,5
cosφ); 0≤θ≤2π;0≤φ≤π.
(b) An ellipsoid with center at (2, 0, 0);
/Phi1(θ,φ)=(2+(1/√
2)3 cos θsinφ,
3 sinθsinφ, 3 cos φ); 0≤θ≤2π,0≤φ≤π.
(c) An elliptic hyperboloid of one sheet;
/Phi1(θ,z)=/parenleftBig1
2/radicalbig
8+2z2cosθ,1
3/radicalbig
8+2z2sinθ,z/parenrightBig
;
0≤θ≤2π,−∞<z<∞.
9.A(/Phi1)=1
2/integraltext2π
0√
3 cos2θ+5dθ;/Phi1describes the upper
nappe of a cone with elliptical horizontal cross sections.
11. 11√
3/6
13.√
2/3
15. 5√
5/6
17. (a) ( eycosπz,xeycosπz,−πxeysinπz)
(b) 0
19.1
2(e2+1)
21. n=(1/√
5)(−1, 0, 2), 2 z−x=1
23. 0
25. IfF=∇φ, then∇× F=0(at least if φis of class C2;
see Theorem 1, Section 4.4). Theorem 3 of Section 7.2
shows that/integraltext
c∇φ·ds=0 because cis a closed curve.27. (a) 24π (b) 24π (c) 60π
29. (a) [/radicalbig
R2+p2(z0−z1)]/p
(b)/radicalbig
2z0(R2+p2)/p2g
Chapter 8
Section 8.1
1.γ(t)=⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩(2t−1,−t+1), t∈[0, 1]
(2t−1, 2t−2), t∈[1, 2]
(−4t+11,−t+4),t∈[2, 3]
3.8
5.8
7.61
9.−8
11. (a) 0
(b)−πR2
(c) 0
(d)−πR2
13. 3πa2
15. 3π/2
17. 3π(b2−a2)/2
19. (a) Both sides are 2π . (b) 0
21. 0
23.πab
25. A horizontal line segment divides the region into three
regions of which Green’ s theorem applies; now useExercise 16 or the technique in Figure 8.1.5.
27. 9π/8
29. Ifε>0, there is a δ>0 such that |u(q)−u(p)|<ε
whenever /bardblp−q/bardbl=ρ<δ . Parametrize ∂Bρ(p)b y
q(θ)=p+ρ(cosθ, sinθ). Then
|I(ρ)−2πu(p)|≤/integraldisplay2π
0|u(q(θ))−u(p)|dθ≤2π.

<<<PAGE 555>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 528
528 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
31. Ifp=(p1,p2), parametrize ∂Bρ(p)b y
ρ/mapsto→(p1+ρcosθ,p2+ρsinθ), then
I(ρ)=/integraltext2π
0u(p1+ρcosθ,p2+ρsinθ)dθ.
Differentiation under the integral sign gives
dI
dρ=/integraldisplay2π
0∇u·(cosθ, sinθ)dθ=/integraldisplay2π
0∇u·ndθ
=1
ρ/integraldisplay
∂Bρ∂u
∂nds=1
ρ/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Bρ∇2ud A
(the last equality uses Exercise 30).
33. Using Exercise 32,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
BRud A=/integraldisplayR
0/integraldisplay2π
0u[p+ρ(cosθ, sinθ)]ρdθdρ
=/integraldisplayR
0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay
∂Bρud s/parenrightbigg
dρ
=/integraldisplayR
02πρu(p)dρ=πR2u(p).
35. Suppose uis subharmonic. We establish the assertions
corresponding to Exercise 34(a) and (b). The argument
for superharmonic functions is similar, with inequalitiesreversed.
Suppose ∇
2u≥0 and u(p)≥u(q) for all qin
BR(p). By Exercise 31, I/prime(ρ)≥0 for 0 <ρ≤R, and
so Exercise 32 shows that 2π u(p)≤I(ρ)≤I(R) for
0<ρ≤R.I fu (q)<u(p) for some q=p+
ρ(cosθ0, sinθ0)∈BR(p), then, by continuity, there is
an arc [θ 0−δ,θ0+δ]o n∂ Bρ(p) where u<u(p)−d
for some d>0. This would mean that
2πu(p)≤I(ρ)=1
ρ/integraldisplay2π
0u[p+ρ(cosθ, sinθ)]ρdθ
≤(2π−2δ)u(p)+2δ[u(p)−d]≤2πu(p)−2δd.
This contradiction shows that we must have u(q)=u(p)
for every qinBB(p).
If the maximum at pis absolute for D, the last
paragraph shows that u(x)=u(p) for all xin some disc
around p.I fc: [0, 1) →Dis a path from ptoq, then
u(c(t))=u(p) for all tin some interval [0, b). Let b0be
the largest b∈[0, 1] such that u(c(t))=u(p) for all
t∈[0,b). (Strictly speaking, this requires the notion of
the least upper bound from a good calculus text.)Because uis continuous, u(c(b
0))=u(p). If b0/negationslash=1,
then the last paragraph would apply at c(b0) and uis
constantly equal to u(p) on a disc around c(b0). In
particular, there is a δ>0 such that u(c(t))=u(c(b0))=
u(p) on [0, b0+δ). This contradicts the maximality of
b0, so we must have b0=1. That is, c(q)=c(p).
Because qwas an arbitrary point in D,uis constant
onD.37. Assume ∇2u1=0 and∇2u2=0 are two solutions. Let
φ=u1−u2. Then ∇2φ=0 andφ(x)=0 for all
x∈∂D. Consider the integral/integraltext/integraltext
Dφ∇2φdA=
−/integraltext/integraltext
D∇φ·∇φdA. Thus,/integraltext/integraltext
D∇φ·∇φdA=0, which
implies that ∇φ=0, and so φis a constant function and
hence must be identically zero.
Section 8.2
1.γ(t)=⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩(3t−1, 1,−6t+4), t∈[0, 1]
(2, 2t−1,−6t+4), t∈[1, 2]
(−3t+8, 3, 10t −28), t∈[2, 3]
(−1,−2t+9, 2t−4),t∈[3, 4]
/Phi1(u,v)=(u,v,5−2u−3v),u∈[−1, 2], v∈[1, 3]
3.0 (Note: Fis a gradient ﬁeld.)
5.π
7.52
9.−2π
11. Each integral in Stokes’ theorem is zero.
13. 0
15.−4π/√
3
17. 0
19.±2π
21. Using Faraday’ s law,/integraltext/integraltext
S[∇× E+∂H/∂t]·dS=0 for
any surface S. If the integrand were a nonzero vector at
some point, then by continuity the integral over some
small disc centered at that point and lying perpendicularto that vector would be nonzero.
23. The orientations of ∂S1=∂S2must agree.
25. Suppose Cis a closed loop on the surface drawn so that
it divides the surface into two pieces, S1andS2. For the
surface of a doughnut (torus) you must use two closedloops; can you see why? Then Cbounds both S
1andS2,
but with positive orientation with respect to one andnegative with respect to the other. Therefore,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S∇× F·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1∇× F·dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2∇× F·dS
=/integraldisplay
CF·ds−/integraldisplay
CF·ds=0.

<<<PAGE 556>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 529
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 529
27. (a) If C=∂S,/integraltext
Cv·ds=/integraltext/integraltext
S(∇× v)·dS=/integraltext/integraltext
S0·ds=0.
(b)/integraltext
Cv·ds=/integraltextb
av·c/prime(t)dt=v·/integraltextb
ac/prime(t)dt=
v·(c(b)−c(a)), where c:[a,b]→R3is a
parametrization of C. (The vector integral is the
vector whose components are the integrals of the
component functions.) If Cis closed, the last
expression is 0.
29. Both integrals give π/4.
31. (a) 0 (b) π (c)π
33.−20π (or 20π if the opposite orientation is used).
35. One possible answer: The M¨ obius curve Cis also the
boundary of an oriented surface ˜S; the equation in
Faraday’ s law isvalid for this new surface.
Section 8.3
1.(a) f=x2/2+y2/2+C
(b)Fis not a gradient ﬁeld.
(c) f=1
3x3+xy2+C
3.(a) There exists such a G, but no such g.
(b) There exists such a g, but no such G.
(c) There exists such a g, but no such G.
(d) Neither function exists.
5.IfF=∇ f=∇gandCis a curve from vtow, then
(f−g)(w)−(f−g)(v)=/integraltext
C∇(f−g)·ds=0 and
sof−gis constant.
7.x2yz−cosx+C
9.Y es, it is the gradient of g(x,y)=F(x)+F(y), where
F/prime(x)=f(x).
11. No;∇× F=(0, 0,−x)/negationslash=0.
13. esin 1+1
3e3−1
3
15. 3.5×1029ergs
17. (a) f(x,y,z)=x2yz
(b) Not a gradient ﬁeld.
(c) Not a gradient ﬁeld.
(d) f(x,y,z)=x2cosy
19. Use Theorem 7 in each case.
(a)−3/2 (b) −1
(c) cos( e2)−cos(1/e )/e21. (a) No.
(b)/parenleftbigg
1
2z2,xy−z,x2y/parenrightbigg
or
/parenleftbigg
1
2z2−2xyz−1
2y2,−x2z−z,0/parenrightbigg
.
23.1
3(z3i+x3j+y3k)
25. (−zsiny+ysinx,xzcosy, 0) (Other answers are
possible.)
27. (a)∇× F=( 0 ,0 ,2 ) /negationslash=0
(b) Let c(t) be the path of an object in the ﬂuid. Then
F(c(t))=c/prime(t). Let c(t)=(x(t),y(t),z(t)). Then
x/prime=− y,y/prime=x, and z/prime=0, and so zis constant
and the motion is parallel to the xyplane. Also,
x/prime/prime+x=0,y/prime/prime+y=0. Thus, x=Acost+Bsint
andy=Ccost+Dsint. Substituting these values
inx/prime=− y,y/prime=x,w eg e t C=− B,D=A,s o
thatx2+y2=A2+B2and we have a circle.
(c) Counterclockwise.
29. (a) F=−GmM
(x2+y2+z2)3/2(x,y,z);
∇·F=− GmM/bracketleftbigg
x2+y2+z2−3x2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2
+x2+y2+z2−3y2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2+x2+y2+z2−3z2
(x2+y2+z2)5/2/bracketrightbigg
=0
(b) Let Sbe the unit sphere, S1the upper hemisphere,
S2the lower hemisphere, and Cthe unit circle. If
F=∇× G, then
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S1F·dS+/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
S2F·dS
=/integraldisplay
CG·ds−/integraldisplay
CG·ds=0.
But/integraltext/integraltext
SF·dS=−GmM/integraltext/integraltext
S(r//bardblr/bardbl3)·ndS=
−4π GmM , because /bardblr/bardbl=1 and r=nonS. Thus,
F=∇× Gis impossible. This does not contradict
Theorem 8 because Fis not smooth at the origin.
Section 8.4
1.3
3.4πr3
5.4π
7.3

<<<PAGE 557>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 530
530 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
9.(a) 0
(b) 4/15
(c)−4/15
11. 6
13.7
10
15. 1
17. Apply the divergence theorem to fFusing
∇·(fF)=∇ f·F+f∇·F.
19. IfF=r/r2, then∇·F=1/r2. If (0, 0, 0) /negationslash∈/Omega1, the
result follows from Gauss’ theorem. If (0, 0, 0) ∈/Omega1,w e
compute the integral by deleting a small ball
Bε={(x,y,z)|(x2+y2+z2)1/2<ε}around the
origin and then letting ε→0:
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Omega11
r2dV=limit
ε→0/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Omega1\Bε1
r2dV=limit
ε→0/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂(/Omega1\Bε)r·n
r2dS
=limit
ε→0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂/Omega1r·n
r2dS−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Bεr·n
r2dS/parenrightbigg
=limit
ε→0/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂/Omega1r·n
r2dS−4πε/parenrightbigg
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂/Omega1r·n
r2dS.
The integral over ∂Bεis obtained from Theorem 10
(Gauss’ law), because r=εeverywhere on Bε.
21. Use the vector identity for div( fF) and the divergence
theorem for part (a). Use the vector identity
∇·(f∇g−g∇f)=f∇2g−g∇2ffor part (b).
23. (a) If φ(p)=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Wρ(q)/(4π/bardblp−q/bardbl)dV(q), then
∇φ(p)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W[ρ(q)/4π]∇p(1//bardblp−q/bardbl)dV(q)
=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W[ρ(q)/4π][(p−q)//bardblp−q/bardbl3]dV(q),
where ∇pmeans the gradient with respect to the
coordinates of pand the integral is the vector whose
components are the three component integrals. If p
varies in V∪∂Vandnis the outward unit normal
to∂V, we can take the inner product using these
components and collect the pieces as
∇φ(p)·n=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wρ(q)
4π1
/bardblp−q/bardbl3(p−q)·ndV(q).Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V∇φ(p)·ndV(p)=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V/parenleftbigg/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wρ(q)
4π1
/bardblp−q/bardbl3(p−q)·ndq/parenrightbigg
dV(p).
There are essentially ﬁve variables of integration
here, three placing qinWand two placing pon∂V.
Use Fubini’ s theorem to obtain
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V∇φ·n·dS
=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wρ(q)
4π/bracketleftbigg/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V(p−q)·n
/bardblp−q/bardbl3dS(p)/bracketrightbigg
dV(q).
IfVis a symmetric elementary region, Theorem 10
says that the inner integral is 4π ifq∈Va n d0i f
q/negationslash∈V. Thus,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V∇φ·ndS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
W∩Vρ(q)dV(q).
Because ρ=0 outside W,
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂V∇φ·ndS=−/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Vρ(q)dV(q).
IfVis not a symmetric elementary region,
subdivide it into a sum of such regions. Theequation holds on each piece, and, upon addingthem together, the boundary integrals alongappropriately oriented interior boundaries cancel,leaving the desired result.
(b) By Theorem 9,
/integraltext/integraltext
∂V∇φ·dS=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
V∇2φdV, and
so/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
V∇2φdV=−/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
VρdV. Because both ρ
and∇2φare continuous and this holds for
arbitrarily small regions, we must have ∇2φ=−ρ.
25. If the charge Qis spread evenly over the sphere Sof
radius Rcentered at the origin, the density of charge per
unit area must be Q/4πR2.I fp is a point not on Sand
q∈S, then the contribution to the electric ﬁeld at pdue
to charge near qis directed along the vector p−q.
Because the charge is evenly distributed, the tangentialcomponent of this contribution will be canceled by thatfrom a symmetric point on the other side of the sphere atthe same distance from p. (Draw the picture.) The total
resulting ﬁeld must be radial. Because Slooks the same
from any point at a distance /bardblp/bardblfrom the origin, the
ﬁeld must depend only on radius and be of the formE=f(r)r.

<<<PAGE 558>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 531
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 531
If we look at the sphere /Sigma1of radius /bardblp/bardbl,w eh a v e
(charge inside /Sigma1)=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Sigma1E·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
/Sigma1f(/bardblp/bardbl) r·ndS
=f(/bardblp/bardbl)/bardblp/bardblarea/Sigma1=4π/bardblp/bardbl3f(/bardblp/bardbl).
If/bardblp/bardbl<R, there is no charge inside /Sigma1;i f/bardblp/bardbl >R, the
charge inside /Sigma1isQ, and so
E(p)=⎧
⎨
⎩1
4πQ
/bardblp/bardbl3p if/bardblp/bardbl>R
0i f/bardblp/bardbl<R.
27. By Theorem 10,/integraltext/integraltext
∂MF·dS=4πfor any surface
enclosing the origin. But if Fwere the curl of some ﬁeld,
then the integral over such a closed surface would have
to be 0.
29. IfS=∂W, then/integraltext/integraltext
Sr·ndS=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
W∇·rdV=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
W3dV=3 volume ( W). For the geometric
explanation, assume (0, 0, 0) ∈Wand consider the
skew cone with its vertex at (0, 0, 0) with base /Delta1Sand
altitude /bardblr/bardbl. Its volume is1
3(/Delta1S)(r·n).
Section 8.5
1.(a) (2 xy2−yx3)dx dy
(b) ( x2+y2)dx dy
(c) ( x2+y2+z2)dx dy dz
(d) ( xy+x2)dx dy dz
(e) dx dy dz
3.(a) 2 xy dx +(x2+3y2)dy
(b)−(x+y2sinx)dx dy
(c)−(2x+y)dx dy
(d) dx dy dz
(e) 2 xd xd y d z
(f) 2 yd yd z −2xd zd x
(g)−4xy
(x2+y2)2dx dy
(h) 2 xy dx dy dz
5.(a) 8π2+44π3
3+11π4
2+3π5
5
(b) 8π2+44π3
3+53π4
2+64π5
5+7π6
3+π7
7
(c) 8π +10π2+9π3+5π4
2+π5
57.(a)
Form 2(αV1+V2)=Form 2(αA1+A2,αB1+B2,αC1+C2)
=(αA1+A2)dy dz+(αB1+B2)dz dx
+(αC1+C2)dx dy
=α(A1dy dz+B1dz dx+C1dx dy)
+(A2dy dz+B2dz dx+C2dx dy)
=αForm 2(V1)+Form 2(V2).
(b)
dω=/parenleftbigg
∂A
∂xdx+∂A
∂ydy+∂A
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧dx+A(dx)2
+/parenleftbigg
∂B
∂xdx+∂B
∂ydy+∂B
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧dy+B(dy)2
+/parenleftbigg
∂C
∂xdx+∂C
∂ydy+∂C
∂zdz/parenrightbigg
∧dz+C(dz)2
But ( dx)2=(dy)2=(dz)2=dx∧dx=dy∧dy=
dz∧dz=0,dy∧dx=− dx∧dy,dz∧dy=
−dy∧dz, and dx∧dz=− dz∧dx. Hence,
dω=/parenleftbigg
∂C
∂y−∂B
∂z/parenrightbigg
dy dz+/parenleftbigg
∂A
∂z−∂C
∂y/parenrightbigg
dz dx
+/parenleftbigg
∂B
∂x−∂A
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy
=Form 2(curl V).
9.An oriented 1-manifold is a curve. Its boundary is a pairof points that may be considered a 0-manifold. Therefore,ωis a 0-form or function, and
/integraltext
∂Mdω=ω(b)−ω(a)
if the curve Mruns from atob. Furthermore, dωis the
1-form ( ∂ω/∂ x)dx+(∂ω/∂ y)dy. Therefore,/integraltext
Mdωis
the line integral/integraltext
M(∂ω/∂ x)dω+(∂ω/dy)dy=/integraltext
M∇ω·ds. Thus, we obtain Theorem 3 of Section 7.2,/integraltext
M∇ω·ds=ω(b)−ω(a).
11. Putω=F1dx dy+F2dy dz+F3dz dx. The integral
becomes
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂Tω=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Tdω
=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
T/parenleftbigg
∂F1
∂z+∂F2
∂x+∂F3
∂y/parenrightbigg
dx dy dz .
(a) 0
(b) 40
13. Consider ω=xd yd z +yd zd x +zd xd y .
Compute that dω=3dx dy dz , so that
1
3/integraltext/integraltext
∂Rω=1
3/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Rdω=/integraltext/integraltext/integraltext
Rdx dy dz =v(R).

<<<PAGE 559>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC September 27, 2011 10:50 532
532 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises
Review Exercises for Chapter 8
1.(a) 2π a2
(b) 0
3.0
5.(a) f=x4/4−x2y3
(b)−1/4
7.(a) Check that ∇× F=0.
(b) f=3x2ycosz+C
(c) 0
9.23/6
11. No:∇× (a×r)=2a.
13. (a)∇f=3yez2i+3xez2j+6xyzez2k
(b) 0
(c) Both sides are 0.15. 8π/3
17.πa2/4
19. 21
21. (a)Gis conservative; Fis not.
(b)G=∇φifφ=(x4/4)+(y4/4)−3
2x2y2+1
2z2+C,
where Cis any constant.
(c)/integraldisplay
αF·ds=0;/integraldisplay
αG·ds=−1
2;
/integraldisplay
βF·ds=1
3;/integraldisplay
βG·ds=−1
2
23. Use (∇·F)(x0,y0,z0)=
limitρ→01
V(/Omega1ρ)/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
∂/Omega1ρF·ndSfrom Section 8.4.

<<<PAGE 560>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 533
Index
Annfollowing a page reference indicates the information is found in a note.
2×2 matrix, 31, 63
3×3 matrix, 31–32, 63
/epsilon1’ s and δ’ s limits, 99–102
In,6 6
n-dimensional Euclidian space, 60
n-space vectors, 60–62R
n,2
xaxis, 1
xcoordinate, 1
x-simple regions, 283, 287, 428, 430yaxis, 1
ycoordinate, 2
y-simple domain, 340y-simple regions, 283, 286, 287, 428–439zaxis, 1
z coordinate, 20-form, 4771-form, 4782-form, 478–4793-form, 479–480symbols, xviii
absolute maximum, 180, 192, 193
absolute minimum, 180, 192, 193absolute value, xxiiiacceleration, 217–228action, principle of, 166–168action at a distance, 243, 419additive inverse, 3adiabatic process, 375afﬁne approximation, 108–109Alexandov, 417algebra of forms, 483–488al-Khuwarizmi, xviiiAmpère’ s law, 372, 408, 452, 472analytic function, 166Andromeda galaxy, 419angle between two vectors, 22–23angular momentum, conservation of, 450angular velocity vector, 250anticommutativity, 483Apollonius of Perga, xvapproximations, 158Arabian mathematics, xvii–xviiiArchimedes, xvi, xix, 266, 333, 389arch length
deﬁnition, 228, 231differential, 230–232formula justiﬁcation, 232–234function, 232reparametrization, 234
area
curl as circulation per unit area, 445–448Green’ s theorem, 433–434surfaces, 383–392
Argand, 46Aristarchus of Samus, xixAristotle, xviArs Magna [the Great Art] (Cardano), 44
associativity, 3, 46n1, 67, 483average value, 357average value of a function, 329–330
Babylonian mathematics, xiii–xvii
ball, volume of, 326basic 1-form, 478basic 2-form, 478–479basic 3-form, 479–480bearing, 30Bentley, Richard, 419Bernoulli, Jacob, 52Bernoulli, Johann II, 155, 167, 358, 419best linear approximation, 110binormal vector, 235bonded function
deﬁnition, 271integratability, 274
bordered Hessian determinant, 197, 198, 199bound vectors, 6boundaries, 90–91boundary curve, 440boundary points, 90, 91boundary regions, 283bounded set, 180brachistrochrone, 358Brahe, Tycho, xxBunyakovskii, 61n4Buys-Ballot’ s law, 262
C
1, 114
calculus of variations, 358
capped cylinder, 451Cardano, Gerolamo, 44, 45Cartesian coordinates, 1, 2Cartesian product, 263Catoptrica (Euclid), xv
533

<<<PAGE 561>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 534
534 Index
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis, 35, 45, 61n4,
281, 390
Cauchy–Bunyakovskii–Schwarz (CBS)
inequality, 61n4
Cauchy–Riemann equations, 399
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, 23–25, 61Cavalieri, Bonaventura, 266Cavalieri’ s principle, 265–266CBS (Cauchy–Bunyakovskii–Schwarz)
inequality, 61n4
center of gravity, 399center of mass, 330–333centripetal force, 221chain rule
described, 124, 126–127as differentiation rules, 218example, 153, 156ﬁrst special case, 127–128implicit function theorem and surface, 206Lagrange multiplier method, 186second special case, 128–132Stokes’ theorems and, 441vector quantities and, 448
change of variables formula
applications, 329–338cylindrical coordinates, 324described, 307–308, 318–320double integrals, 319Gaussian integral, 322–323polar coordinates, 320–323spherical coordinates, 325–326triple integrals, 323–324
change of variables theorem, 314–328changing the order of integration, 289–294charge density, 472chemical equation, 4circular orbit, 220–222circulation, 373, 446circulation and curl, 445–448class C
1functions, 114
class C2functions, 150
class Ck, 237
Clifford, W . K., 351, 419closed curve, 368closed interval, xxiiiclosed set, 180closed surface, 452Cobb–Douglas production function, 203coefﬁcients, matrix of, 195n12commutative, 66complex numbers, 45–48component curves, 370component functions, 117components, 1, 4component scalar ﬁelds, 237composition, 99conductivity, 238cone, 379, 385, 392conformal parametrization, 399, 423conical refraction, 46conic sections, xivconservation of angular momentum, 450conservation of energy, 240conservative ﬁelds
deﬁnition, 453physical interpretation, 455–457planar case, 458–459
conservative vector ﬁeld, 453constant multiple rule, 125constant vector ﬁeld, 491constrained extrema, 185–203
LaGrange multiplier method for several
constraints, 191–193
second derivative test, 197–201
continuity, 88–105
of compositions, 99deﬁnition, 97open sets and, 88–90theorems, 113–114
continuous functions, 95–98conversion of energy, 240coordinates, 1–2, 4Copernicus, Nicolaus, xvi, xixCoulomb’ s law, 239, 243, 409Cramer, 34Cramer’ s rule, 35Crick, Francis, 418critical points, 168, 177, 181, 182,
186, 198
cross product, 31, 35–39, 44, 47–48cross product rule, 218cross-sectional area, 265–266cross section of a torus, 391cubic equations, 44curl
as circulation per unit area, 445–448deﬁnition, 249–250divergence, 253gradients, 252rotational ﬂow, 251rotations and, 250–251scalar curl, 252–253
curvature
deﬁnition, 355hemisphere, 415–417on a path, 235planes, 415of surfaces, 414–417surfaces of constant, 417, 418total curvature, 414

<<<PAGE 562>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 535
Index 535
curves, 116–124
components, 370
integral of 1-forms over, 480–481knotted, 355line integrals over, 368–371piecewise, 229planar, 353–355total curvature, 355
cyclicly permuting, 36cyclist, 374cycloid, 119cycloidal path, 121cylinder, 270, 451cylindrical coordinates
change of variables, 324described, 52–54Stokes’ theorems, 448
cylindrical hole, 392
d’Alembert, Le Rond, 155
DaVinci, Leonardo, 333deﬁnite integral, xxvdegenerate critical point, 177degenerate type, 176Delaunay, 417del Ferro, Scipione, xix, 44del operator, 245, 256density
charge, 472current, 472
derivative of a function, xxivderivative of a k-form, 484–485
derivative operator, 245derivatives
directional, 136–137gradients, 112–113partial, 105–108, 111properties of, 124–134
Descartes, René, xix, 68determinants
geometry of, 39–41matrix, 31–32properties of, 32–35, 66–67
determinant test for positive deﬁniteness, 175Dido, Queen of Carthage, 190Dieterici’ s equation, 133differentiability
functions of two variables, 109general case, 110–112tangent plane, 110theorems, 113–114
differential equations, 154differential forms, 476–491
0-form, 4771-form, 4782-form, 478–4793-form, 479–480algebra of forms, 483–488cross product and, 48n3deﬁnition, 360Gauss’, 487Gauss’ theorem, 487, 488Green’ s theorem, 487integral of 1-forms over curves, 480–481integral of 2-forms over surfaces, 481–482integral of 3-forms over regions, 483Stokes’ theorems, 488
differentiation, 105–116differentiation of paths, 217–219Dirac, Paul, xviiidirected simple curve, 368directional derivatives, 136–137directions of fastest increase, 137–138Dirichlet’ s functional, 399discontinuous functions, 97discriminant of the Hessian, 176displacement
inﬁnitesimal, 231vector, 27–29
distance
deﬁnition, xxiiifrom point to plane, 43–44between vector endpoints, 21–22, 62
distributivity, 3, 483divergence
curls, 253cylindrical coordinates, 448deﬁnition, 245Gauss’ theorem, 463–466, 467, 468, 470Green’ s theorem, 436–437Laplace operator, 254physical interpretation, 246spherical coordinates, 448, 470–471
divergence-free, 468domain, xxivdot product, 19–20, 24, 38, 44, 48, 55, 60, 245dot product rule, 218double helix, 418double integrals
bonded function, 274Cavalieri’ s principle, 265–266change of variables formula, 319changing the order of integration, 289–294Fubini’ s theorem, 276–280mean value equality, 292–293mean value inequality, 292over a rectangle, 271–283over elementary regions, 283–289reduction to iterated integrals, 267–269,
285–288

<<<PAGE 563>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 536
536 Index
double integrals (Continued)
as volumes, 263–265
doughnut surface, 375
drnotation for line integral, 371
economics, 196–197Egyptian mathematics, xiii–xviieigenvalue, 203eigenvector, 203Einstein, Albert, 243, 418–420Einstein’ s ﬁeld equations, 420, 422Einstein’ s general theory of relativity, 418elasticity, 155, 348electric ﬁeld, 472Electromagnetic Theory (Heaviside), 49
elementary regions
described, 297–298double integrals over, 283–289Gauss’ theorem, 461–463Green’ s theorem, 428other types of, 299symmetric, 300triple integrals over, 298–302
Elementary Treatises on Quaternions
(Tait), 47
Elements (Euclid), xv
Elements of V ector Analysis (Gibbs), 49
ellipsoid, 391, 413elliptic, 213endpoints, 368energy, conversion of, 240energy vector ﬁeld, 238epicycles, xv, 119epicycloid, 119equality of mixed partials, 151, 152Equilibrium (Archimedes), 333
equipotential surfaces, 141, 239escape velocity, 240–241Escher, M. C., 402Euclid, xv, xix, 236, 333Euclidian n-space
matrices, 63–73vectors in, 60–62
Eudoxus, xvEuler, Leonhard, 45, 48, 76n1, 149, 152, 155,
187, 222, 390
Euler equations, 152Euler’ s theorems, 146European mathematics, xviii–xxiexceptional points, 453exhausting regions, 340extrema of real-valued functions,
166–185
extreme points, 168extremum, 168Faraday’ s law, 407, 449–450, 472Fary–Milnor theorems, 356fence, Tom Sawyer’ s, 354Feynman, Richard, 222, 223–224, 427Feynman integrals, 223ﬁeld concept, 242–243Fields medal, 356Fior, Antonio, 44ﬁrst-order Taylor formula, 159, 160, 164ﬂexural rigidity, 348ﬂow lines, 241–242ﬂux, 407, 408, 467–468ﬂux per unit volume, 467–468Fontana, Nicolo, 44force ﬁelds
gravitational, 238, 239, 240, 459work done by, 358–359
force vectors, 29Fourier, Joseph, 154Fourier series, 154, 281free vectors, 6Frenet formulas, 235frequency, orbit, 221frustum, 392Fubini, Guido, 281Fubini’ s theorem, 268, 271, 276–280,
342–344
functions
analytic, 166arch length, 232average value, 329–330class C
1, 114
class C2, 150
Cobb–Douglas production function, 203component, 117continuous, 95–98deﬁnition, xxivdifferentiability, 109graphs, 77Green’ s, 475harmonic, 157mappings and, 76–77one-to-one, 310–311onto, 311–313potential, 455, 458, 475quadratic, 172of several variables, 76smooth, 193
functions unbounded at isolated points,
344–345
fundamental solution, 156fundamental theorem of algebra, 45fundamental theorem of calculus, 159, 232,
280, 430–431, 476
fundamental theorem of integral calculus, 276

<<<PAGE 564>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 537
Index 537
Galileo, 153, 358
gauge freedom, 472Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 45, 46, 408, 413,
418, 420
Gauss–Bonnet theorem, 420–422Gauss curvature, 414, 416, 417, 418, 420Gaussian integral, 322–323Gauss’ law, 408, 468–470, 472Gauss divergence theorem, 256Gauss’ theorem
divergence as ﬂux per unit volume,
467–468
divergence theorem, 463–466elementary regions and boundaries,
461–463
generalizing, 466–467
general implicit function theorem,
207–208
general second-derivative test, 176general vector ﬁeld, 236geodesics, 420geometric example, 195–196La Geometrie (Descartes), 66
geometry
of determinants, 39–41real-valued functions, 76–87scalar multiplication, 3, 6, 42theorems by vector methods, 11–12vector addition, 2–4vector subtraction, 7
geometry theorems by vector methods,
11–12
geosynchronous orbit, 222Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 48, 49,
256–257, 258
global maximum, 180–182, 193–195global minimum, 180–182, 193–195gradients, 112–113, 135, 138gradient vector ﬁeld
conservative ﬁelds, 453–461described, 140–141, 238–240line integrals over, 366–368
graphs
cylindrical coordinates, 448deﬁnition, xxivorientation, 404real-valued functions, 77smooth vs. nonsmooth, 105spherical coordinates, 448Stokes’ theorems for, 439–443surface area, 387surface integrals over, 394–396,
409–410, 411
gravitational constant, 453gravitational ﬁeld, escaping earth’ s, 240gravitational force ﬁelds, 238, 239,
240, 459
gravitational potential, 155, 238, 334–337gravitational potential energy, 457Greek mathematics, xiii–xviiGreen, George, 431Green’ s identities, 475Green’ s theorem
area of region bounded by curve, 433–434correct orientation for boundary
curves, 432
differential forms, 487divergence theorem in the plane, 436–437generalizing, 432–433lemmas, 429–431overview, 427simple and elementary regions and
boundaries, 428
vector form, 434–437
Gregory, James, 76n1
Halley, Edmund, xxi, xxii
halo orbits, 226Hamilton, Sir William Rowan, xxii, 46–47,
48, 222, 256, 476
Hamilton’ s principle, 222, 223–224harmonic functions, 157heat equation, 154, 155, 156heat ﬂux vector ﬁeld, 238Heaviside, Oliver, 48, 49helicoid, 386, 394, 397, 417heliocentric theory, xixhelix, 121, 352, 418hemisphere, curvature, 415–417Hessian, 172–175, 176Hessian matrix, 175–176, 179, 197higher-order approximations, 158higher-order derivatives, 149Hilbert, David, 422Hilbert’ s action principle, 422Hipparchus, xvHölder-continuous, 105homogeneity with respect to functions, 483homogeneous of degree, 146Hooke, Robert, xxihot-air balloon, 451Huygens, Christian, 45, 68, 119, 390hydrodynamic equation, 258hyperbolic paraboloid, 80hyperboloid, 381hypocycloid, 119, 219, 374, 433
ideal gas law, 147
imaginary numbers, xix, 44–46implicit function theorem, 203–215

<<<PAGE 565>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 538
538 Index
improper integrals
exhausting regions, 340
as limits, 340–341as limits of iterated integrals, 341–342one-variable, 339, 340in plane, 339–340
incompressible ﬂuid, 468Indian mathematics, xvii–xviiiinduced orientation, 440, 445, 469inequality
Cauchy–Schwartz, 23–25, 61mean value, 292triangle, 26–27, 62, 126, 236
inﬁnitesimal displacement, 231inhomogeneouswave equation, 473inner product, 3, 19–20, 21, 24–25, 60integer, xxiiiintegral
double, 271–283Feynman, 223Gaussian, 322–323improper, 339–347iterated, 267–269, 272–276, 286,
341–342
line, 358–375, 442–443oriented, 366path, 351–358Riemann, 281scalar functions over surfaces, 393surface, 394–396, 400–401, 406–411topological invariant, 421triple, 294–305, 323–324
integral curves, 241, 242integratability, 272integration
double integral reduction, 267–269,
285–288
triple integral reduction, 295, 296
integration by parts, 159, 160intersection, xxivinverse function theorem, 208–209invertible matrices, 66irrational number, xxiiiirrotational vector ﬁeld, 251, 455, 457isobar, 262isoquant, 196isotherms, 238iterated integrals
Fubini’ s theorem for, 342–344improper integrals as limits of iterated
integrals, 341–342
properties of, 272–276reduction of double integrals, 267–269,
285–288
iterated partial derivatives, 150–158Jacobi, 35Jacobian determinant, 209, 315–318, 323
Kelvin’ s circulation theorem, 407
Kepler, Johannes, xx, 222Kepler’ s laws of celestial motion, xx, 153, 221kernel, 214knotted curve, 355
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 35, 56
Lagrange multiplier method
constrained extrema and, 185–190global maximum, 193–195global minimum, 193–195for several constraints, 191–193
Laplace, Pierre-Simon de, 35, 155Laplace operator, 254Laplace’ s equation, 154, 155law of cosines, 22, 61law of planetary motion, 222Lebesgue, Henri, 281left-hand limit, 104Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, xx, xxi, 34,
45, 68, 167–168, 225–226, 266, 281,419, 476
lemniscate, 327length, vectors, 20, 21, 60level contours, 78level curves, 78–85level sets, 78–85level surface, 79, 138–139L ’Hôpital’ s rule, 100limits
boundaries, 90–91concept of, 91–94deﬁnition, 92, 93, 99open sets and, 88–90properties of, 94–95in terms of ε’ s and δ’ s, 99–102
uniqueness of, 94
linear approximation, 108–109, 158,
164, 165
line integrals
deﬁnition, 359–363differential forms, 360drnotation, 371
of gradient ﬁeld, 366–368over curves, 368–371reparametrization, 363–366Stokes’ theorems, 442–443work done by force ﬁelds, 358–359, 362
lines
dimensionality, 17equations of, 12–17parametrical expression, 12–17

<<<PAGE 566>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 539
Index 539
passing through endpoints of two
vectors, 14
point-direction form, 12
point–point form of parametric
equations, 15
segment description, 16
Lipschitz-continuous, 105Listing, J. B., 402local extrema, 168local maximum
deﬁnition, 168ﬁrst derivative test, 169–171second derivative test, 171–175second-derivative test for two variables,
176–180
local minimum
deﬁnition, 168ﬁrst derivative test, 169–171second-derivative test, 171–175second-derivative test for two variables,
176–180
Maclaurin, 34magnetic ﬁeld, 472mappings, functions and, 76–77maps
fromR
2toR2, 308–314
deﬁnition, xxivimages of, 310Jacobian determinant, 315–318one-to-one, 310–311onto, 311–313parametrized surfaces as, 376–378
Marcellus, 389mass
center of, 330–333density, 337
mathematics, xiiimatrices
2×2 matrix, 31, 63
3×3 matrix, 31–32, 63
coefﬁcients, 195n12determinants, 31–35, 39–41, 66–67general matrices, 63–66Hessian, 175–176, 179, 197invertible, 66partial derivatives, 111, 130properties of, 66–68triple product, 36, 46, 67
Maupertuis, Pierre-Louis de, 166, 167, 168Maupertuis’ principle, 166–168, 222maximum
absolute, 180–182, 192, 193global, 180–182, 193–195
Maxwell, James Clerk, 48, 49, 256, 258Maxwell ﬁeld equations, 243, 452, 471–474Maxwell’ s equations, 155mean curvature, 415, 417mean-value equality, 292–293mean-value inequality, 292mean-value theorem, 353Menaechmus, xivThe Method of Fuxions and Inﬁnite Series
(Newton), 52
method of least squares, 214, 215n16method of sections, 80–85method of substitution, 318Milky Way, 419Milnor, John, 356minimal surfaces, 423minimum
absolute, 180–182, 192, 193global, 180–182, 193–195local, 168
mixed partial derivatives, 150–156Möbius, A. F ., 402Möbius strip, 402moment of a force, 51moments of inertia, 333–334momentum, 72Muir, T., 35multiplication, 3, 6, 44, 46, 65n5
negative, 3
negative-deﬁnite quadratic function, 173,
174, 175
negative pressure gradient, 262neighborhood, 90, 91, 98, 113, 205Newton, Sir Isaac, xxi–xxii, 46, 52, 222, 266,
335, 358, 413, 418, 419, 476
Newton’ s law of gravitation, 141, 153, 168,
220, 238, 239, 243, 419
Newton’ s mechanics, 222Newton’ s potential, 155, 158Newton’ s second law, 217–228, 240nondegenerate critical point, 177, 179nonsmooth graph, 105norm of a vector, 60normalized vectors, 21notations, 76n1
octonians, 48n3
Oersted Hans Christian 372n6one-dimensional wave equation, 155one-to-one maps, 310–311one-variable implicit function theorem, 203On Floating Bodies (Archimedes), 333
On Growth and Form (D’Arcy), 418
On the Equilibrium and Centers of Mass of
Plane Figures (Archimedes), 333

<<<PAGE 567>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 540
540 Index
onto maps, xxiv, 311–313
open ball, 88open disk, 88open interval, xxiiiopen sets, 88–90opposite path, 363Optics (Euclid), xv
orbit
circular, 220–222geosynchronous, 222halo, 226
order of integration, 289–294ordinary differential equations, 154orientation
graphs, 404surfaces, 401–404vector surface element of a sphere, 404
orientation-preserving parametrization,
403, 404
orientation-preserving reparametrization,
363, 364
orientation-reversing parametrization,
403, 404
orientation-reversing reparametrization,
363, 364
oriented integral, 366oriented simple curve, 368oriented surface, 401–402, 403origin, 1orthogonal projections, 25–26orthogonal vectors, 24, 36orthonormal, 58orthonormal vectors, 24
paddle wheel, 445, 455
Pappus of Alexandria, 333Pappus’ theorem, 392paraboloid, 300, 302paraboloid of revolution, 79parallelepiped, 40–41parallelogram
area of, 385change of variables, 320cross product calculation, 38parametric description, 16, 17
parallelogram law, 69parallel planes, 42–43parametrized by arc length, 235parametrized surface
deﬁnition, 377as mappings, 376–378regular surface, 378–379tangent plane to, 379–381tangent vectors, 378
parametrized surfacesgraph restrictions, 375–376Stokes’ theorems, 444–445surface integrals, 410–411
parametrization, 117, 309, 362, 368, 372,
378–381, 405
partial derivatives
described, 105–108equality of mixed partials, 151–156iterated partial, 150–158matrix of, 111mixed partial, 150
partial differential equations, 153–155Pascal, Blaise, 119path, 116–124
differentiation, 217–219integration of secular functions over,
351–358
piecewise smooth, 229, 230
path-connected region, 305path-independent integral, 453path integral, 351–358Peano, Giuseppe, 183perpendicular vectors, 24Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica (Newton), 335
physical applications of vectors, 27–29piecewise curve, 229Pierce, J. M., 49planar curves, 353–355Planck, Max, 222, 225planes
curvature, 415dimensionality, 17equations of, 41–43parallel, 42–43parametric description, 17parametrization, 375, 376path in, 117three coordinate planes, 17
Plato, xiv–xv, xviiiPoincaré, 226point to plane, distance from, 43–44Poisson’ s equation, 155, 475polar coordinates, 52, 53, 131, 320–323polarization identity, 69Pope, Alexander, xxiposition vector, 371positive-deﬁnite quadratic function, 173positive orientation, 440potential, 475potential equation, 155potential function, 455, 458, 475potential temperature, 147Poynting vector, 475principal normal vector, 235

<<<PAGE 568>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 541
Index 541
Principia (Newton), xxi, xxii
principle of least action, 167–168, 223,
225–226
“Principles of the Motions of Fluids”
(Euler), 155
product rule, 125
properties
continuous functions, 98derivatives, 124–134determinants, 32–35, 66–67iterated integrals, 272–276of limits, 94–95triple integrals, 295–297
proper time of a path, 235property of the unit element, 3property of zero, 3Ptolemaic model of planetary motion, 166Ptolemaic theory, xvPtolemy of Alexandria, xv, xviPythagorean theorem, 20
quadratic approximations, 158, 164, 165
quadratic equations, 44–45quadratic functions, 172quaternions, 46–48, 256quotient rule, 125
radio waves, 471–474
range, xxivrational number, xxiiireal-valued functions
extrema, 166–185geometry, 76–87
regular differentiable path, 219regular partition, 271regular surface, 378–379relative extrema, 168, 188relativistic triangle inequality, 236remarkable theorems, 418reparametrization, 363–366restaurant plans, 412Riemann, Bernhard, 45, 281, 399n11, 418,
420, 476
Riemann integral, 281Riemann sum, 263–265, 269, 272, 278,
353, 385
right-hand limit, 104right-hand rule, 37Rodrigues, Olinde, 49rotary vector ﬁeld, 237
saddle, 80, 83
saddle point, 168, 170, 177saddle-type critical point, 175, 176, 200scalar curl, 252–253, 458scalar ﬁeld, 236scalar multiplication, 3, 6, 42, 44scalar multiplication rule, 218scalar part, 47, 48scalar quantity, 46scalar-valued function, 76Schwarz, 61n4second-order Taylor formula, 159–160,
163, 164
sections, method of, 80–85semimajor axis, 195semiminor axis, 195sets
bounded, 180closed, 180level, 78–85open, 88–90
simple closed curve, 368, 369simple curve, 368simple regions, 283, 287single-sheeted hyperboloid of revolution, 83single-variable Taylor theorem, 158–160sink, 468slice method—Cavalieri’ s principle, 266smooth function, 193smooth graph, 105smooth path, 181smooth surface, 378Snell’ s law, 51soap bubble, 390–391, 417soap ﬁlm surfaces, 417, 423solid ellipsoid, 347solid of revolution, 270solutions, existence of, 190–191space, path in, 117space analysis, 68special implicit function theorem, 203–206speed, 120, 220, 230sphere, 411, 445spherical coordinates
change of variables, 325–326described, 54–58divergence, 470–471Stokes’ theorems, 448
standard basis vectors, 8–10, 60steady ﬂow, 237Stokes’ theorems
conservative ﬁelds, 453, 455curl as circulation per unit area,
445–448
differential forms, 488for graphs, 439–443parametrized surfaces, 444–445
streamlines, 241strictly subharmonic relative, 213

<<<PAGE 569>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 542
542 Index
Stokes’ theorem
Faraday’ s law, 449–450
reorientation applications, 449
strong maximum principle, 439strong minimum principle, 439subharmonic function, 439subset, xxiiisum, 2sum, Riemann, 263–265, 269, 272, 278,
353, 385
sum rule, 125, 218superharmonic function, 439surface area
deﬁnition, 384–385graph surface area, 387surfaces of revolution, 387–389
surface integrals
independence of parametrization, 405over graphs, 394–396, 409–410physical interpretation, 406–411scalar integral relationship, 405–406summary of formulas, 410–411of vector ﬁelds, 400–413
surfaces
curvature of, 414–417described, 78–85implicit function theorem and, 205–206integral of 2-forms over, 481–482integrals of scalar functions over, 393–400
symmetric elementary regions, 300
Tait, Peter Guthrie, 47, 48
tangent line to a path, 122–123tangent plane, 110, 139, 379–381tangent vectors, 120, 129, 378target, xxivTartaglia, Niccolo, xix, 44, 45, 333Tartaglia–Cardano solution, 45Taylor series, 164Taylor’ s theorem, 158–166, 173temperature, 147, 154, 155, 375, 412tetrahedron, 286, 287Thales of Miletus, xivtheorema egregium (remarkable
theorem), 418
theorems
change of variables, 314–328Euler’ s, 146Fary–Milnor, 356Fubini’ s, 268, 271, 276–280, 342–344fundamental theorem of algebra, 45fundamental theorem of calculus, 159, 232,
280, 430–431, 476
fundamental theorem of integral
calculus, 276Gauss,’ 461, 463–466, 488Gauss–Bonnet, 420–422general implicit function, 207–208Green’ s, 428–439implicit function, 203–215inverse function, 208–209Kelvin’ s circulation, 407mean-value, 353Pappus,’ 392Pythagorean, 20remarkable, 418special implicit function, 203–205Stokes,’ 250, 407and surfaces, 205–206Taylor’ s, 158–166, 173
The Theory of Determinants in the Historical
Order of Development (Muir), 35
theory of mirrors, xvthermodynamic path, 375The Theodicy (Leibniz), 167
third-order Taylor formula, 163Thomae, Karl J., 281Thompson, D’Arcy, 418three-body problem, 226Tom Sawyer’ s fence, 354topological invariant, 421torsion, 235torus, 375, 391, 421, 476total curvature, 355, 414traces out, 117trajectories, 26transformations, xxivTreatise on Electricity and Magnetism
(Maxwell), 48, 256
triangle inequality, 26–27, 62, 126, 236triple, 2, 3triple integral
change of variables formula for, 323–324deﬁnition, 294–295over elementary regions, 298–302properties, 295–297reduction to integrated integrals, 295, 296
triple product, 36, 46, 67twice continuously differentiable, 150
unbound regions, 345
unicellular organisms, 418union, xxiiiunit ball, 298, 328unit cube, 462unit disk, 283, 284unit speed, 235unit sphere, 392, 403unit tangent, 235unit vectors, 21, 58

<<<PAGE 570>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙index September 26, 2011 10:2 543
Index 543
Vandermonde, 35
van der Waals gas, 375vector analysis, 68V ector Analysis (Wilson), 49
vector ﬁelds
basic identities of vector analysis,
254–256
concept of, 236–238conservative ﬁelds, 453–461curl, 249–253deﬁnition, 236divergence, 245–248ﬂow lines, 241–242general, 236gradient, 140–141, 238–240integral curves, 241, 242integration of over paths, 358–375Laplace operator, 254rotary, 237surface integrals, 400–413types of, 236, 237
vector joining two points, 10–11vector methods, geometry theorems by,
11–12
vector moment, 51vector operations, geometry of, 4–8vector part, 47, 48vector product, 35, 44vectors
addition, 2–4bound, 6deﬁnition, 4, 46displacement, 27–29force, 29free, 6length, 20, 21normalized, 21orthogonal, 24, 36orthonormal, 24perpendicular, 24physical interpretation, 5scalar multiplication, 3, 6, 42subtraction, 7unit, 21, 58velocity, 28zero, 29
vector standard basis, 8–10vector-valued functions, 76, 217–262velocity ﬁeld V , 237velocity vector, 28, 120, 122, 123, 129
Watson, James, 418
wave equation, 155wedge product, 483Weierstrass, 190–191Wente, Henry, 417Wessel, 46Wiener, Norbert, 215n16Wilson, E. B., 49, 257Wimsey, Peter, 190work, 30, 358–359, 362Wren, Sir Christopher, xxi
Y oung’ s modulus of elasticity, 348zero element, 3
zero vector, 29

<<<PAGE 571>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙FM September 27, 2011 9:49 vi
this page left intentionally blank

<<<PAGE 572>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙photoCr September 26, 2011 10:3 545
Photo Credits
Author portrait: Courtesy of EAS Communications Ofﬁce
Introduction Fig. 3: Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NYIntroduction Fig. 4: From Theoricae novae planitarium
Introduction Fig. 5: Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Introduction Fig. 6: J. L. Charmet/Photo Researchers, Inc.Introduction Fig. 7: Detail from the Codex Vigilanus (976 CE, Northern Spain)
Introduction Fig. 8: Michael Paszdior/Getty ImagesIntroduction Fig. 9: CorbisIntroduction Fig. 10: CorbisIntroduction Fig. 11: From Kepler’ s Astronomia Nova
Introduction Fig. 13: CorbisIntroduction Fig. 14: National Portrait Gallery, London, UK/The Bridgeman Art LibraryIntroduction Fig. 15: From the Principia
Fig. 1.3.8: CorbisFig. 1.3.9: Getty ImagesFig. 1.5.1: CorbisChapter 3 opening ﬁgure: Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Fig. 3.3.1: From Parsimonious Universe/Courtesy of Anthony Tromba
Fig. 4.1.5: CorbisFig. 4.1.6: Cern/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Fig. 4.1.11: American Institute of Physics/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Fig. 4.4.9: CorbisFig. 6.3.3: From Leonardo’ s Tracat von der Mahlerey, Nuremberg (1747)
Fig. 7.4.5: Jean-Baptiste Simeon Chardin/LACMA/Erich Lessing/Art Resource
Fig. 7.6.4: Moebius Strip II, 1963, by M. C. Escher, Escher Foundation, Haags Gemeentemuseum,
The Hague
Fig. 7.7.1: Sinclair Stammers/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Fig. 7.7.2: Courtesy of Anthony TrombaFig. 7.7.3: © 1997 Michael Dalton/Fundamental PhotographsFig. 7.7.5: UCSC/Lick ObservatoryFig. 7.7.6: Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.Fig. 7.7.12: Corbis
545

<<<PAGE 573>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 1
DERIV ATIVES
1.dau
dx=adu
dx19.darccos u
dx=−1√
1−u2du
dx
2.d(u+v)
dx=du
dx+dv
dx20.darctan u
dx=1
1+u2du
dx
3.d(uv)
dx=udv
dx+vdu
dx21.darccot u
dx=−1
1+u2du
dx
4.d(u/v)
dx=v(du/dx)−u(dv/dx)
v222.darcsec u
dx=1
u√
u2−1du
dx
5.d(un)
dx=nun−1du
dx23.darccsc u
dx=−1√
u2−1du
dx
6.d(uv)
dx=vuv−1du
dx+uv(log u)dv
dx24.dsinhu
dx=cosh udu
dx
7.d(eu)
dx=eudu
dx25.dcosh u
dx=sinh udu
dx
8.d(eau)
dx=aeaudu
dx26.dtanh u
dx=sech2udu
dx
9.dau
dx=au(loga)du
dx27.dcoth u
dx=−(csch2u)du
dx
10.d(logu)
dx=1
udu
dx28.dsech u
dx=−(sech u)(tanh u)du
dx
11.d(logau)
dx=1
u(loga)du
dx29.dcsch u
dx=−(csch u)(coth u)du
dx
12.dsinu
dx=cosudu
dx30.dsinh−1u
dx=1√
1+u2du
dx
13.dcosu
dx=− sinudu
dx31.dcosh−1u
dx=1√
u2−1du
dx
14.dtanu
dx=sec2udu
dx32.dtanh−1u
dx=1
1−u2du
dx
15.dcotu
dx=− csc2udu
dx33.dcoth−1u
dx=1
u2−1du
dx
16.dsecu
dx=tanusecudu
dx34.dsech−1u
dx=−1
u√
1−u2du
dx
17.dcscu
dx=−(cotu)(csc u)du
dx35.dcsch−1u
dx=−1
|u|√
1+u2du
dx
18.darcsin u
dx=1√
1−u2du
dx

<<<PAGE 574>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 2
INTEGRALS (An arbitrary constant may be added to each integral.)
1./integraldisplay
xndx=1
n+1xn+1(n/negationslash=−1)
2./integraldisplay1
xdx=log|x|
3./integraldisplay
exdx=ex
4./integraldisplay
axdx=ax
loga
5./integraldisplay
sinxd x=− cosx
6./integraldisplay
cosxd x=sinx
7./integraldisplay
tanxd x=− log|cosx|
8./integraldisplay
cotxd x=log|sinx|
9./integraldisplay
secxd x=log|secx+tanx|=log/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingletan/parenleftbigg1
2x+1
4π/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
10./integraldisplay
cscxd x=log|cscx−cotx|=log/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingletan1
2x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
11./integraldisplay
arcsinx
adx=xarcsinx
a+/radicalbig
a2−x2(a>0)
12./integraldisplay
arccosx
adx=xarccosx
a−/radicalbig
a2−x2(a>0)
13./integraldisplay
arctanx
adx=xarctanx
a−a
2log(a2+x2)(a>0)
14./integraldisplay
sin2mx dx =1
2m(mx−sinmxcosmx)
15./integraldisplay
cos2mx dx =1
2m(mx+sinmxcosmx)
16./integraldisplay
sec2xd x=tanx
17./integraldisplay
csc2xd x=− cotx
18./integraldisplay
sinnxd x=−sinn−1xcosx
n+n−1
n/integraldisplay
sinn−2xd x
19./integraldisplay
cosnxd x=cosn−1xsinx
n+n−1
n/integraldisplay
cosn−2xd x
20./integraldisplay
tannxd x=tann−1x
n−1−/integraldisplay
tann−2xd x (n/negationslash=1)
21./integraldisplay
cotnxd x=−cotn−1x
n−1−/integraldisplay
cotn−2xd x (n/negationslash=1)
22./integraldisplay
secnxd x=tanxsecn−2x
n−1+n−2
n−1/integraldisplay
secn−2xd x (n/negationslash=1)
23./integraldisplay
cscnxd x=−cotxcscn−2x
n−1+n−2
n−1/integraldisplay
cscn−2xd x (n/negationslash=1)
(Continued on next page)

<<<PAGE 575>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 3
24./integraldisplay
sinhxd x=cosh x
25./integraldisplay
cosh xd x=sinhx
26./integraldisplay
tanh xd x=log|cosh x|
27./integraldisplay
coth xd x=log|sinhx|
28./integraldisplay
sech xd x=arctan (sinh x)
29./integraldisplay
csch xd x=log/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingletanhx
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=−1
2logcosh x+1
cosh x−1
30./integraldisplay
sinh2xd x=1
4sinh 2 x−1
2x
31./integraldisplay
cosh2xd x=1
4sinh 2 x+1
2x
32./integraldisplay
sech2xd x=tanh x
33./integraldisplay
sinh−1x
adx=xsinh−1x
a−/radicalbig
x2+a2(a>0)
34./integraldisplay
cosh−1x
adx=⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩xcosh −1x
a−/radicalbig
x2−a2/bracketleftBig
cosh−1/parenleftBigx
a/parenrightBig
>0,a>0/bracketrightBig
xcosh−1x
a+/radicalbig
x2−a2/bracketleftBig
cosh−1/parenleftBigx
a/parenrightBig
<0,a>0/bracketrightBig
35./integraldisplay
tanh−1x
adx=xtanh−1x
a+a
2log/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea2−x2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
36./integraldisplay1
√
a2+x2dx=log (x+/radicalbig
a2+x2=sinh−1x
a(a>0)
37./integraldisplay1
a2+x2dx=1
aarctanx
a(a>0)
38./integraldisplay/radicalbig
a2−x2dx=x
2/radicalbig
a2−x2+a2
2arcsinx
a(a>0)
39./integraldisplay
(a2−x2)3/2dx=x
8(5a2−2x2)/radicalbig
a2−x2+3a4
8arcsinx
a(a>0)
40./integraldisplay1√
a2−x2dx=arcsinx
a(a>0)
41./integraldisplay1
a2−x2dx=1
2alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea+x
a−x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
42./integraldisplay1
(a2−x2)3/2dx=x
a2√
a2−x2
43./integraldisplay/radicalbig
x2±a2dx=x
2/radicalbig
x2±a2±a2
2log/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex+/radicalbig
x2±a2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
44./integraldisplay1
√
x2−a2dx=log/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex+/radicalbig
x2−a2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle=cosh −1x
a(a>0)
45./integraldisplay1
x(a+bx)dx=1
alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex
a+bx/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
46./integraldisplay
x√
a+bx dx =2(3bx −2a)(a+bx)3/2
15b2
(Continued at the back of the book)

<<<PAGE 576>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 4
47./integraldisplay√a+bx
xdx=2√
a+bx+a/integraldisplay1
x√a+bxdx
48./integraldisplayx√a+bxdx=2(bx−2a)√a+bx
3b2
49./integraldisplay1
x√a+bxdx=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩1
√alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle√
a+bx−√a√a+bx+√a/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(a>0)
2
√−aarctan/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/radicalbigg
a+bx
−a/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(a<0)
50./integraldisplay√
a2−x2
xdx=/radicalbig
a2−x2−alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea+√
a2−x2
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
51./integraldisplay
x/radicalbig
a2−x2dx=−1
3(a2−x2)3/2
52./integraldisplay
x2/radicalbig
a2−x2dx=x
8(2x2−a2)/radicalbig
a2−x2+a4
8arcsinx
a(a>0)
53./integraldisplay1
x√
a2−x2dx=−1
alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea+√
a2−x2
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
54./integraldisplayx
√
a2−x2dx=−/radicalbig
a2−x2
55./integraldisplayx2
√
a2−x2dx=−x
2/radicalbig
a2−x2+a2
2arcsinx
a(a>0)
56./integraldisplay√
x2+a2
xdx=/radicalbig
x2+a2−alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglea+√
x2+a2
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
57./integraldisplay√
x2−a2
xdx=/radicalbig
x2−a2−aarccosa
|x|(a>0)
58./integraldisplayx2
√
x2+a2dx=x√
x2+a2
2−a2
2log/parenleftBig
x+/radicalbig
x2+a2/parenrightBig
59./integraldisplay1
x√
x2+a2dx=1
alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex
a+√
x2+a2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
60./integraldisplay1
x√
x2−a2dx=1
aarccosa
|x|(a>0)
61./integraldisplay1
x2√
x2±a2dx=∓√
x2±a2
a2x
62./integraldisplay1√
x2±a2dx=ln/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
a/radicalbig
x2±a2+x
a/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
63./integraldisplay1
ax2+bx+cdx=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩1
√
b2−4aclog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2ax+b−√
b2−4ac
2ax+b+√
b2−4ac/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(b
2>4ac)
2√
4ac−b2arctan2ax+b√
4ac−b2(b2<4ac)
64./integraldisplayx
ax2+bx+cdx=1
2alog|ax2+bx+c|−b
2a/integraldisplay1
ax2+bx+cdx
65./integraldisplay1√
ax2+bx+cdx=⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩1
√alog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2ax+b+2√a/radicalbig
ax2+bx+c/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(a>0)
1
√−aarcsin−2ax−b√
b2−4ac(a<0)

<<<PAGE 577>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 5
66./integraldisplay/radicalbig
ax2+bx+cdx=2ax+b
4a/radicalbig
ax2+bx+c+4ac−b2
8a/integraldisplay1√
ax2+b+cdx
67./integraldisplayx√
ax2+bx+cdx=√
ax2+bx+c
a−b
2a/integraldisplay1√
ax2+bx+cdx
68./integraldisplay1
x√
ax2+bx+cdx=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩−1
√clog/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2√
c√
ax2+bx+c+bx+2c
x/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle(c>0)
1
√−carcsinbx+2c
|x|√
b2−4ac(c<0)
69./integraldisplay
x3/radicalbig
x2+a2dx=/parenleftbigg1
5x2−2
15a2/parenrightbigg/radicalbig
(a2+x2)3
70./integraldisplay√
x2±a2
x4dx=∓√(x2±a2)3
3a2x3
71./integraldisplay
sinaxsinbx dx =sin (a−b)x
2(a−b)−sin (a+b)x
2(a+b)(a2/negationslash=b2)
72./integraldisplay
sinaxcosbx dx =−cos (a−b)x
2(a−b)−cos (a+b)x
2(a+b)(a2/negationslash=b2)
73./integraldisplay
cosaxcosbx dx =sin (a−b)x
2(a−b)+sin (a+b)x
2(a+b)(a2/negationslash=b2)
74./integraldisplay
secxtanxd x=secx
75./integraldisplay
cscxcotxd x=− cscx
76./integraldisplay
cosmxsinnxd x=cosm−1xsinn+1x
m+n+m−1
m+n/integraldisplay
cosm−2xsinnxd x
=−sinn−1xcosm+1x
m+n+n−1
m+n/integraldisplay
cosmxsinn−2xd x
77./integraldisplay
xnsinax dx =−1
axncosax+n
a/integraldisplay
xn−1cosax dx
78./integraldisplay
xncosax dx =1
axnsinax−n
a/integraldisplay
xn−1sinax dx
79./integraldisplay
xneaxdx=xneax
a−n
a/integraldisplay
xn−1eaxdx
80./integraldisplay
xnlogax dx =xn+1/bracketleftbigglogax
n+1−1
(n+1)2/bracketrightbigg
81./integraldisplay
xn(logax)mdx=xn+1
n+1(logax)m−m
n+1/integraldisplay
xn(logax)m−1dx
82./integraldisplay
eaxsinbx dx =eax(asinbx−bcosbx)
a2+b2
83./integraldisplay
eaxcosbx dx =eax(bsinbx+acosbx)
a2+b2
84./integraldisplay
sech xtanh xd x=−sech x
85./integraldisplay
csch xcoth xd x=−csch x

<<<PAGE 578>>>

Marsden-3620111 VC˙Endpaper September 27, 2011 10:58 6
SYMBOLS INDEX
SYMBOLS ARE LISTED IN ORDER OF THEIR APPEARANCE IN THE TEXT
SYMBOL NAME
R real numbers
[a,b] closed interval {x|a≤x≤b}
(a,b) open interval {x|a<x<b}
[a,b) half-open interval {x|a≤x<b}
(a,b] half-open interval {x|a<x≤b}
|a| absolute value of a
Q rational numbers
Rnn-dimensional space
i,j,k standard basis in R3
||a|| norm of a vector a
a·b inner product of the vectors aandb
a×b cross product of the vectors aandb
(r,θ,z) cylindrical coordinates
(ρ,θ,φ) spherical coordinates
Dr(x0) disk of radius rabout x0
lim
x→x 0limit as xapproaches x0
lim
x→b−left-hand limit; x→bfrom below∂f
∂xpartial derivative of fwith respect to x
Df(x0) derivative of fat the point x0
∇f grad f, gradient of the function f
C1continuously differentiable
c a path
C2twice continuously differentiable
Hf(x0) Hessian of fat the point x0
∇ del or nabla
∇·F divF, divergence of F
∇× F curlF, curl of F
∇2Laplacian/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Dfd A=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Df(x,y)dx dy double integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wfd V=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Wf(x,y,z)dx dydz triple integral
J=∂(x,y)
∂(u,v)Jacobian
cop opposite path/integraldisplay
Cfd s path integral
/integraldisplay
CF·ds line integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
Sfd S scalar surface integral
/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·dS=/integraldisplay/integraldisplay
SF·ndS vector surface integral